ARTICLES
A Manifesto for Cyborgs: Science, Technology, and
Socialist Feminism in the 1980s
Donna Haraway
An Ironic Dream of a, Common Language
for Women in the Integrated Circuit

T

his essay is an effort to build an ironic political myth faithful
to feminism, socialism, and materialism. Perhaps more
faithful as blasphemy is faithful, than as reverent worship
and identification. Blasphemy has always seemed to require
taking things very seriously. I know no better stance to adopt from
within the secular-religious, evangelical traditions of United States
politics, including the politics of socialist-feminism. Blasphemy
protects one from the moral majority within, while still insisting on
the need for community. Blasphemy is not apostasy. Irony is about
contradictions that do not resolve into larger wholes, even
dialectically, about the tension of holding incompatible things
together because both or all are necessary and true. Irony is about
humor and serious play. It is also a rhetorical strategy and a political
method, one I would like to see more honored within socialist
feminism. At the center of my ironic faith, my blasphemy, is the image
of the cyborg.
A cyborg is a cybernetic organism, a hybrid of machine and
organism, a creature of social reality as well as a creature of fiction.
Social reality is lived social relations, our most important political
AFS 4 Autumn 1987

 2

DONNA HARAWAY

construction, a world-changing fiction. The international women's
movements have constructed 'women's experience', as well as
uncovered or discovered this crucial collective object. This
experience is a fiction and fact of the most crucial, political kind.
Liberation rests on the construction of the consciousness, the
imaginative apprehension, of oppression, and so of possibility. The
cyborg is a matter of fiction and lived experience that changes what
counts as women's experience in the late twentieth century. This
is a struggle over life and death, but the boundary between science
fiction and social reality is an optical illusion.
Contemporary science fiction is full of cyborgs — creatures
simultaneously animal and machine, who populate worlds
ambiguously natural and crafted. Modern medicine is also full of
cyborgs, of couplings between organism and machine, each
conceived as coded devices, in an intimacy and with a power that
was not generated in the history of sexuality. Cyborg 'sex' restores
some of the lovely replicative baroque of ferns and invertebrates
(such nice organic prophylactics against heterosexism). Cyborg
replication is uncoupled from organic reproduction. Modern
production seems like a dream of cyborg colonization of work, a
dream that makes the nightmare of Taylorism seem idyllic. And
modern war is a cyborg orgy, coded by C3I, command-controlcommunication-intelligence, an $84 billion item in 1984's U.S. defence
budget. I am making an argument for the cyborg as a fiction
mapping our social and bodily reality and as an imaginative resource
suggesting some very fruitful couplings. Foucault's biopolitics is a
flaccid premonition of cyborg politics, a very open field.
*
By the late twentieth century, our time, a mythic time, we are all
chimeras, theorized and fabricated hybrids of machine and
organism; in short, we are cyborgs. The cyborg is our ontology;
it gives us our politics. The cyborg is a condensed image of both
imagination and material reality, the two joined centers structuring
any possibility of historical transformation. In the traditions of 'Western'
science and politics — the tradition of racist, male-dominant
capitalism; the tradition of progress; the tradition of the appropriation
of nature as resource for the production of culture; the tradition of
reproduction of the self from the reflections of the other — the relation
between organism and machine has been a border war. The stakes

 A MANIFESTO FOR CYBORGS

3

in the border war have been the territories of production,
reproduction, and imagination. This essay is an argument for
pleasure in the confusion of boundaries and for responsibility'^ their
construction. It is also an effort to contribute to socialist-feminist
culture and theory in a post-modernist, non-naturalist mode and in
the Utopian tradition of imagining a world without gender, which is
perhaps a world without genesis, but maybe also a world without
end. The cyborg incarnation is outside salvation history.
The cyborg is a creature in a post-gender world; it has no truck
with bisexuality, pre-Oedipal symbiosis, unalienated labor, or other
seductions to organic wholeness through a final appropriation of
all the powers of the parts into a higher unity. In a sense, the cyborg
has no origin story in the Western sense; a 'final' irony since the
cyborg is also the awful apocalyptic telos of the 'West's' escalating
dominations of abstract individuation, an ultimate self untied at last
from all dependency, a man in space. An origin story in the 'Western',
humanist sense depends on the myth of original unity, fullness, bliss
and terror, represented by the phallic mother from whom all humans
must separate, the task of individual development and of history,
the twin potent myths inscribed most powerfully for us in psychoanalysis and Marxism. Hilary Klein has argued that both Marxism
and psychoanalysis, in their concepts of labor and of individuation
and gender formation, depend on the plot of original unity out of
which difference must be produced and enlisted in a drama of
escalating domination of woman/nature. The cyborg skips the step
of original unity, of identification with nature in the Western sense.
This is its illegitimate promise that might lead to subversion of its
teleology as star wars.
The cyborg is resolutely committed to partiality, irony, intimacy,
and perversity. It is oppositional, Utopian, and completely without
innocence. No longer structured by the polarity of public and private,
the cyborg defines a technological polis based partly on a revolution
of social relations in the oikos, the household. Nature and culture
are reworked; the one can no longer be the resource for appropriation or incorporation by the other. The relationships for forming
wholes from parts, including those of polarity and hierarchical
domination, are at issue in the cyborg world. Unlike the hopes of
Frankenstein's monster, the cyborg does not expect its father to save
it through a restoration of the garden; i.e., through the fabrication

 4

DONNA HARAWAY

of a heterosexual mate, through its completion in a finished whole,
a city and cosmos. The cyborg does not dream of community on
the model of the organic family, this time without the Oedipal project.
The cyborg would not recognize the Garden of Eden; it is not made
of mud and cannot dream of returning to dust. Perhaps that is why
I want to see if cyborgs can subvert the apocalypse of returning
to nuclear dust in the manic compulsion to name the Enemy.
Cyborgs are not reverent; they do not re-member the cosmos. They
are wary of holism, but needy for connection — they seem to have
a natural feel for united front politics, but without the vanguard party.
The main trouble with cyborgs, of course, is that they are the
illegitimate offspring of militarism and patriarchal capitalism, not to
mention state socialism. But illegitimate offspring are often
exceedingly unfaithful to their origins. Their fathers, after all, are
inessential.
I will return to the science fiction of cyborgs at the end of this essay,
but now I want to signal three crucial boundary breakdowns that
make the following political fictional (political scientific) analysis
possible. By the late twentieth century in United States scientific
culture, the boundary between human and animal is thoroughly
breached. The last beachheads of uniqueness have been polluted
if not turned into amusement parks — language, tool use, social
behaviour, mental events, nothing really convincingly settles the
separation of human and animal. And many people no longer feel
the need of such a separation; indeed, many branches of feminist
culture affirm the pleasure of connection of human and other living
creatures. Movements for animal rights are not irrational denials of
human uniqueness; they are clear-sighted recognition of connection
across the discredited breach of nature and culture. Biology and
evolutionary theory over the last two centuries have simultaneously
produced modern organisms as objects of knowledge and reduced
the line between humans and animals to a faint trace re-etched in
ideological struggle or professional disputes between life and social
sciences. Within this framework, teaching modern Christian
creationism should be fought as a form of child abuse.
Biological-determinist ideology is only one position opened up
in scientific culture for arguing the meanings of human animality.
There is much room for radical political people to contest for the
meanings of the breached boundary.1 The cyborg appears in

 A MANIFESTO FOR CYBORGS

5

myth precisely where the boundary between human and animal
is transgressed. Far from signalling a walling off of people from other
living beings, cyborgs signal disturbingly and pleasurably tight
coupling. Bestiality has a new status in this cycle of marriage
exchange.
The second leaky distinction is between animal-human (organism)
and machine. Pre-cybernetic machines could be haunted; there was
always the specter of the ghost in the machine. This dualism
structured the dialogue between materialism and idealism that was
settled by a dialectical progeny, called spirit or history, according
to taste. But basically machines were not self-moving; self-designing,
autonomous. They could not achieve man's dream, only mock it.
They were not man,-an author to himself, but only a caricature of
that masculinist reproductive dream. To think they were otherwise
was paranoid. Now we are not so sure. Late-twentieth-century
machines have made thoroughly ambiguous the difference between
natural and artificial, mind and body, self-developing and externallydesigned, and many other distinctions that used to apply to
organisms and machines. Our machines are disturbingly lively, and
we ourselves frighteningly inert.
Technological determinism is only one ideological space opened
up by the reconceptions of machine and organism as coded texts
through which we engage in the play of writing and reading the
world.2 'Textualization' of everything in post-structuralist, postmodernist theory has been dammed by Marxists and socialist
feminists for its Utopian disregard for lived relations of domination
that ground the 'play' of arbitrary reading.3* It is certainly true that
post-modernist strategies, like my cyborg myth, subvert myriad
organic wholes (e.g., the poem, the primitive culture, the biological
organism). In short, the certainty of what counts as nature — a source
of insight and a promise of innocence — is undermined, probably
fatally. The transcendent authorization of interpretation is lost, and
with it the ontology grounding 'Western' epistemology. But the
alternative is not cynicism or faithlessness, i.e., some version of
abstract existence, like the accounts of technological determinism
destroying 'man' by the 'machine' or 'meaningful political action'
by the 'text'. Who cyborgs will be is a radical question; the answers
are a matter of survival. Both chimpanzees and artifacts have politics,
so why shouldn't we?4
* See over.

 6

DONNA HARAWAY

The third distinction is a subset of the second: the boundary
between physical and non-physical is very imprecise for us. Pop
physics books on the consequences of quantum theory and the
indeterminacy principle are a kind of popular scientific equivalent
to the Harlequin romances as a marker of radical change in
American white heterosexuality: they get it wrong, but they are on
the right subject. Modern machines are quintessential^ microelectronic devices: they are everywhere and they are invisible.
Modern machinery is an irreverent upstart god, mocking the Father's
ubiquity and spirituality. The silicon chip is a surface for writing; it
is etched in molecular scales disturbed only by atomic noise, the
ultimate interference for nuclear scores. Writing, power, and
technology are old partners in Western stories of the origin of
civilization, but miniaturization has changed our experience of
mechanism. Miniaturization has turned out to be about power; small
is not so much beautiful as pre-eminently dangerous, as in cruise
missiles. Contrast the TV sets of the 1950s or the news cameras
of the 1970s with the TV wrist bands or hand-sized video cameras
now advertised. Our best machines are made of sunshine; they are
all light and clean because they are nothing but signals,
electromagnetic waves, a section of a spectrum. And these
machines are eminently portable, mobile — a matter of immense
* A provocative, comprehensive argument about the politics and theories of 'post-modernism'
is made by Frederick Jameson, who argues that post-modernism is not an option, a style
among others, but a cultural dominant requiring radical reinvention of left politics from within;
there is no longer any place from without that gives meaning to the comforting fiction of
critical distance. Jameson also makes clear why one cannot be for or against post-modernism,
an essentially moralist move. My position is that feminists (and others) need continuous cultural
reinvention, post-modernist critique, and historical materialism; only a cyborg would have
a chance. The old dominations of white capitalist patriarchy seem nostalgically innocent
now: they normalized heterogeneity, e.g., into man and woman, white and black. 'Advanced
capitalism' and post-modernism release heterogeneity without a norm, and we are flattened,
without subjectivity, which requires depth, even unfriendly and drowning depths. It is time
to write The Death of the Clinic. The clinic's methods required bodies and works; we have
texts and surfaces. Our dominations don't work by medicalization and normalization anymore;
they work by networking, communications redesign, stress management. Normalization
gives way to automation, utter redundancy. Michel Foucault's Birth of the Clinic, History
of Sexuality, and Discipline and Punish name a form of power at its moment of implosion.
The discourse of biopolitics gives way to technobabble, the language of the spliced
substantive; no noun is left whole by the multinationals. These are their names, listed from
one issue of Science: Tech-Knowledge, Genentech, Allergen, Hybritech, Compupro, Genencor, Syntex, Allelix, Agrigenetics Corp., Syntro, Codon, Repligen, Micro-Angelo from Scion
Corp., Percom Data, Inter Systems, Cyborg Corp., Statcom Corp., Intertec. If we are
imprisoned by language, then escape from that prison house requires language poets, a
kind of cultural restriction enzyme to cut the code; cyborg heteroglossia is one form of radical
culture politics.

 A MANIFESTO FOR CYBORGS

7

human pain in Detroit and Singapore. People are nowhere near so
fluid, being both material and opaque. Cyborgs are ether,
quintessence.
The ubiquity and invisibility of cyborgs is precisely why these
sunshine-belt machines are so deadly. They are as hard to see
politically as materially. They are about consciousness — or its
simulation.5 They are floating signifiers moving in pickup trupks
across Europe, blocked more effectively by the witch-weavings of
the displaced and so unnatural Greenham women, who read the
cyborg webs of power very well, than by the militant labor of older
masculinist politics, whose natural constituency needs defense jobs.
Ultimately the 'hardest' science is about the realm of greatest
boundary confusion, the realm of pure number, pure spirit, C3I,
cryptography, and the preservation of potent secrets. The new
machines are so clean and light. Their engineers are sunworshippers mediating a new scientific revolution associated with
the night dream of post-industrial society. The diseases evoked by
these clean machines are 'no more' than the miniscule coding
changes of an antigen in the immune system, 'no more' than the
experience of stress. The nimble little fingers of 'Oriental' women,
the old fascination of little Anglo-Saxon Victorian girls with doll
houses, women's enforced attention to the small take on quite new
dimensions in this world. There might be a cyborg Alice taking
account of these new dimensions. Ironically, it might be the unnatural
cyborg women making chips in Asia and spiral dancing in Santa
Rita whose constructed unities will guide effective oppositional
strategies.
So my cyborg myth is about transgressed boundaries, potent
fusions, and dangerous possibilities which progressive people might
explore as one part of needed political work. One of my premises
is that most American socialists and feminists see deepened
dualisms of mind and body, animal and machine, idealism and
materialism in the social practices, symbolic formulations, and
physical artifacts associated with 'high technology' and scientific
culture. From One-Dimensional Man to The Death of Nature,6 the
analytic resources developed by progressives have insisted on the
necessary domination of technics and recalled us to an imagined
organic body to integrate our resistance. Another of my premises
is that the need for unity of people trying to resist worldwide

 8

DONNA HARAWAY

intensification of domination has never been more acute. But a
slightly perverse shift of perspective might better enable us to contest
for meanings, as well as for other forms of power and pleasure in
technologically-mediated societies.
From one perspective, a cyborg world is about the final imposition
of a grid of control on the planet, about the final abstraction
embodied in a Star War apocalypse waged in the name of defense,
about the final appropriation of women's bodies in a masculinist orgy
of war.7 From another perspective, a cyborg world might be about
lived social and bodily realities in which people are not afraid of
their joint kinship with animals and machines, not afraid of
permanently partial identities and contradictory standpoints. The
political struggle is to see from both perspectives at once because
each reveals both dominations and possibilities unimaginable from
the other vantage point. Single vision produces worse illusions than
double vision or many-headed monsters. Cyborg unities are
monstrous and illegitimate; in our present political circumstances,
we could hardly hope for more potent myths for resistance and
recouping. I like to imagine LAG, the Livermore Action Group, as
a kind of cyborg society, dedicated to realistically converting the
laboratories that most fiercely embody and spew out the tools of
technological apocalypse, and committed to building a political form
that actually manages to hold together witches, engineers, elders,
perverts, Christians, mothers, and Leninists long enough to disarm
the state. Fission Impossible is the name of the affinity group in my
town. (Affinity: related not by blood but by choice, the appeal of one
chemical nuclear group for another, avidity.)
Fractured identities
It has become difficult to name one's feminism by a single adjective
— or even to insist in every circumstance upon the noun.
Consciousness of exclusion through naming is acute. Identities seem
contradictory, partial, and strategic. With the hard-won recognition
of their social and historical constitution, gender, race, and class
cannot provide the basis for belief in 'essential' unity. There is nothing
about being 'female' that naturally binds women. There is not even
such a state as 'being' female, itself a highly complex category
constructed in contested sexual scientific discourses and other social
practices. Gender, race, or class consciousness is an achievement

 A MANIFESTO FOR CYBORGS

9

forced on us by the terrible historical experience of the contradictory
social realities of patriarchy, colonialism, and capitalism. And who
counts as 'us' in my own rhetoric? Which identities are available to
ground such a potent political myth called 'us', and what could
motivate enlistment in this collectivity? Painful fragmentation among
feminists (not to mention among women) along every possible fault
line has made the concept of woman elusive, an excuse for the matrix
of women's dominations of each other. For me — and for many who
share a similar historical location in white, professional middle class,
female, radical, North American, mid-adult bodies — the sources
of a crisis in political identity are legion. The recent history for much
of the U.S. left and U.S. feminism has been a response to this kind
of crisis by endless splitting and searches for a new essential unity.
But there has also been a growing recognition of another response
through coalition — affinity, not identity.8
Chela Sandoval, from a consideration of specific historical
moments in the formation of the new political voice called women
of color, has theorized a hopeful model of political identity called
'oppositional consciousness', born of the skills for reading webs of
power by those refused stable membership in the social categories
of race, sex, or class.9 'Women of color', a name contested at its
origins by those whom it would incorporate, as well as a historical
consciousness marking systematic breakdown of all the signs of
Man in 'Western' traditions, constructs a kind of post-modernist
identity out of otherness and difference. This post-modernist identity
is fully political, whatever might be said about other possible postmodernisms.
Sandoval emphasizes the lack of any essential criterion for
identifying who is a women of color. She notes that the definition
of the group has been by conscious appropriation of negation. For
example, a Chicana or U.S. black woman has not been able to speak
as a woman or as a black person or as a Chicano. Thus, she was
at the bottom of a cascade of negative identities, left out of even
the privileged oppressed authorial categories called 'women and
blacks', who claimed to make the important revolutions. The category
'woman' negated all non-white women; 'black' negated all non-black
people, as well as all black women. But there was also no 'she', no
singularity, but a sea of differences among U.S. women who have
affirmed their historical identity as U.S. women of color. This identity

 10

DONNA HARAWAY

marks out a self-consciously constructed space that cannot affirm
the capacity to act on the basis of natural identification, but only
on the basis of conscious coalition, of affinity, of political kinship.10
Unlike the 'woman' of some streams of the white women's movement
in the United States, there is no naturalization of the matrix, or at
least this is what Sandoval argues is uniquely available through the
power of oppositional consciousness.
Sandoval's argument has to be seen as one potent formulation
for feminists out of the worldwide development of anti-colonialist
discourse, i.e., discourse dissolving the 'West' and its highest product
— the one who is not animal, barbarian, or woman; i.e., man, the
author of a cosmos called history. As orientalism is deconstructed
politically and semiotically, the identities of the Occident destabilize,
including those of feminists.11 Sandoval argues that 'women of
color' have a chance to build an effective unity that does not replicate
the imperializing, totalizing revolutionary subjects of previous
Marxisms and feminisms which had not faced the consequences
of the disorderly polyphony emerging from decolonization.
Katie King has emphasized the limits of identification and the
political/poetic mechanics of identification built into reading 'the
poem', that generative core of cultural feminism. King criticizes the
persistent tendency among contemporary feminists from different
'moments' or 'conversations' in feminist practice to taxonomize the
women's movement to make one's own political tendencies appear
to be the telos of the whole. These taxonomies tend to remake
feminist history to appear to be an ideological struggle among
coherent types persisting over time, especially those typical units
called radical, liberal, and socialist feminism. Literally, all other
feminisms are either incorporated or marginalized, usually by
building an explicit ontology and epistemology.12 Taxonomies of
feminism produce epistemologies to police deviation from official
women's experience. And of course, 'women's culture', like women
of color, is consciously created by mechanisms inducing affinity. The
rituals of poetry, music, and certain forms of academic practice have
been pre-eminent. The politics of race and culture in the U.S.
women's movements are intimately interwoven. The common
achievement of King and Sandoval is learning how to craft a
poetic/political unity without relying on a logic of appropriation,
incorporation, and taxonomic identification.

 A MANIFESTO FOR CYBORGS

11

The theoretical and practical struggle against unity-throughdomination or unity-through-incorporation ironically not only
undermines the justifications for patriarchy, colonialism, humanism,
positivism, essentialism, scientism, and other unlamented -isms, but
all claims for an organic or natural standpoint. I think that radical
and socialist/Marxist feminisms have also undermined their/our own
epistemological strategies and that this is a crucially valuable step
in imagining possible unities. It remains to be seen whether all
'epistemologies' as Western political people have known them fail
us in the task to build effective affinities.
It is important to note that the effort to construct revolutionary
standpoints, epistemologies as achievements of people committed
to changing the world, has been part of the process showing the
limits of identification. The acid tools of post-modernist theory and
the constructive tools of ontological discourse about revolutionary
subjects might be seen as ironic allies in dissolving Western selves
in the interests of survival. We are excruciatingly conscious of what
it means to have a historically constituted body. But with the loss
of innocence in our origin, there is no expulsion from the Garden
either. Our politics lose the indulgence of guilt with the naivete of
innocence. But what would another political myth for socialist
feminism look like? What kind of politics could embrace partial,
contradictory, permanently unclosed constructions of personal and
collective selves and still be faithful, effective — and, ironically,
socialist feminist?
I do not know of any other time in history when there was greater
need for political unity to confront effectively the dominations of 'race',
'gender', 'sexuality', and 'class'. I also do not know of any other time
when the kind of unity we might help build could have been possible.
None of 'us' have any longer the symbolic or material capability of
dictating the shape of reality to any of 'them'. Or at least 'we' cannot
claim innocence from practicing such dominations. White women,
including socialist feminists, discovered (i.e., were forced kicking and
screaming to notice) the non-innocence of the category 'woman'.
That consciousness changes the geography of all previous
categories; it denatures them as heat denatures a fragile protein.
Cyborg feminists have to argue that 'we' do not want any more
natural matrix of unity and that no construction is whole. Innocence,
and the corollary insistence on victimhood as the only ground for

 12

DONNA HARAWAY

insight, has done enough damage. But the constructed revolutionary
subject must give late-twentieth-century people pause as well. In
the fraying of identities and in the reflexive strategies for constructing
them, the possibility opens up for weaving something other than
a shroud for the day after the apocalypse that so prophetically ends
salvation history.
Both Marxist/socialist feminisms and radical feminisms have
simultaneously naturalized and denatured the category 'woman' and
consciousness of the social lives of 'women'. Perhaps a schematic
caricature can highlight both kinds of moves. Marxian socialism is
rooted in an analysis of wage labor which reveals class structure.
The consequence of the wage relationship is systematic alienation,
as the worker is dissociated from his (sic) product. Abstraction and
illusion rule in knowledge, domination rules in practice. Labor is the
pre-eminently privileged category enabling the Marxist to overcome
illusion and find that point of view which is necessary for changing
the world. Labor is the humanizing activity that makes man; labor
is an ontological category permitting the knowledge of a subject,
and so the knowledge of subjugation and alienation.
In faithful filiation, socialist feminism advanced by allying itself with
the basic analytic strategies of Marxism. The main achievement of
both Marxist feminists and socialist feminists was to expand the
category of labor to accommodate what (some) women did, even
when the wage relation was subordinated to a more comprehensive
view of labor under capitalist patriarchy. In particular, women's labor
in the household and women's activity as mothers generally, i.e.,
reproduction in the socialist feminist sense, entered theory on the
authority of analogy to the Marxian concept of labor. The unity of
women here rests on an epistemology based on the ontological
structure of 'labor'. Marxist/socialist feminism does not 'naturalize'
unity; it is a possible achievement based on a possible standpoint
rooted in social relations. The essentializing move is in the ontological
structure of labor or of its analogue, women's activity.13* The
* The central role of object-relations versions of psychoanalysis and related strong
universalizing moves in discussing reproduction, caring work, and mothering in many
approaches to epistemology underline their authors' resistance to what I am calling postmodernism. For me, both the universalizing moves and the versions of psychoanalysis make
analysis of 'women's place in the integrated circuit' difficult and lead to systematic difficulties
in accounting for or even seeing major aspects of construction of gender and gendered
social life.

 A MANIFESTO FOR CYBORGS

13

inheritance of Marxian humanism, with its pre-eminently Western
self, is the difficulty for me. The contribution from these formulations
has been the emphasis on the daily responsibility of real women
to build unities, rather than to naturalize them.
Catherine MacKinnon's version of radical feminism is itself a
caricature of the appropriating, incorporating, totalizing tendencies
of Western theories of identity grounding action.14 It is factually and
politically wrong to assimilate all of the diverse 'moments' or
'conversations' in recent women's politics named radical feminism
to MacKinnon's version. But the teleological logic of her theory shows
how an epistemology and ontology — including their negations —
erase or police difference. Only one of the effects of MacKinnon's
theory is the rewriting of the history of the polymorphous field called
radical feminism. The major effect is the production of a theory of
experience, of women's identity, that is a kind of apocalypse for all
revolutionary standpoints. That is, the totalization built into this tale
of radical feminism achieves its end — the unity of women — by
enforcing the experience of and testimony to radical non-being. As
for the Marxist/socialist feminist, consciousness is an achievement,
not a natural fact. And MacKinnon's theory eliminates some of the
difficulties built into humanist revolutionary subjects, but at the cost
of radical reductionism.
MacKinnon argues that radical feminism necessarily adopted a
different analytical strategy from Marxism, looking first not at the
structure of class, but at the structure of sex/gender and its generative
relationship, men's constitution and appropriation of women sexually.
Ironically, MacKinnon's 'ontology' constructs a non-subject, a nonjDeing. Another's desire, not the self's labor, is the origin of 'woman'.
She therefore develops a theory of consciousness that enforces what
can count as 'women's' experience — anything that names sexual
violation, indeed, sex itself as far as 'women' can be concerned.
Feminist practice is the construction of this form of consciousness;
i.e., the self-knowledge of a self-who-is-not.
Perversely, sexual appropriation in this radical feminism still has
the epistemological status of labor, i.e., the point from which analysis
able to contribute to changing the world must flow. But sexual
objectification, not alienation, is the consequence of the structure
of sex/gender. In the realm of knowledge, the result of sexual

 14

DONNA HARAWAY

objectification is illusion and abstraction. However, a woman is not
simply alienated from her product, but in a deep sense does not
exist as a subject, or even potential subject, since she owes her
existence as a woman to sexual appropriation. To be constituted
by another's desire is not the same thing as to be alienated in the
violent separation of the laborer from his product.
MacKinnon's radical theory of experience is totalizing in the
extreme; it does not so much marginalize as obliterate the authority
of any other women's political speech and action. It is a totalization
producing what Western partiarchy itself never succeeded in doing
— feminists' consciousness of the non-existence of women, except
as products of men's desire. I think MacKinnon correctly argues that
no Marxian version of identity can firmly ground women's unity. But
in solving the problem of the contradictions of any Western
revolutionary subject for feminist purposes, she develops an even
more authoritarian doctrine of experience. If my complaint about
socialist/Marxian standpoints is their unintended erasure of polyvocal,
unassimilable, radical difference made visible in anti-colonial
discourse and practice, MacKinnon's intentional erasure of all
difference through the device of the 'essential' non-existence of
women is not reassuring.
In my taxonomy, which like any other taxonomy is a reinscription
of history, radical feminism can accommodate all the activities of
women named by socialist feminists as forms of labor only if the
activity can somehow be sexualized. Reproduction had different
tones of meanings for the two tendencies, one rooted in labor, one
in sex, both calling the consequences of domination and ignorance
of social and personal reality 'false consciousness'.
Beyond either the difficulties or the contributions in the argument
of any one author, neither Marxist nor radical feminist points of view
have tended to embrace the status of a partial explanation; both
were regularly constituted as totalities. Western explanation has
demanded as much; how else could the 'Western' author incorporate
its others? Each tried to annex other forms of domination by
expanding its basic categories through analogy, simple listing, or
addition. Embarrassed silence about race among white radical and
socialist feminists was one major, devastating political consequence.
History and polyvocality disappear into political taxonomies that try

 A MANIFESTO FOR CYBORGS

15

to establish genealogies. There was no structural room for race (or
for much else) in theory claiming to reveal the construction of the
category woman and social group women as a unified or totalizable
whole. The structure of my caricature looks like this:
Socialist Feminism —
structure of class//wage labor//alienation
labor, by analogy reproduction, by extension sex, by addition
race
Radical Feminism —
structure of gender//sexual appropriation//objectification
sex, by analogy labor, by extension reproduction, by addition
race

In another context, the French theorist Julia Kristeva claimed
women appeared as a historical group after World War II, along with
groups like youth. Her dates are doubtful; but we are now
accustomed to remembering that as objects of knowledge and as
historical actors, 'race' did not always exist, 'class' has a historical
genesis, and 'homosexuals' are quite junior. It is no accident that
the symbolic system of the family of man — and so the essence
of woman — breaks up at the same moment that networks of
connection among people on the planet are unprecedentedly
multiple, pregnant, and complex. 'Advanced capitalism' is
inadequate to convey the structure of this historical moment. In the
'Western' sense, the end of man is at stake. It is no accident that
woman disintegrates into women in our time. Perhaps socialist
feminists were not substantially guilty of producing essentialist theory
that suppressed women's particularity and contradictory interests.
I think we have been, at least through unreflective participation in
the logics, languages, and practices of white humanism and through
searching for a single ground of domination to secure our
revolutionary voice. Now we have less excuse. But in the
consciousness of our failures, we risk lapsing into boundless
difference and giving up on the confusing task of making partial,
real connection. Some differences are playful; some are poles of
world historical systems of domination. 'Epistemology' is about
knowing the difference.
The informatics of domination
In this attempt at an epistemological and political position, I would
like to sketch a picture of possible unity, a picture indebted to socialist

 16

DONNA HARAWAY

and feminist principles of design. The frame for my sketch.is set
by the extent and importance of rearrangements in worldwide social
relations tied to science and technology. I argue for a politics rooted
in claims about fundamental changes in the nature of class, race,
and gender in an emerging system of world order analogous in its
novelty and scope to that created by industrial capitalism; we are
living through a movement from an organic, industrial society to a
polymorphous, information system — from all work to all play, a
deadly game. Simultaneously material and ideological, the dichotomies may be expressed in the following chart of transitions from
the comfortable old hierarchical dominations to the scary new
networks I have called the informatics of domination:
Representation
Bourgeois novel, realism
Organism
Depth, integrity
Heat
Biology as clinical practice
Physiology
Small group
Perfection
Eugenics
Decadence, Magic Mountain
Hygiene
Microbiology, tuberculosis
Organic division of labor
Functional specialization
Reproduction
Organic sex role specialization
Biological determinism
Community ecology
Racial chain of being
Scientific management in home/
factory
Family/Market/Factory
Family wage
Public/Private
Nature/Culture
Cooperation
Freud
Sex
Labor
Mind
World War II
White Capitalist Patriarchy

Simulation
Science fiction, post-modernism
Biotic component
Surface, boundary

Noise
Biology as inscription
Communications engineering
Subsystem
Optimization
Population control
Obsolescence, Future Shock
Stress Management
Immunology, AIDS
Ergonomics/cybernetics of labor
Modular construction
Replication
Optimal genetic strategies
Evolutionary inertia, constraints
Ecosystem
Neo-imperialism, United Nations
humanism
Global factory/Electronic cottage
Women in the Integrated Circuit
Comparable worth
Cyborg citizenship
Fields of difference
Communications enhancement
Lacan
Genetic engineering
Robotics
Artificial Intelligence
Star Wars
Informatics of Domination

This list suggests several interesting things.15 First, the objects on
the right-hand side cannot be coded as 'natural', a realization that

 A MANIFESTO FOR CYBORGS

17

subverts naturalistic coding for the left-hand side as well. We cannot
go back ideologically or materially. It's not just that 'god' is dead;
so is the 'goddess'. In relation to objects like biotic components, one
must think not in terms of essential properties, but in terms of
strategies of design, boundary constraints, rates of flows, systems
logics, costs of lowering constraints. Sexual reproduction is one kind
of reproductive strategy among many, with costs and benefits as
a function of the system environment. Ideologies of sexual
reproduction can no longer reasonably call on the notions of sex
and sex role as organic aspects in natural objects like organisms
and families. Such reasoning will be unmasked as irrational, and
ironically corporate executives reading Playboy and anti-porn radical
feminists will make strange bedfellows in jointly unmasking the
irrationalism.
Likewise for race, ideologies about human diversity have to be
formulated in terms of frequencies of parameters, like blood groups
or intelligence scores. It is 'irrational' to invoke concepts like primitive
and civilized. For liberals and radicals, the search for integrated social
systems gives way to a new practice called 'experimental ethnography' in which an organic object dissipates in attention to the play
of writing. At the level of ideology, we see translations of racism and
colonialism into languages of development and underdevelopment,
rates and constraints of modernization. Any objects or persons can
be reasonably thought of in terms of disassembly and reassembly;
no 'natural' architectures constrain system design. The financial
districts in all the world's cities, as well as the export-processing and
free-trade zones, proclaim this elementary fact of 'late capitalism'.
The entire universe of objects that can be known scientifically must
be formulated as problems in communications engineering (for the
managers) or theories of the text (for those who would resist). Both
are cyborg semiologies.
One should expect control strategies to concentrate on boundary
conditions and interfaces, on rates of flow across boundaries — and
not on the integrity of natural objects. 'Integrity' or 'sincerity' of the
Western self gives way to decision procedures and expert systems.
For example, control strategies applied to women's capacities to give
birth to new human beings will be developed in the languages of
population control and maximization of goal achievement for
individual decision-makers. Control strategies will be formulated in

 18

DONNA HARAWAY

terms of rates, costs of constraints, degrees of freedom. Human
beings, like any other component or subsystem, must be localized
in a system architecture whose basic modes of operation are
probabilistic, statistical. No objects, spaces, or bodies are sacred
in themselves; any component can be interfaced with any other if
the proper standard, the proper code, can be constructed for
processing signals in a common language. Exchange in this world
transcends the universal translation effected by capitalist markets
that Marx analyzed so well. The privileged pathology affecting all
kinds of components in this universe is stress — communications
breakdown.16 The cyborg is not subject to Foucault's biopolitics;
the cyborg simulates politics, a much more potent field of operations.
This kind of analysis of scientific and cultural objects of knowledge
which have appeared historically since World War II prepares us
to notice some important inadequacies in feminist analysis which
has proceeded as if the organic, hierarchical dualisms ordering
discourse in 'the West' since Aristotle still ruled. They have been
cannibalized, or as Zoe Sofia (Sofoulis) might put it, they have been
'techno-digested'. The dichotomies between mind and body, animal
and human, organism and machine, public and private, nature and
culture, men and women, primitive and civilized are all in question
ideologically. The actual situation of women is their
integration/exploitation into a world system of production/
reproduction and communication called the informatics of
domination. The home, workplace, market, public arena, the body
itself — all can be dispersed and interfaced in nearly infinite,
polymorphous ways, with large consequences for women and others
— consequences that themselves are very different for different
people and which make potent oppositional international movements
difficult to imagine and essential for survival. One important route
for reconstructing socialist-feminist politics is through theory and
practice addressed to the social relations of science and technology,
including crucially the systems of myth and meanings structuring
our imaginations. The cyborg is a kind of disassembled and
reassembled, post-modern collective and personal self. This is the
self feminists must code.
Communications technologies and biotechnologies are the crucial
tools recrafting our bodies. These tools embody and enforce new
social relations for women worldwide. Technologies and scientific

 A MANIFESTO FOR CYBORGS

19

discourses can be partially understood as formalizations, i.e., as
frozen moments, of the fluid social interactions constituting them,
but they should also be viewed as instruments for enforcing
meanings. The boundary is permeable between tool and myth,
instrument and concept, historical systems of social relations and
historical anatomies of possible bodies, including objects of
knowledge. Indeed, myth and tool mutually constitute each other.
Furthermore, communications sciences and modern biologies are
constructed by a common move — the translation of the world into
a problem of coding, a search for a common language in which
all resistance to instrumental control disappears and all heterogeneity
can be submitted to disassembly, reassembly, investment, and
exchange.
In communications sciences, the translation of the world into a
problem in coding can be illustrated by looking at cybernetic
(feedback controlled) systems theories applied to telephone
technology, computer design, weapons deployment, or data base
construction and maintenance. In each case, solution to the key
questions rests on a theory of language and control; the key
operation is determining the rates, directions, and probabilities of
flow of a quantity called information. The world is subdivided by
boundaries differentially permeable to information. Information is just
that kind of quantifiable element (unit, basis of unity) which allows
universal translation, and so unhindered instrumental power (called
effective communication). The biggest threat to such power is
interruption of communication. Any system breakdown is a function
of stress. The fundamentals of this technology can be condensed
into the metaphor C 3 I, command-control-communicationintelligence, the military's symbol for its operations theory.
In modern biologies, the translation of the world into a problem
in coding can be illustrated by molecular genetics, ecology, sociobiological evolutionary theory, and immunobiology. The organism
has been translated into problems of genetic coding and read-out.
Biotechnology, a writing technology, informs research broadly.17 In
a sense, organisms have ceased to exist as objects of knowledge,
giving way to biotic components, i.e., special kinds of information
processing devices. The analogous moves in ecology could be
examined by probing the history and utility of the concept of the

 20

DONNA HARAWAY

ecosystem. Immunobiology and associated medical practices are
rich exemplars of the privilege of coding and recognition systems
as objects of knowledge, as constructions of bodily reality for us.
Biology is here a kind of cryptography. Research is necessarily a
kind of intelligence activity. Ironies abound. A stressed system goes
awry; its communication processes break down; it fails to recognize
the difference between self and other. Human babies with baboon
hearts evoke national ethical perplexity — for animal-rights activists
at least as much as for guardians of human purity. Gay men, Haitian
immigrants, and intravenous drug users are the 'privileged' victims
of an awful immune-system disease that marks (inscribes on the
body) confusion of boundaries and moral pollution.
But these excursions into communications sciences and biology
have been at a rarefied level; there is a mundane, largely economic
reality to support my claim that these sciences and technologies
indicate fundamental transformations in the structure of the world
for us. Communications technologies depend on electronics.
Modern states, multinational corporations, military power, welfarestate apparatuses, satellite systems, political processes, fabrication
of our imaginations, labor-control systems, medical constructions
of our bodies, commercial pornography, the international division
of labor, and religious evangelism depend intimately upon
electronics. Microelectronics is the technical basis of simulacra, i.e.,
of copies without originals.
Microelectronics mediates the translations of labor into robotics
and word processing; sex into genetic engineering and reproductive
technologies; and mind into artificial intelligence and decision
procedures. The new biotechnologies concern more than human
reproduction. Biology as a powerful engineering science for
redesigning materials and processes has revolutionary implications
for industry, perhaps most obvious today in areas of fermentation,
agriculture, and energy. Communications sciences and biology are
constructions of natural-technical objects of knowledge in which the
difference between machine and organism is thoroughly blurred;
mind, body, and tool are on very intimate terms. The 'multinational'
material organization of the production and reproduction of daily
life and the symbolic organization of the production and reproduction
of culture and imagination seem equally implicated. The boundary-

 A MANIFESTO FOR CYBORGS

21

maintaining images of base and superstructure, public and private,
or material and ideal never seemed more feeble.
I have used Rachel Grossman's image of women in the integrated
circuit to name the situation of women in a world so intimately
restructured through the social relations of science and technology.18 I use the odd circumlocution, 'the social relations of
science and technology', to indicate that we are not dealing with
a technological determinism, but with a historical system depending
upon structured relations among people. But the phrase should also
indicate that science and technology provide fresh sources of power,
that we need fresh sources of analysis and political action.19 Some
of the rearrangements of race, sex, and class rooted in high-techfacilitated social relations can make socialist feminism more relevant
to effective progressive politics.
The homework economy
The 'new industrial revolution' is producing a new worldwide
working class. The extreme mobility of capital and the emerging
international division of labor are intertwined with the emergence
of new collectivities, and the weakening of familiar groupings. These
developments are neither gender- nor race-neutral. White men in
advanced industrial societies have become newly vulnerable to
permanent job loss, and women are not disappearing from the job
rolls at the same rates as men. It is not simply that women in thirdworld countries are the preferred labor force for the science-based
multinationals in the export-processing sectors, particularly in
electronics. The picture is more systematic and involves reproduction,
sexuality, culture, consumption, and production. In the prototypical
Silicon Valley, many women's lives have been structured around
employment in electronics-dependent jobs, and their intimate realities
include serial heterosexual monogamy, negotiating childcare,
distance from extended kin or most other forms of traditional
community, a high likelihood of loneliness and extreme economic
vulnerability as they age. The ethnic and racial diversity of women
in Silicon Valley structures a microcosm of conflicting differences
in culture, family, religion, education, language.
Richard Gordon has called this new situation the homework
economy.20 Although he includes the phenomenon of literal

 22

DONNA HARAWAY

homework emerging in connection with electronics assembly,
Gordon intends 'homework economy' to name a restructuring of
work that broadly has the characteristics formerly ascribed to female
jobs, jobs literally done only by women. Work is being redefined
as both literally female and feminized, whether performed by men
or women. To be feminized means to be made extremely vulnerable;
able to be disassembled, reassembled, exploited as a reserve labor
force; seen less as workers than as servers; subjected to time
arrangements on and off the paid job that make a mockery of a
limited work day; leading an existence that always borders on being
obscene, out of place, and reducible to sex. Deskilling is an old
strategy newly applicable to formerly privileged workers. However,
the homework economy does not refer only to large-scale deskilling,
nor does it deny that new areas of high skill are emerging, even
for women and men previously excluded from skilled employment.
Rather, the concept indicates that factory, home, and market are
integrated on a new scale and that the places of women are crucial
— and need to be analyzed for differences among women and for
meanings for relations between men and women in various
situations.
The homework economy as a world capitalist organizational
structure is made possible by (not caused by) the new technologies.
The success of the attack on relatively privileged, mostly white, men's
unionized jobs is tied to the power of the new communications
technologies to integrate and control labor despite extensive
dispersion and decentralization. The consequences of the new
technologies are felt by women both in the loss of the family (male)
wage (if they ever had access to this white privilege) and in the
character of their own jobs, which are becoming capital-intensive,
e.g., office work and nursing.
The new economic and technological arrangements are also
related to the collapsing welfare state and the ensuing intensification
of demands on women to sustain daily life for themselves as well
as for men, children, and old people. The feminization of poverty
— generated by dismantling the welfare state, by the homework
economy where stable jobs become the exception, and sustained
by the expectation that women's wage will not be matched by a
male income for the support of children — has become an urgent
focus. The causes of various women-headed households are a

 A MANIFESTO FOR CYBORGS

23

function of race, class, or sexuality; but their increasing generality
is a ground for coalitions of women on many issues. That women
regularly sustain daily life partly as a function of their enforced status
as mothers is hardly new; the kind of integration with the overall
capitalist and progressively war-based economy is new. The
particular pressure, for example, on U.S. black women, who have
achieved an escape from (barely) paid domestic service and who
now hold clerical and similar jobs in large numbers, has large
implications for continued enforced black poverty with employment.
Teenage women in industrializing areas of the third world increasingly
find themselves the sole or major source of a cash wage for their
families, while access to land is ever more problematic. These
developments must have major consequences in the psychodynamics and politics of gender and race.
Within the framework of three major stages of capitalism
(commercial/early industrial, monopoly, multinational) — tied to
nationalism, imperialism, and multinationalism, and related to
Jameson's three dominant aesthetic periods of realism, modernism,
and post-modernism — I would argue that specific forms of families
dialectically relate to forms of capital and to its political and cultural
concomitants. Although lived problematically and unequally, ideal
forms of these families might be schematized as (1) the patriarchal
nuclear family, structured by the dichotomy between public and
private and accompanied by the white bourgeois ideology of
separate spheres and nineteenth-century Anglo-American bourgeois
feminism; (2) the modern family mediated (or enforced) by the welfare
state and institutions like the family wage, with a flowering of a-feminist
heterosexual ideologies, including their radical versions represented
in Greenwich Village around World War I; and (3) the 'family' of the
homework economy with its oxymoronic structure of women-headed
households and its explosion of feminisms and the paradoxical
intensification and erosion of gender itself.
This is the context in which the projections for worldwide structural
unemployment stemming from the new technologies are part of the
picture of the homework economy. As robotics and related
technologies put men out of work in 'developed' countries and
exacerbate failure to generate male jobs in third-world 'development',
and as the automated office becomes the rule even in labor-surplus
countries, the feminization of work intensifies. Black women in the

 24

DONNA HARAWAY

United States have long known what it looks like to face the structural
underemployment ('feminization') of black men, as well as their own
highly vulnerable position in the wage economy. It is no longer a
secret that sexuality, reproduction, family, and community life are
interwoven with this economic structure in myriad ways which have
also differentiated the situations of white and black women. Many
more women and men will contend with similar situations, which
will make cross-gender and race alliances on issues of basic life
support (with or without jobs) necessary, not just nice.
The new technologies also have a profound effect on hunger and
on food production for subsistence worldwide. Rae Lessor Blumberg
estimates that women produce about fifty per cent of the world's
subsistence food.21 * Women are excluded generally from benefiting from the increased high-tech commodification of food and
energy crops, their days are made more arduous because their
responsibilities to provide food do not diminish, and their reproductive situations are made more complex. Green Revolution
technologies interact with other high-tech industrial production to
alter gender divisions of labor and differential gender migration
patterns.
The new technologies seem deeply involved in the forms of
'privatization' that Ros Petchesky has analyzed, in which
militarization, right-wing family ideologies and policies, and intensified
definitions of corporate property as private synergistically interact.22
The new communications technologies are fundamental to the
eradication of 'public life' for everyone. This facilitates the
mushrooming of a permanent high-tech military establishment at
the cultural and economic expense of most people, but especially
of women. Technologies like video games and highly miniaturized
television seem crucial to production of modern forms of 'private
* The conjunction of the Green Revolution's social relations with biotechnologies like plant
genetic engineering makes the pressures on land in the third world increasingly intense.
AID's estimates (New York Times, 14 October 1984) used at the 1984 World Food Day are
that in Africa, women produce about 90 per cent of rural food supplies, about 60-80 per
cent in Asia, and provide 40 per cent of agricultural labor in the Near East and Latin America.
Blumberg charges that world organizations' agricultural politics, as well as those of multinationals and national governments in the third world, generally ignore fundamental issues
in the sexual division of labor. The present tragedy of famine in Africa might owe as much
to male supremacy as to capitalism, colonialism, and rain patterns. More accurately, capitalism
and racism are usually structurally male dominant.

 A MANIFESTO FOR CYBORGS

25

life'. The culture of video games is heavily oriented to individual
competition and extraterrestrial warfare. High-tech, gendered
imaginations are produced here, imaginations that can contemplate
destruction of the planet and a sci-fi escape from its consequences.
More than our imagination is militarized; and the other realities of
electronic and nuclear warfare are inescapable.
The new technologies affect the social relations of both sexuality
and of reproduction, and not always in the same ways. The close
ties of sexuality and instrumentality, of views of the body as a kind
of private satisfaction- and utility-maximizing machine, are described
nicely in sociobiological origin stories that stress a genetic calculus
and explain the inevitable dialectic of domination of male and female
gender roles.23 These sociobiological stories depend on a hightech view of the body as a biotic component or cybernetic communications system. Among the many transformations of reproductive
situations is the medical one, where women's bodies have
boundaries newly permeable to both 'visualization' and 'intervention'.
Of course, who controls the interpretation of bodily boundaries in
medical hermeneutics is a major feminist issue. The speculum served
as an icon of women's claiming their bodies in the 1970s; that handcraft tool is inadequate to express our needed body politics in the
negotiation of reality in the practices of cyborg reproduction. Selfhelp is not enough. The technologies of visualization recall the
important cultural practice of hunting with the camera and the deeply
predatory nature of a photographic consciousness.24 Sex,
sexuality, and reproduction are central actors in high-tech myth
systems structuring our imaginations of personal and social
possibility.
Another critical aspect of the social relations of the new
technologies is the reformulation of expectations, culture, work, and
reproduction for the large scientific and technical work force. A major
social and political danger is the formation of a strongly bimodal
social structure, with the masses of women and men of all ethnic
groups, but especially people of color, confined to a homework
economy, illiteracy of several varieties, and general redundancy and
impotence, controlled by high-tech repressive apparatuses ranging
from entertainment to surveillance and disappearance. An adequate
socialist-feminist politics should address women in the privileged
occupational categories, and particularly in the production of science

 26

DONNA HARAWAY

and technology that constructs scientific-technical discourses,
processes, and objects.25
This issue is only one aspect of inquiry into the possibility of a
feminist science, but it is important. What kind of constitutive role
in the production of knowledge, imagination, and practice can new
groups doing science have? How can these groups be allied with
progressive social and political movements? What kind of political
accountability can be constructed to tie women together across the
scientific-technical hierarchies separating us? Might there be ways
of developing feminist science/technology politics in alliance with
anti-military science facility conversion action groups? Many scientific
and technical workers in Silicon Valley, the high-tech cowboys
included, do not want to work on military science.26 Can these
personal preferences and cultural tendencies be welded into
progressive politics among this professional middle class in which
women, including women of color, are coming to be fairly numerous?
Women in the integrated circuit
Let me summarize the picture of women's historical locations in
advanced industrial societies, as these positions have been
restructured partly through the social relations of science and
technology. If it was ever possible ideologically to characterize
women's lives by the distinction of public and private domains —
suggested by images of the division of working-class life into factory
and home, of bourgeois life into market and home, and of gender
existence into personal and political realms — it is now a totally
misleading ideology, even to show how both terms of these
dichotomies construct each other in practice and in theory. I prefer
a network ideological image, suggesting the profusion of spaces
and identities and the permeability of boundaries in the personal
body and in the body politic. 'Networking' is both a feminist practice
and a multinational corporate strategy — weaving is for oppositional
cyborgs.
The only way to characterize the informatics of domination is as
a massive intensification of insecurity and cultural impoverishment,
with common failure of subsistence networks for the most vulnerable.
Since much of this picture interweaves with the social relations of
science and technology, the urgency of a socialist-feminist politics

 A MANIFESTO FOR CYBORGS

27

addressed to science and technology is plain. There is much now
being done, and the grounds for political work are rich. For example,
the efforts to develop forms of collective struggle for women in paid
work, like SEIU's District 925, should be a high priority for all of us.
These efforts are profoundly tied to technical restructuring of labor
processes and reformations of working classes. These efforts also
are providing understanding of a more comprehensive kind of labor
organization, involving community, sexuality, and family issues never
privileged in the largely white male industrial unions.
The structural rearrangements related to the social relations of
science and technology evoke strong ambivalence. But it is not
necessary to be ultimately depressed by the implications of latetwentieth-century women's relation to all aspects of work, culture,
production of knowledge, sexuality, and reproduction. For excellent
reasons, most Marxisms see domination best and have trouble
understanding what can only look like false consciousness and
people's complicity in their own domination in late capitalism. It is
crucial to remember that what is lost, perhaps especially from
women's points of view, is often virulent forms of oppression,
nostalgically naturalized in the face of current violation. Ambivalence
toward the disrupted unities mediated by high-tech culture requires
not sorting consciousness into categories of 'clear-sighted critique
grounding a solid political epistemology' versus 'manipulated false
consciousness', but subtle understanding of emerging pleasures,
experiences, and powers with serious potential for changing the rules
of the game.
There are grounds for hope in the emerging bases for new kinds
of unity across race, gender, and class, as these elementary units
of socialist-feminist analysis themselves suffer protean
transformations. Intensifications of hardship experienced worldwide
in connection with the social relations of science and technology
are severe. But what people are experiencing is not transparently
clear, and we lack sufficiently subtle connections for collectively
building effective theories of experience. Present efforts — Marxist,
psychoanalytic, feminist, anthropological — to clarify even 'our'
experience are rudimentary.
I am conscious of the odd perspective provided by my historical
position — a Ph.D. in biology for an Irish Catholic girl was made

 28

DONNA HARAWAY

possible by Sputnik's impact on U.S. national science-education
policy. I have a body and mind as much constructed by the postWorld War II arms race and cold war as by the women's movements.
There are more grounds for hope by focusing on the contradictory
effects of politics designed to produce loyal American technocrats,
which as well produced large numbers of dissidents, rather than
by focusing on the present defeats.
The permanent partiality of feminist points of view has
consequences for our expectations of forms of political organization
and participation. We do not need a totality in order to work well.
The feminist dream of a common language, like all dreams for a
perfectly true language, of perfectly faithful naming of experience,
is a totalizing and imperialist one. In that sense, dialectics too is a
dream language, longing to resolve contradiction. Perhaps, ironically,
we can learn from our fusions with animals and machines how not
to be Man, the embodiment of Western logos. From the point of
view of pleasure in these potent and taboo fusions, made inevitable
by the social relations of science and technology, there might indeed
be a feminist science.
Cyborgs: a myth of political identity
I want to conclude with a myth about identity and boundaries
which might inform late-twentieth-century political imaginations. I am
indebted in this story to writers like Joanna Russ, Samuel Delaney,
John Varley, James Tiptree, Jr., Octavia Butler, Monique Wittig, and
Vonda Mclntyre.27 These are our storytellers exploring what it
means to be embodied in high-tech worlds. They are theorists for
cyborgs. Exploring conceptions of bodily boundaries and social
order, the anthropologist Mary Douglas should be credited with
helping us to consciousness about how fundamental body imagery
is to world view, and so to political language.28 French feminists like
Luce Irigaray and Monique Wittig, for all their differences, know how
to write the body, how to weave eroticism, cosmology, and politics
from imagery of embodiment, and especially for Wittig, from imagery
of fragmentation and reconstitutipn of bodies.29
American radical feminists like Susan Griffin, Audre Lorde, and
Adrienne Rich have profoundly affected our political imaginations
— and perhaps restricted too much what we allow as a friendly body
and political language.30 They insist on the organic, opposing it to

 A MANIFESTO FOR CYBORGS

29

the technological. But their symbolic systems and the related
positions of ecofeminism and feminist paganism, replete with
organicisms, can only be understood in Sandoval's terms as
oppositional ideologies fitting the late twentieth century. They would
simply bewilder anyone not preoccupied with the machines and
consciousness of late capitalism. In that sense they are part of the
cyborg world. But there are also great riches for feminists in explicitly
embracing the possibilities inherent in the breakdown of clean
distinctions between organism and machine and similar distinctions
structuring the Western self. It is the simultaneity of breakdowns that
cracks the matrices of domination and opens geometric possibilities.
What might be learned from personal and political 'technological'
pollution? I will look briefly at two overlapping groups of texts for
their insight into the construction of a potentially helpful cyborg myth:
constructions of women of color and monstrous selves in feminist
science fiction.
Earlier I suggested that 'women of color' might be understood
as a cyborg identity, a potent subjectivity synthesized from fusions
of outsider identities. There are material and cultural grids mapping
this potential. Audre Lorde captures the tone in the title of her Sister
Outsider. In my political myth, Sister Outsider is the offshore woman,
whom U.S. workers, female and feminized, are supposed to regard
as the enemy preventing their solidarity, threatening their security.
Onshore, inside the boundary of the United States, Sister Outsider
is a potential amidst the races and ethnic identities of women
manipulated for division, competition, and exploitation in the same
industries. 'Women of color' are the preferred labor force for the
science-based industries, the real women for whom the worldwide
sexual market, labor market, and politics of reproduction
kaleidoscope into daily life. Young Korean women hired in the sex
industry and in electronics assembly are recruited from high schools,
educated for the integrated circuit. Literacy, especially in English,
distinguishes the 'cheap' female labor so attractive to the
multinationals.
Contrary to orientalist stereotypes of the 'oral primitive', literacy is
a special mark of women of color, acquired by U.S. black women
as well as men through a history of risking death to learn and to
teach reading and writing. Writing has a special significance for all
colonized groups. Writing has been crucial to the Western myth of

 30

DONNA HARAWAY

the distinction of oral and written cultures, primitive and civilized
mentalities, and more recently to the erosion of that distinction in
'post-modernist' theories attacking the phallogocentrism of the West,
with its worship of the monotheistic, phallic, authoritative, and singular
word, the unique and perfect name.31 Contests for the meanings
of writing are a major form of contemporary political struggle.
Releasing the play of writing is deadly serious. The poetry and stories
of U.S. women of color are repeatedly about writing, about access
to the power to signify; but this time that power must be neither phallic
nor innocent. Cyborg writing must be about the Fall, the imagination
of a once-upon-a-time wholeness before language, before writing,
before Man. Cyborg writing is about the power to survive, not on
the basis of original innocence, but on the basis of seizing the tools
to mark the world that marked them as other.
The tools are often stories, retold stories, versions that reverse and
displace the hierarchical dualisms of naturalized identities. In retelling
origin stories, cyborg authors subvert the central myths of origin of
Western culture. We have all been colonized by those origin myths,
with their longing for fulfillment in apocalypse. The phallogocentric
origin stories most crucial for feminist cyborgs are built into the literal
technologies — technologies that write the world, biotechnology and
microelectronics — that have recently textualized our bodies as code
problems on the grid of C3I. Feminist cyborg stories have the task
of recoding communication and intelligence to subvert command
and control.
Figuratively and literally, language politics pervade the struggles
of women of color; and stories about language have a special power
in the rich contemporary writing by U.S. women of color. For example,
retellings of the story of the indigenous woman Malinche, mother
of the mestizo 'bastard' race of the new world, master of languages,
and mistress of Cortes, carry special meaning for Chicana
constructions of identity. Cherrie Moraga in Loving in the War Years
explores the themes of identity when one never possessed the
original language, never told the original story, never resided in the
harmony of legitimate heterosexuality in the garden of culture, and
so cannot base identity on a myth or a fall from innocence and right
to natural names, mother's or father's.32 Moraga's writing, her
superb literacy, is presented in her poetry as the same kind of
violation as Malinche's mastery of the conquerer's language — a

 A MANIFESTO FOR CYBORGS

31

violation, an illegitimate production, that allows survival. Moraga's
language is not 'whole'; it is self-consciously spliced, a chimera of
English and Spanish, both conqueror's languages. But it is this
chimeric monster, without claim to an original language before
violation, that crafts the erotic, competent, potent identities of women
of color. Sister Outsider hints at the possibility of world survival not
because of her innocence, but because of her ability to live on the
boundaries, to write without the founding myth of original wholeness,
with its inescapable apocalypse of final return to a deathly oneness
that Man has imagined to be the innocent and all-powerful Mother,
freed at the End from another spiral of appropriation by her son.
Writing marks Moraga's body, affirms it as the body of a woman
of color, against the possibility of passing into the unmarked category
of the Anglo father or into the orientalist myth of 'original illiteracy'
of a mother that never was. Malinche was mother here, not Eve
before eating the forbidden fruit. Writing affirms Sister Outsider, not
the Woman-before-the-Fall-into-Writing needed by the
phallogocentric Family of Man.
Writing is pre-eminently the technology of cyborgs, etched
surfaces of the late twentieth century. Cyborg politics is the struggle
for language and the struggle against perfect communication,
against the one code that translates all meaning perfectly, the central
dogrfia of phallogocentrism. That is why cyborg politics insist on
noise and advocate pollution, rejoicing in the illegitimate fusions of
animal and machine. These are the couplings which make Man and
Woman so problematic, subverting the structure of desire, the force
imagined to generate language and gender, and so subverting the
structure and modes of reproduction of 'Western' identity, of nature
and culture, of mirror and eye, slave and master, body and mind.
'We' did not originally choose to be cyborgs, but choice grounds
a liberal politics and epistemology that imagines the reproduction
of individuals before the wider replications of 'texts'.
From the perspective of cyborgs, freed of the need to ground
politics in 'our' privileged position of the oppression that incorporates
all other dominations, the innocence of the merely violated, the
ground of those closer to nature, we can see powerful possibilities.
Feminisms and Marxisms have run aground on Western
epistemological imperatives to construct a revolutionary subject from
the perspective of a hierarchy of oppressions and/or a latent position

 32

DONNA HARAWAY

of moral superiority, innocence, and greater closeness to nature.
With no available original dream of a common language or original
symbiosis promising protection from hostile 'masculine' separation,
but written into the play of a text that has no finally privileged reading
or salvation history, to recognize 'oneself as fully implicated in the
world, frees us of the need to root politics in identification, vanguard
parties, purity, and mothering. Stripped of identity, the bastard race
teaches about the power of the margins and the importance of a
mother like Malinche. Women of color have transformed her from
the evil mother of masculinist fear into the originally literate mother
who teaches survival.
This is not just literary deconstruction, but liminal transformation.
Every story that begins with original innocence and privileges the
return to wholeness imagines the drama of life to be individuation,
separation, the birth of the self, the tragedy of autonomy, the fall
into writing, alienation; i.e., war, tempered by imaginary respite in
the bosom of the Other. These plots are ruled by a reproductive
politics — rebirth without flaw, perfection, abstraction. In this plot
women are imagined either better or worse off, but all agree they
have less selfhood, weaker individuation, more fusion to the oral,
to Mother, less at stake in masculine autonomy. But there is another
route to having less at stake in masculine autonomy, a route that
does not pass through Woman, Primitive, Zero, the Mirror Stage and
its imaginary. It passes through women and other present-tense,
illegitimate cyborgs, not of Woman born, who refuse the ideological
resources of victimization so as to have a real life. These cyborgs
are the people who refuse to disappear on cue, no matter how many
times a 'Western' commentator remarks on the sad passing of
another primitive, another organic group done in by 'Western'
technology, by writing.33 These real-life cyborgs, e.g., the Southeast
Asian village women workers in Japanese and U.S. electronics firms
described by Aiwa Ong, are actively rewriting the texts of their bodies
and societies. Survival is the stakes in this play of readings.
*
To recapitulate, certain dualisms have been persistent in Western
traditions; they have all been systemic to the logics and practices
of domination of women, people of colour, nature, workers, animals
— in short, domination of all constituted as others, whose task is
to mirror the self. Chief among these troubling dualisms are self/other,

 A MANIFESTO FOR CYBORGS

33

mind/body, culture/nature, male/female, civilized/primitive, reality/
appearance, whole/part, agent/resource, maker/made, active/
passive, right/wrong, truth/illusion, total/partial, God/man. The self
is the One who is not dominated, who knows that by the service
of the other; the other is the one who holds the future, who knows
that by the experience of domination, which gives the lie to the
autonomy of the self. To be One is to be autonomous, to be powerful,
to be God; but to be One is to be an illusion, and so to be involved
in a dialectic of apocalypse with the other. Yet to be other is to be
multiple, without clear boundary, frayed, insubstantial. One is too
few, but two are too many.
High-tech culture challenges these dualisms in intriguing ways.
It is not clear who makes and who is made in the relation between
human and machine. It is not clear what is mind and what body
in machines that resolve into coding practices. Insofar as we know
ourselves in both formal discourse (e.g., biology) and in daily practice
(e.g., the homework economy in the integrated circuit), we find
ourselves to be cyborgs, hybrids, mosaics, chimeras. Biological
organisms have become biotic systems, communications devices
like others. There is no fundamental, ontological separation in our
formal knowledge of machine and organism, of technical and
organic.
One consequence is that our sense of connection to our tools
is heightened. The trance state experienced by many computer
users has become a staple of science-fiction film and cultural jokes.
Perhaps paraplegics and other severely handicapped people can
(and sometimes do) have the most intense experiences of complex
hybridization with other communication devices. Anne McCaffrey's
The Ship Who Sang explored the consciousness of a cyborg, hybrid
of girl's brain and complex machinery, formed after the birth of a
severely handicapped child. Gender, sexuality, embodiment, skill:
all were reconstituted in the story. Why should our bodies end at
the skin, or include at best other beings encapsulated by skin? From
the seventeenth century till now, machines could be animated —
given ghostly souls to make them speak or move or to account for
their orderly development and mental capacities. Or organisms could
be mechanized — reduced to body understood as resource of mind.
These machine/organism relationships are obsolete, unnecessary.
For us, in imagination and in other practice, machines can be

 34

_

DONNA HARAWAY

prosthetic devices, intimate components, friendly selves. We don't
need organic holism to give impermeable wholeness, the total
woman and her feminist variants (mutants?). Let me conclude this
point by a very partial reading of the logic of the cyborg monsters
of my second group of texts, feminist science fiction.
The cyborgs populating feminist science fiction make very
problematic the statuses of man or woman, human, artifact, member
of a race, individual identity, or body. Katie King clarifies how pleasure
in reading these fictions is not largely based on identification.
Students facing Joanna Russ for the first time, students who have
learned to take modernist writers like James Joyce or Virginia Woolf
without flinching, do not know what to make of The Adventures of
Alyx or The Female Man, where characters refuse the reader's
search for innocent wholeness while granting the wish for heroic
quests, exuberant eroticism, and serious politics. The Female Man
is the story of four versions of one genotype, all of whom meet, but
even taken together do not make a whole, resolve the dilemmas
of violent moral action, nor remove the growing scandal of gender.
The feminist science fiction of Samuel Delany, especially Tales of
Neveryon, mocks stories of origin by redoing the neolithic revolution,
replaying the founding moves of Western civilization to subvert their
plausibility. James Tiptree, Jr., an author whose fiction was regarded
as particularly manly until her 'true' gender was revealed, tells tales
of reproduction based on non-mammalian technologies like
alternation of generations or male brood pouches and male
nurturing. John Varley constructs a supreme cyborg in his archfeminist exploration of Gaea, a mad goddess-planet-trickster-old
woman-technological device on whose surface an extraordinary
array of post-cyborg symbioses are spawned. Octavia Butler writes
of an African sorceress pitting her powers of transformation against
the genetic manipulations of her rival {Wild Seed), of time warps
that bring a modern U.S. black woman into slavery where her actions
in relation to her white master-ancestor determine the possibility of
her own birth (Kindred), and of the illegitimate insights into identity
and community of an adopted cross-species child who came to
know the enemy as self (Survivor).
Because it is particularly rich in boundary transgressions, Vonda
Mclntyre's Superluminal can close this truncated catalogue of

 A MANIFESTO FOR CYBORGS

35

promising monsters who help redefine the pleasures and politics
of embodiment and feminist writing. In a fiction where no character
is 'simply' human, human status is highly problematic. Orca, a
genetically altered diver, can speak with killer whales and survive
deep ocean conditions, but she longs to explore space as a pilot,
necessitating bionic implants jeopardizing her kinship with the divers
and cetaceans. Transformations are effected by virus vectors carrying
a new developmental code, by transplant surgery, by implants of
microelectronic devices, by analogue doubles, and other means.
Laenea becomes a pilot by accepting a heart implant and a host
of other alterations allowing survival in transit at speeds exceeding
that of light. Radu Dracul survives a virus-caused plague on his
outerworld planet to find himself with a time sense that changes
the boundaries of spatial perception for the whole species. All the
characters explore the limits of language, the dream of
communicating experience, and the necessity of limitation, partiality,
and intimacy even in this world of protean transformation and
connection.
Monsters have always defined the limits of community in Western
imaginations. The Centaurs and Amazons of ancient Greece
established the limits of the centered polis of the Greek male human
by their disruption of marriage and boundary pollutions of the warrior
with animality and woman. Unseparated twins and hermaphrodites
were the confused human material in early modern France who
grounded discourse on the natural and supernatural, medical and
legal, portents and diseases — all crucial to establishing modern
identity.34 The evolutionary and behavioural sciences of monkeys
and apes have marked the multiple boundaries of late-twentiethcentury industrial identities. Cyborg monsters in feminist science
fiction define quite different political possibilities and limits from those
proposed by the mundane fiction of Man and Woman.
There are several consequences to taking seriously the imagery
of cyborgs as other than our enemies. Our bodies, ourselves; bodies
are maps of power and identity. Cyborgs are no exceptions. A cyborg
body is not innocent; it was not born in a garden; it does not seek
unitary identity and so generate antagonistic dualisms without end
(or until the world ends); it takes irony for granted. One is too few,
and two is only one possibility. Intense pleasure in skill, machine

 36

DONNA HARAWAY

skill, ceases to be a sin, but an aspect of embodiment. The machine
is not an it to be animated, worshipped and dominated. The machine
is us, our processes, an aspect of our embodiment. We can be
responsible for machines; they do not dominate or threaten us. We
are responsible for boundaries; we are they. Up till now (once upon
a time), female embodiment seemed to be given, organic,
necessary; and female embodiment seemed to mean skill in
mothering and its metaphoric extensions. Only by being out of place
could we take intense pleasure in machines, and then with excuses
that this was organic activity after all, appropriate to females. Cyborgs
might consider more seriously the partial, fluid, sometimes aspect
of sex and sexual embodiment. Gender might not be global identity
after all.
The ideologically charged question of what counts as daily activity,
as experience, can be approached by exploiting the cyborg image.
Feminists have recently claimed that women are given to dailiness,
that women more than men somehow sustain daily life, and so have
a privileged epistemological position potentially. There is a
compelling aspect to this claim, one that makes visible unvalued
female activity and names it as the ground of life. But the ground
of life? What about all the ignorance of women, all the exclusions
and failures of knowledge and skill? What about men's access to
daily competence, to knowing how to build things, to take them apart,
to play? What about other embodiments? Cyborg gender is a local
possibility taking a global vengeance. Race, gender, and capital
require a cyborg theory of wholes and parts. There is no drive in
cyborgs to produce total theory, but there is an intimate experience
of boundaries, their construction and deconstruction. There is a myth
system waiting to become a political language to ground one way
of looking at science and technology and challenging the informatics
of domination.
One last image: organisms and organismic, holistic politics
depend on metaphors of rebirth and invariably call on the resources
of reproductive sex. I would suggest that cyborgs have more to do
with regeneration and are suspicious of the reproductive matrix and
of most birthing. For salamanders, regeneration after injury, such
as the loss of a limb, involves regrowth of structure and restoration
of function with the constant possibility of twinning or other odd
topographical productions at the site of former injury. The regrown

 A MANIFESTO FOR CYBORGS

37

limb can be monstrous, duplicated, potent. We have all been injured,
profoundly. We require regeneration, not rebirth, and the possibilities
for our reconstitution include the Utopian dream of the hope for a
monstrous world without gender.
Cyborg imagery can help express two crucial arguments in this
essay: (1) the production of universal, totalizing theory is a major
mistake that misses most of reality, probably always, but certainly
now; (2) taking responsibility for the social relations of science and
technology means refusing an anti-science metaphysics, a
demonology of technology, and so means embracing the skillful
task of reconstructing the boundaries of daily life, in partial
connection with others, in communication with all of our parts. It
is not just that science and technology are possible means of great
human satisfaction, as well as a matrix of complex dominations.
Cyborg imagery can suggest a way out of the maze of dualisms
in which we have explained our bodies and our tools to ourselves.
This is a dream not of a common language, but of a powerful infidel
heteroglossia. It is an imagination of a feminist speaking in tongues
to strike fear into the circuits of the super-savers of the new right.
It means both building and destroying machines, identities,
categories, relationships, spaces, stories. Though both are bound
in the spiral dance, I would rather be a cyborg than a goddess.
Acknowledgments
By the editors of AFS:
This article first appeared in Socialist Review No. 80, 1985. We are very grateful to Donna
Haraway for allowing us to reprint it, and to Jeff Escoffier, Executive Editor of Socialist Review.
By Donna Haraway:
Research was funded by an Academic Senate Faculty Research Grant from the University
of California, Santa Cruz. An earlier version of the paper on genetic engineering appeared
as 'Lieber Kyborg als Gottin: Fur eine sozialistisch-feministische Unterwanderung der
Gentechnologie', in Bernd-Peter Lange and Anna Marie Stuby, eds., 1984 (Berlin: ArgumentSonderband 105,1984), pp. 66-84. The cyborg manifesto grew from 'New Machines, New
Bodies, New Communities: Political Dilemmas of a Cyborg Feminist', The Scholar and the
Feminist x: The Question of Technology, Conference, April 1983.
The people associated with the History of Consciousness Board of University of California
at Santa Cruz [UCSC] have had an enormous influence on this paper, so that it feels
collectively authored more than most, although those I cite may not recognize their ideas.
In particular, members of graduate and undergraduate feminist theory, science and politics,
and theory and methods courses have contributed to the cyborg manifesto. Particular debts
here are due Hilary Klein ('Marxism, Psychoanalysis, and Mother Nature'); Paul Edwards
('Border Wars: The Science and Politics of Artificial Intelligence'); Lisa Lowe ('Julia Kristeva's
Des Chinoises: Representing Cultural and Sexual Others'); Jim Clifford, 'On Ethnographic
Allegory: Essays', forthcoming.

 38

DONNA HARAWAY

Parts of the paper were my contribution to a collectively developed session, Poetic Tools
and Political Bodies: Feminist Approaches to High Technology Culture, 1984 California
American Studies Association, with History of Consciousness graduate students Zoe Sofoulis,
'Jupiter Space'; Katie King, 'The Pleasures of Repetition and the Limits of Identification in
Feminist Science Fiction: Reimaginations of the Body after the Cyborg'; and Chela Sandoval,
'The Construction of Subjectivity and Oppositional Consciousness in Feminist Film and Video'.
Sandoval's theory of oppositional consciousness was published as 'Women Respond to
Racism: A Report on the National Women's Studies Association Conference' Center for Third
World Organizing, Oakland, California, n.d. For Sofoulis's semiotic-psychoanalytic readings
of nuclear culture, see Z. Sofia, 'Exterminating Fetuses: Abortion, Disarmament and the
Sexo-Semiotics of Extraterrestrialism', Nuclear Criticism issue, Diacritics, vol. 14, no. 2 (1984),
pp. 47-59. King's manuscripts ('Questioning Tradition: Canon Formation and the Veiling
of Power'; 'Gender and Genre: Reading the Science Fiction of Joanna Russ'; 'Varley's Titan
and Wizard: Feminist Parodies of Nature, Culture, and Hardware') deeply inform the cyborg
manifesto.
Barbara Epstein, Jeff Escoffier, Rusten Hogness, and Jaye Miller gave extensive discussion
and editorial help. Members of the Silicon Valley Research Project [SVRP] of UCSC and
participants in SVRP conferences and workshops have been very important, especially Rick
Gordon, Linda Kimball, Nancy Snyder, Langdon Winner, Judith Stacey, Linda Lim, Patricia
Fernandez-Kelly, and Judith Gregory. Finally, I want to thank Nancy Hartsock for years of
friendship and discussion on feminist theory and feminist science fiction.

Notes
1. Useful references to left and/or feminist radical science movements and theory and
to biological/biotechnological issues include: Ruth Bleier, Science and Gender: A Critique
of Biology and Its Themes on Women (New York: Pergamon, 1984); Elizabeth Fee,
'Critiques of Modern Science: The Relationship of Feminist and Other Radical
Epistemologies', and Evelyn Hammonds, 'Women of Color, Feminism and Science',
papers for Symposium on Feminist Perspectives on Science, University of Wisconsin,
11-12 April, 1985 (proceedings to be published by Pergamon); Stephen J. Gould,
Mismeasure of Man (New York: Norton, 1981); Ruth Hubbard, Mary Sue Henifin, Barbara
Fried, eds., Biological Woman, the Convenient Myth (Cambridge, Mass.: Schenkman,
1982); Evelyn Fox Keller, Reflections on Gender and Science (New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1985); R. C. Lewontin, Steve Rose, and Leon Kamin, Not in Our Genes (New
York: Pantheon, 1984): Radical Science Journal, 26 Freegrove Road, London N7 9RQ;
Science for the People, 897 Main St., Cambridge, MA 02139.
2. Starting points for left and/or feminist approaches to technology and politics include:
Ruth Schwartz Cowan, More Work for Mother: The Ironies of Household Technology
from the Open Hearth to the Microwave (New York: Basic Books, 1983); Joan Rothschild,
Machina ex Dea: Feminist Perspectives on Technology (New York: Pergamon, 1983);
Sharon Traweek, 'Uptime, Downtime, Spacetime, and Power: An Ethnography of U.S.
and Japanese Particle Physics', Ph.D. thesis, UC Santa Cruz, History of Consciousness,
1982; R. M. Young and Les Levidov, eds., Science, Technology, and the Labour Process,
vols. 1-3 (London: CSE Books); Jospeh Weizenbaum, Computer Power and Human
Reason (San Francisco: Freeman, 1976); Langdon Winner, Autonomous Technology:
Technics Out of Control as a Theme in Political Thought (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
1977); Langdon Winner, 'Paths in Technopolis', esp. 'Mythinformation in the High Tech
Era' (in ms., forthcoming); Jan Zimmerman, ed., The Technological Woman: Interfacing
with Tomorrow (New York: Praeger, 1983); Global Electronics Newsletter, 867 West Dana
St., #204, Mountain View, CA 94041; Processed World, 55 Sutter St., San Francisco,
CA 94104; ISIS, Women's International Information and Communication Service, P.O.
Box 50 (Cornavin), 1211 Geneva 2, Switzerland, and Via Santa Maria dell'Anima 30,
00186 Rome, Italy. Fundamental approaches to modern social studies of science that
do not continue the liberal mystification that it all started with Thomas Kuhn, include:
Karin Knorr-Cetina, The Manufacture of Knowledge (Oxford: Pergamon, 1981); K. D.

 A MANIFESTO FOR CYBORGS

39

Knorr-Cetina and Michael Mulkay, eds., Science Observed: Perspectives on the Social
Study of Science (Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage, 1983); Bruno Latour and Steve Woolgar,
Laboratory Life: The Social Construction of Scientific Facts (Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage,
1979); Robert M. Young, 'Interpreting the Production of Science', New Scientist, vol.
29 (March 1979), pp. 1026-1028. More is claimed than is known about room for
contesting productions of science in the mythic/material space of 'the laboratory'; the
1984 Directory of the Network for the Ethnographic Study of Science, Technology, and
Organizations lists a wide range of people and projects crucial to better radical analysis;
available from NESSTO, P.O. Box 11442, Stanford, CA 94305.
3. Frederic Jameson, 'Post Modernism, or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism', New Left
Review, July/August 1984, pp. 53-94. See Marjorie Perloff, ' "Dirty" Language and
Scramble Systems', Sulfur II (1984), pp. 178-183; Kathleen Fraser, Something (Even
Human Voices) in the Foreground, a Lake (Berkeley, Calif.: Kelsey St. Press, 1984).
4. Frans de Waal, Chimpanzee Politics: Power and Sex among the Apes (New York: Harper
& Row, 1982); Langdon Winner, 'Do artifacts have politics?' Daedalus, Winner 1980.
5. Jean Baudrillard, Simulations, trans. P. Foss, P. Pattern, P. Beitchman (New York:
Semiotext(e), 1983). Jameson ('Post modernism', p. 66) points out that Plato's definition
of the simulacrum is the copy for which there is no original, i.e., the world of advanced
capitalism; of pure exchange.
6. Herbert Marcuse, One-Dimensional Man (Boston: Beacon, 1964); Carolyn Merchant,
Death of Nature (San Francisco: Harper & Rowe, 1980).
7. Zoe Sofia, 'Exterminating Fetuses', Diacritics, vol. 14, no. 2 (Summer 1984), pp. 47-59,
and 'Jupiter Space' (Pomona, Calif.: American Studies Association, 1984).
8. Powerful developments of coalition politics emerge from 'third world' speakers, speaking
from nowhere, the displaced center of the universe, earth: 'We live on the third planet
from the sun' — Sun Poem by Jamaican writer Edward Kamau Braithwaite, review by
Nathaniel Mackey, Sulfur, II (1984), pp. 200-205. Home Girls, ed. Barbara Smith (New
York: Kitchen Table, Women of Color Press, 1983), ironically subverts naturalized identities
precisely while constructing a place from which to speak called home. See esp. Bernice
Reagan, 'Coalition Politics, Turning the Century', pp. 356-368.
9. Chela Sandoval, 'Dis-Illusionment and the Poetry of the Future: The Making of
Oppositional Consciousness', Ph.D. qualifying essay. UCSC, 1984.
10. Bell Hooks, Ain't l a Woman? (Boston: South End Press, 1981); Gloria Hull, Patricia Bell
Scott, and Barbara Smith, eds., All the Women Are White, All the Men Are Black, But
Some of Us Are Brave: Black Women's Studies (Old Westbury, Conn.: Feminist Press,
1982). Toni Cade Bambara, in The Salt Eaters (New York: Vintage/Random House, 1981),
writes an extraordinary post-modernist novel, in which the women of color theater group,
The Seven Sisters, explores a form of unity. Thanks to Elliott Evans's readings of Bambara,
Ph.D. qualifying essay, UCSC, 1984.
11. On orientalism in feminist works and elsewhere, see Lisa Lowe, 'Orientation:
Representations of Cultural and Sexual "Others" ', Ph.D. thesis, UCSC; Edward Said,
Orientalism (New York: Pantheon, 1978).
12. Katie King has developed a theoretically sensitive treatment of the workings of feminist
taxonomies as genealogies of power in feminist ideology and polemic: 'Prospectus',
Gender and Genre: Academic Practice and the Making of Criticism (Santa Cruz, Calif.:
University of California, 1984). King examines an intelligent, problematic example of
taxonomizing feminisms to make a little machine producing the desired final position:
Alison Jaggar, Feminist Politics and Human Nature (Totowa, N.J.: Rowman & Allanheld,
1983). My caricature here of socialist and radical feminism is also an example.
13. The feminist standpoint argument is being developed by: Jane Flax, 'Political Philosophy
and the Patriarchal Unconsciousness', in Sandra Harding and Merill Hintikka, eds.,
Discovering Reality (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1983); Sandra Harding, 'The Contradictions
and Ambivalence of a Feminist Science', ms.; Harding and Hintikka, Discovering Reality,
Nancy Hartsock, Money, Sex and Power (New York: Longman, 1983) and 'The Feminist
Standpoint: Developing the Ground for a Specifically Feminist Historical Materialism',
in Harding and Hintikka, Discovering Reality, Mary O'Brien, The Politics of Reproduction

 40

DONNA HARAWAY

(New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1981); Hilary Rose, 'Hand, Brain, and Heart: A
Feminist Epistemology for the Natural Sciences', Signs, vol. 9, no. 1 (1983), pp. 73-90;
Dorothy Smith, 'Women's Perspective as a Radical Critique of Sociology', Sociological
Inquiry 44 (1974), and 'A Sociology of Women', in J. Sherman and E. T. Beck, ed., The
Prism of Sex (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1979).
14. Catherine MacKinnon, 'Feminism, Marxism, Method, and the State: An Agenda for
Theory', Signs, vol. 7, no. 3 (Spring 1982), pp. 515-544. A critique indebted to
MacKinnon, but without the reductionism and with an elegant feminist account of
Foucault's paradoxical conservatism on sexual violence (rape), is Teresa de Lauretis,
'The Violence of rhetoric: Considerations on representation and gender', in Semiotica,
special issue on 'The Rhetoric of Violence', guest ed. Nancy Armstrong, vol. 54, nos
1 & 2, 1985. A theoretically elegant feminist social-historical examination of family violence,
that insists on women's, men's, children's complex agency without losing sight of the
material structures of male domination, race, and class, is Linda Gordon, Cruelty, Love,
and Dependence: Family Violence and Social Control, Boston 1880-1960, forthcoming
with Pantheon.
15. My previous efforts to understand biology as a cybernetic command-control discourse
and organisms as 'natural-technical objects of knowledge' are: 'The High Cost of
Information in Post-World War II Evolutionary Biology', Philosophical Forum, vol. 13,
nos. 2-3 (1979), pp. 206-237; 'Signs of Dominance: From a Physiology to a Cybernetics
of Primate Society', Studies in History of Biology 6 (1983), pp. 129-219; 'Class, Race,
Sex, Scientific Objects of Knowledge: A Socialist-Feminist Perspective on the Social
Construction of Productive Knowledge and Some Political Consequences', in Violet
Haas and Carolyn Perucci, eds., Women in Scientific and Engineering Professions (Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1984), pp. 212-229.
16. E. Rusten Hogness, 'Why Stress? A Look at the Making of Stress, 1936-56', available
from the author, 4437 Mill Creek Rd., Healdsburg, CA 95448.
17. A left entry to the biotechnology debate: GeneWatch, a Bulletin of the Committee for
Responsible Genetics, 5 Doane St., 4th floor. Boston, MA 02109; Susan Wright,
forthcoming book and 'Recombinant DNA: The Status of Hazards and Controls',
Environment, July/August 1982; Edward Yoxen, The Gene Business (New York: Harper
& Rowe, 1983).
18. Starting references for 'women in the integrated circuit': Pamela D'Onofrio-Flores and
Sheila M. Pfafflin, eds., Scientific-Technological Change and the Role of Women in
Development (Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1982); Maria Patricia Fernandez-Kelly,
For We Are Sold, I and My People (Albany, N.Y.: SUNY Press, 1983); Annette Fuentes
and Barbara Ehrenreich, Women in the Global Factory (Boston: South End Press, 1983),
with an especially useful list of resources and organizations; Rachel Grossman, 'Women's
Place in the Integrated Circuit', Radical America, vol. 14, no. 1 (1980), pp. 29-50; June
Nash and M. P. Fernandez-Kelly, eds., Women and Men and the International Division
of Labor (Albany, N.Y.: SUNY Press, 1983); Aiwa Ong, 'Japanese Factories, Malay
Workers: Industrialization and the Cultural Construction of Gender in West Malaysia',
in Shelley Errington and Jane Atkinson, eds., The Construction of Gender, forthcoming;
Science Policy Research Unit, Microelectronics and Women's Employment in Britain
(University of Sussex, 1982).
19. The best example is Bruno Latour, Les Microbes: Guerre et Paix, suivi de Irreductions
(Paris: Metailie, 1984).
20. For the homework economy and some supporting arguments: Richard Gordon, 'The
Computerization of Daily Life, the Sexual Division of Labor, and the Homework Economy',
in R. Gordon, ed., Microelectronics in Transition (Norwood, N.J.: Ablex, 1985); Patricia
Hill Collins, 'Third World Women in America', and Sara G. Burr, 'Women and Work',
in Barbara K. Haber, ed., The Women's Annual, 1981 (Boston: G. K. Hall, 1982); Judith
Gregory and Karen Nussbaum, 'Race against Time: Automation of the Office', Office:
Technology and People 1 (1982), pp. 197-236; Frances Fox Piven and Richard Cloward,
The New Class War: Reagan's Attack on the Welfare State and Its Consequences (New
York: Pantheon, 1982); Microelectronics Group, Microelectronics: Capitalist Technology

 A MANIFESTO FOR CYBORGS

41

and the Working Class (London: CSE, 1980); Karin Stallard, Barbara Ehrenreich, and
Holly Sklar, Poverty in the American Dream (Boston: South End Press, 1983), including
a useful organization and resource list.
21. Rae Lessor Blumberg, 'A General Theory of Sex Stratification and Its Application to
the Position of Women in Today's World Economy', paper delivered to Sociology Board,
UCSC, February 1983. Also Blumberg, Stratification: Socioeconomic and Sexual
Inequality (Boston: Brown, 1981). See also Sally Hacker, 'Doing It the Hard Way:
Ethnographic Studies in the Agribusiness and Engineering Classroom', California
American Studies Association, Pomona, 1984, forthcoming in Humanity and Society,
S. Hacker and Lisa Bovit, 'Agriculture to Agribusiness: Technical Imperatives and
Changing Roles', Proceedings of the Society for the History of Technology, Milwaukee,
1981; Lawrence Busch and William Lacy, Science, Agriculture, and the Politics of
Research (Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1983); Denis Wilfred, 'Capital and Agriculture,
a Review of Marxian Problematics', Studies in Political Economy, no. 7 (1982), pp.
127-154; Carolyn Sachs, The Invisible Farmers: Women in Agricultural Production
(Totowa, N.J.: Rowman & Allanheld, 1983). Thanks to Elizabeth Bird, 'Green Revolution
Imperialism', I & II, ms. UCSC, 1984.
22. Cynthia Enloe, 'Women Textile Workers in the Militarization of South-east Asia', in Nash
and Fernandez-Kelly, Women and Men; Rosalind Petchsky, 'Abortion, Anti-Feminism,
and the Rise of the New Right', Feminist Studies, vol. 7, no. 2 (1981).
23. For a feminist version of this logic, see Sarah Blaffer Hrdy, The Woman That Never Evolved
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1981). For an analysis of scientific women's
story-telling practices, especially in relation to sociobiology, in evolutionary debates
around child abuse and infanticide, see Donna Haraway, 'The Contest for Primate Nature:
Daughters of Man the Hunter in the Field, 1960-80', in Mark Kann, ed., The Future
of American Democracy (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1983), pp. 175-208.
24. For the moment of transition of hunting with guns to hunting with cameras in the
construction of popular meanings of nature for an American urban immigrant public,
see Donna Haraway, 'Teddy Bear Patriarchy', Social Text, no. 11, Winter 1984-5,
pp. 20-64; Roderick Nash, 'The Exporting and Importing of Nature: Nature-Appreciation
as a Commodity, 1850-1980', Perspectives in American History, vol. 3 (1979),
pp. 517-560; Susan Sontag, On Photography (New York: Dell, 1977); and Douglas
Preston, 'Shooting in Paradise', Natural History, vol. 93, no. 12 (December 1984), pp.
14-19.
25. For crucial guidance for thinking about the political/cultural implications of the history
of women doing science in the United States, see: Violet Haas and Carolyn Perucci,
eds., Women in Scientific and Engineering Professions (Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press, 1984); Sally Hacker, 'The Culture of Engineering: Women, Workplace,
and Machine', Women's Studies International Quarterly, vol. 4, no. 3 (1981), pp. 341-53;
Evelyn Fox Keller, A Feeling for the Organism (San Francisco: Freeman, 1983); National
Science Foundation, Women and Minorities in Science and Engineering (Washington,
DC: NSF, 1982); Margaret Rossiter, Women Scientists in America (Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1982).
26. John Markoff and Lenny Siegel, 'Military Micros', UCSC Silicon Valley Research Project
conference, 1983, forthcoming in Microelectronics and Industrial Transformation. High
Technology Professionals for Peace and Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility
are promising organizations.
27. Katie King, The Pleasure of Repetition and the Limits of Identification in Feminist Science
Fiction: Reimaginations of the Body after the Cyborg', California American Studies
Association, Pomona, 1984. An abbreviated list of feminist science fiction underlying
themes of this essay: Octavia Butler, Wild Seed, Mind of My Mind, Kindred, Survivor,
Suzy McKee Charnas, Motherlines, Samuel Delany, Tales of Neveryorr, Anne McCaffrey,
The Ship Who Sang, Dinosaur Planet, Vonda McIntyre, Superluminal, Dreamsnake,
Joanna Russ, Adventures of Ayx, The Female Man; James Tiptree, Jr., Star Songs of
an Old Primate, Up the Walls of the World, John Varley, Titan, Wizard, Demon.
28. Mary Douglas, Purity and Danger (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1966), Natural
Symbols (London: Cresset Press, 1970).

 42

DONNA HARAWAY

29. French feminisms contribute to cyborg heteroglossia. Carolyn Burke, 'Irigaray through
the Looking Glass', Feminist Studies, vol. 7, no. 2 (Summer 1981), pp. 288-306; Luce
Irigaray, Ce sexe qui n'en est pas un (Paris: Minuit, 1977); L. Irigaray, Et I'une ne bouge
pas sans I'autre (Paris: Minuit, 1979); Elaine Marks and Isabelle de Courtivron, ed.,
New French Feminisms (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1980); Signs,
vol. 7, no. 1 (Autumn, 1981), special issue on French feminism; Monique Wittig, The
Lesbian Body, trans. David LeVay (New York: Avon, 1975; Le corps lesbien, 1973).
30. But all these poets are very complex, not least in treatment of themes of lying and erotic,
decentered collective and personal identities. Susan Griffin, Women and Nature: The
Roaring Inside Her (New York: Harper & Row, 1978); Audre Lorde, Sister Outsider (New
York: Crossing Press, 1984); Adrienne Rich, The Dream of a Common Language (New
York: Norton, 1978).
31. Jacques Derrida, Of Grammatology, trans. and introd. G. C. Spivak (Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1976), esp. part II, 'Nature, Culture, Writing'; Claude LéviStrauss, Tristes Tropiques, trans. John Russell (New York, 1961), esp. 'The Writing Lesson'.
32. Cherrie Moraga, Loving in the War Years (Boston: South End Press, 1983). The sharp
relation of women of color to writing as theme and politics can be approached through:
'The Black Woman and the Diaspora: Hidden Connections and Extended
Acknowledgments', An International Literary Conference, Michigan State University,
October 1985; Mari Evans, ed., Black Women Writers: A Critical Evaluation (Garden
City, N.Y.: Doubleday/Anchor, 1984); Dexter Fisher, ed., The Third Woman: Minority
Women Writers of the United States (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1980); several issues
of Frontiers, esp. vol. 5 (1980), 'Chicanas en el Ambiente Nacional' and vol. 7 (1983),
'Feminisms in the Non-Western World'; Maxine Hong Kingston, China Men (New York:
Knopf, 1977); Gerda Lerner, ed., Black Women in White America: A Documentary History
(New York: Vintage, 1973); Cherrie Moraga and Gloria Anzaldua, eds., This Bridge Called
My Back: Writings by Radical Women of Color (Watertown, Mass.: Persephone, 1981);
Robin Morgan, ed., Sisterhood Is Global (Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor/Doubleday, 1984).
The writing of white women has had similar meanings: Sandra Gilbert and Susan Gubar,
The Madwoman in the Attic (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1979); Joanna Russ,
How to Suppress Women's Writing (Austin: University for Texas Press, 1983).
33. James Clifford argues persuasively for recognition of continuous cultural reinvention,
the stubborn non-disappearance of those 'marked' by Western imperializing practices;
see 'On Ethnographic Allegory: Essays', forthcoming 1985, and 'On Ethnographic
Authority', Representations, vol. 1, no. 2 (1983), pp. 118-146.
34. Page DuBois, Centaurs and Amazons (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1982);
Lorraine Daston and Katharine Park, 'Hermaphrodites in Renaissance France', ms.,
n.d.; Katharine Park and Lorraine Daston, 'Unnatural Conceptions: The Study of
Monsters in 16th and 17th Century France and England', Past and Present, no. 92
(August 1981), pp. 20-54.

 Copyright of Australian Feminist Studies is the property of Routledge and its content may not be copied or
emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.
However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

 