m/other ourselves:

a Black queer feminist genealogy for radical mothering
Alexis Pauline Gumbs

The queer thing is that we were born at all.

I was born in 1982 in the middle of the first term of a president
who won by demonizing "welfare queens;' in the global context of
"population control;' a story that says poor women and women of
color should not give birth. A story with a happy ending for capi­
talism: we do not exist. The queer thing is that we were born; our
young and/or deviant and/or brown and/or broke and/or single
mamas did the wrong thing. Therefore we exist: a population out of
control, a story interrupted. We are the guerrilla poems written on
walls, purveyors of a billion dangerous meanings of life.
And how unlikely that I would love you.

In 1983, Audre Larde, Black, lesbian, poet, warrior, mother, inter­
rupted the story of a heterosexist, capitalist, fashion and beauty
magazine called Essence with a queer proposition. In an essay on
the impact of internalized oppression between Black women, she
offered: WE CAN LEARN TO MOTHER OURSELVES. I have de­
signed multiple workshops with this title and I still don't know
what it means. 1 Except that love is possible even in a world that
teaches us to hate ourselves and the selves we see waiting in each
other. Except that in a world that says that we should not be born,
and that says "no" to our very beings everyday, I still wake up
wanting you with a "yes" on my heart. Except that I believe in
how we grow our bodies into place to live at the very sight of each
A version of this essay was published in make/shift magazine and dedicated to
Revolutionary Mothering co-editor Mai'a Williams.
1 This is also the title of my dissertationi "We Can Learn to Mother Ourselves:
The Queer Survival of Black Feminism:'

 1I11uuIer uur:::.eIve::. 1 LI

other. We can learn to mother ourselves. I think it means you and
me.
Another generative site for the queer potential of mothering is
June Jordan's 1992 essay "A New Politics of Sexuality;' in which she
uses bisexuality as an intervention against predictive sexuality in or­
der to create a space for freedom. This critical use of bisexuality pre­
figures the use of the word "queer" to describe a politics of sexuality
that is not based on a specific sexual practice, but rather a critical
relationship to existing sexual and social norms. Jordan uses a procla­
mation of her own bisexuality as a hinge to articulate her own contra­
dictory multiplicity: "I am Black and I am female and I am a mother
and I am bisexual and I am a nationalist and I am an antinationalist:' 2
[We say that mothering, especially the mothering of children
in oppressed groups, and especially mothering to end war, to end
capitalism, to end homo hobia and to end patriarrny-is a queer
tning. And that is a good thing. That is a necessary ifig.7hat is
a crucial and dangerous thing to do. Those of us who nurture the
lives of those children who are not supposed to exist, who are not
supposed to grow up, who are revolutionary in their very beings are
doing some of the most subversive work in the world. If we don't
know it, the establishment does.
In 2005, former U.S. Secretary of Education and officer of Drug
Policy, William Bennett, publicly stated that aborting every Black
baby would decrease crime.3 This neo-eugenicist statement about
U.S. race relations corresponds with globalized "family planning"
agendas that have historically forced women in the Caribbean,
Latin America, South Asia, and Africa to undergo sterilization
in order to work for multinational corporations. In 1977, World
Bank official Richard Rosenthal went so far as to suggest that three
fourths of the women in developing nations should be sterilized to
prevent economically disruptive revolutions.4
In the face of this genocidal attack, Black feminists from the
1970s to the 1990s appropriated motherhood as a challenge and
2 June Jordan, "A New Politics of Sexuality;• in Technical Difficuluties: African
American Notes on the State of the Union (New York: Pantheon Books, 1992), 132.
3 September 28 broadcast of Salem Radio Network's Bill Bennett's Morning in
America,
4 Luz Rodriguez, "Population Control in Puerto Rico;' Conference presentation
at Let's Talk about Sex, the SisterSong 10th Anniversary Conference, May 2006.

a refusal to the violence that these discourses of stabilization and
welfare would naturalize. While the U.S. state enacted domestic
and foreign policies that required, allowed and endorsed violence
against the bodies of Black women and early death for Black chil­
dren, Black feminists audaciously centered an entire literary move­
ment around the invocation of this criminal act of Black maternity,
demanding not only the rights of Black women to reproductive
autonomy in the biological sense, but also the imperative to cre­
ate narratives, theories, contexts, collectives, publications, political
ideology, and more. I read the Black feminist literary production
that occurred between 1970 and 1990 as the experimental creation
of a rival economy and temporality in which Black women and chil­
dren would be generators of an alternative destiny. A Black femi­
nist position became articulable and necessary not only because
of the lived experiences of Black mothers but also because of the
successes and failures of the Black cultural nationalist movement
and the white radical lesbian/feminist movement.
To answer death with utopian futurity, to rival the social re­
production of capital on a global scale with a forward-dreaming
diasporic accountability is a queer thing to do. A strange thing to
do. A thing that changes the family and the future forever. To name
oneself "mother" in a moment where representatives of the state
conscripted "Black" and "mother" into vile epithets is a queer thing.
To insist on Black motherhood despite Black cultural nationalist
claims to own Black women's wombs and white feminist attempts
to use the maternal labor of Black women as domestic servants to
buy their own freedom (and to implicitly support the use of Black
women as guinea pigs in their fight to perfect the privilege of ster­
ilization) is an almost illegible thing, an outlawed practice, a queer
thing.
You are something else.

The radical potential of the word "mother" comes after the 'm'. It is
the space that "other" takes in our mouths when we say it. We are
something else. We know it from how fearfully institutions wield
social norms and try to shut us down. We know it from how we are
transforming the planet with our every messy step toward mak­
ing life possible. Mamas who unlearn domination by refusing to

 m/other ourselves I L.3

dominate their children, extended family and friends, community
caregivers, radical childcare collectives, all of us breaking cycles of
abuse by deciding what we want to replicate from the past and what
we need urgently to transform, are m/othering ourselves.
Audre Lorde's essay had an older sister. In 1973, Toni Morrison
wrote a novel about a dangerous, undomesticated woman, an "art­
ist without an art form" who spurned her own mother's advice to
settle down, insisting, "I don't want to make someone else. I want
to make myself:' Sula, the novel that inspired Black feminist liter­
ary critics like Barbara Smith and Mae Gwendolyn Henderson to
invent Black feminist literary criticism, is a sacred text about two
girls who "having long ago realized they were neither white nor
male ... went about creating something else to be:' Sula herself is
not a mother-type, except for how she creates herself, except for
how she creates a context for other people to grow past the norms
they knew, except for how in her name contemporary Black femi­
nist literary theory was born and how she is how I know how to
write these words.
Your mama is queer as hell.

What if mothering is about the how of it? In 1987, Hortense Spillers
wrote "Mama's Baby, Papa's Maybe: A New American Grammar
Book;' reminding her peers that motherHOOD is a status granted
by patriarchy to white middle-class women, those women whose
legal rights to their children are never questioned, regardless of
who does the labor (the how) of keeping them alive. MotherING is
another matter, a possible action, the name for that nurturing work,
that survival dance, worked by enslaved women who were forced to
breastfeed the children of the status mothers while having no con­
trol over whether their birth or chosen children were sold away.
Mothering is a form of labor worked by immigrant nannies like my
grandmother who mothered wealthy white kids in order to send
money to Jamaica for my mother and her brothers who could not
afford the privilege of her presence. Mothering is worked by chosen
and accidental mentors who agree to support some growing unpre­
dictable thing called future.Mothering is worked by house mothers
in ball culture who provide spaces of self-love and expression for/
as queer youth of color in the street. What would it mean for us to

take the word "mother" less as a gendered identity and more as a
possible action, a technology of transformation that those people
who do the most mothering labor are teaching us right now?
The queer thing is that we are still here.

We can remember how to mother ourselves if we can remember
the proto-queer of color movement that radicalized the meaning
of mothering. In 1979, at the National Third World Lesbian and
Gay Conference, where Audre Larde gave the keynote speech, a
caucus of lesbians agreed on the statement: "All children of lesbians
are ours;' a socialist context for mothering, where children are not
individual property but rather reminders of the context through
which community exists.5 This means that "mothering" is a queer
thing. Not just when people who do not identify as heterosexual
give birth to or adopt children and parent them, but all day long
and everywhere when we acknowledge the creative power of trans­
forming ourselves and the ways we relate to each other. Because we
were never meant to survive and here we are creating a world full
of love.
Foremother moments in radical creativity provide the precedent
for radical mothering that we can find articulated clearly in Black
feminist and feminist of color legacies and offer a queer intergen­
erational and collective vision of mothering that we can see articu­
lated in the late 1970s and early 1980s and use to contextualize our
contemporary movement to create the world we deserve together
through transformative bridgemaking acts. Here are some of the
moments we want to remember in this anthology.
Foremother Moments in Radical Mothering

Love is lifeforce.
Children are the ways that the world begins again and again.
Ifyou fasten upon that concept of their promise, you will have
trouble finding anything more awesome, and also anything
5 Doc in "First National Third World Lesbian and Gay Conference;' Off Our
Backs (November 1979): 14.

 ...,_-,

F

IH., VVIU IVI 101 Y IVIULl 11;::11 1 1':,J

more extraordinarily exhilarating, than the opportunity or/
and obligation to nurture a child into his or her ownfreedom.

-June Jordan, "The Creative Spirit and Children's
Literature;' 1977

In 1977, the great Black feminist poet June Jordan was best known
for her work as an author of children's books. Her very first pub­
lished book was Who Look at Me, based on a poem that she wrote
for her son Christopher to go along with an exploration of art by
and about African Americans. "New energies of darkness;' the
poem says to contextualize the middle passage, "we disturbed a
continent like seeds:'
June Jordan's work as an author of children's literature was
not by default, even though she lived in a time where both Black
nationalist and library driven publishing models made children's
books by Black mothers marketable. Jordan saw children's litera­
ture as one part of a holistic intergenerational imperative. At the
1974 Howard Conference of Afro-American Writers she explained
what was at stake for her as an author accountable to youth when
she encouraged fellow authors of children's literature to "write sto­
ries that correct the genocidal misinformation about reality" that
she notes is being taught to children and adults through the cor­
porate media. The basic lessons that Jordan advocates as necessary
for children's literature-that sharing is vital, that the birth of Black
children is a cause for celebration and that the Blackness of Black
people is wonderful-are simple and profound. These messages,
which Jordan continued to offer through her children's books and
young adult fiction are direct attacks on capitalism, reproductive
injustice, and white supremacy.
In a range of publications for audiences as wide-ranging as the
1\/ew York Times Book Review section, the Negro Digest, and library
r1ewsletters Jordan stressed the importance of the terms of our con­
versations across generations about life, love, resources, and value.
ln "The Creative Spirit and Children's Literature" she explains the
responsibility all adults have to "make love powerful" in the face of
1 dominating order that seeks to put love in opposition to power.
'Love is opposed to the death of the dream;' she explains and she
,eminds her audience of educators and authors at UC Berkeley that
1dults are responsible not only for "nurturing a child into his or her

own freedom" but also for responding to the questions and chal­
lenges that young people bring to the conversation as opportunities
to evolve as a species.
Our definition of radical mothering builds on June Jordan's fu­
turism and the futurism of the Black Feminist moment out of which
she spoke. In 1974, when Jordan spoke on the panel at Howard, she
was sitting next to Lucille Clifton, who used her poetry and chil­
dren's literature to break silence about child sexual and physical
abuse. In 1977, when she spoke at Berkeley, it was the same year
that the Combahee River Collective released their groundbreak­
ing statement that insisted that "we are ready for the lifetime of
struggle and work before us:'
You can see the seeds germinating in the Parenting in/and/as
Science Fiction reader and series of workshops generated at the
Allied Media Conference, a gathering of visionary futuristic holis­
tic media makers in Detroit. You can see the seeds growing in the
intentionally visionary spaces crafted by the childcare collectives
that designed content rich interactive tracks for children at the
Critical Resistance 10th anniversary prison abolition conference,
the U.S. Social Forums and the Allied Media Conference. You can
see it in the ongoing work of collectives like Regeneraci6n and Kidz
City, all of which deeply inform the work in this collection.
Regeneraci6n was founded in New York City as an organic act
of love and collaboration with powerful women of color organizing
collectives that emerged there. They are "committed to growing an
intergenerational movement for collective liberation, in which peo­
ple of all ages can participate, learn from each other, take care of
each other, and dramatically reshape the conditions of their lives:'
They say it explicitly in their mission statement and they walk it out
through their powerful programming presence at national conver­
gences, their day-to-day collaboration with organization in NYC
and their collective visioning work. They identify "child-raising as
a form of resistance;' clarifying the crucial role of childcare in the
movement we need and the world we deserve.
Co-editor China Martens is a co-f ounder of Kidz City Baltimore,
a collective founded after Regeneraci6n and explicitly influenced
and inspired by their vision for collective liberation. In their mis­
sion statement, Kidz City articulate the value of the labor of child­
care as "vitally important, and often overlooked and undervalued"

 111/Vlllt;;"I vu1::,t:::'1vt::::, I

and emphasizes the importance of access to social justice spaces
for children and parents. They acknowledge that our social justice
movements are already intergenerational and see their work as sup­
porting that intergenerationality so it can be "healthy and happy:'
It is an act of love to participate in the resistance work of child­
raising. It is an act of love to envision and actualize an intergenera­
tionally participatory movement. We honor and acknowledge the
work of raising and caring for children as lifeforce toward the world
we can only transform together.
"All Children of Lesbians Are Ours": A Queer Challenge
"All third world lesbians share in the responsibility for the care
of nurturing of the children of individual lesbians of color.'

-Doc in "First National Third World Lesbian and Gay
Conference;' Off Our Backs (1979)

By 1979, the idea of mothering poor children and children of color
was under direct attack. Ronald Reagan was running for president
on a platform that criminalized the "welfare queen;' a figure he in­
vented in order to sell a neoliberal vision that insisted education,
housing, and other social issues were not collective but individ­
ual issues. Eventually Reagan in the United States, like Margaret
Thatcher in England, would spearhead a project of divesting from
social services and loosening regulations on multi-national corpo­
rations. In the first few months of 1979, twelve Black women were
murdered in Boston's Black neighborhoods and their murders were
ignored until a coalition of feminists, including the members of the
Combahee River Collective, began organizing around the value of
Black women's lives and the need to end the multiple oppressions
they faced. In November of 1979, the KKK opened fire in broad
daylight on a rally organized by women of color and their allies
demanding economic human rights in Greensboro, NC. The police
arrested victims of what later became known as the Greensboro
Massacre. That same fall, the Atlanta Child Murders began and au­
thorities refused for months to take Black mothers seriously when
they reported their children missing.
At the same historical moment, "troublesome" young people
of color were in fact achieving revolutions in the Caribbean and

LI

Latin America. The student-led New Jewel Movement in Grenada
created the first Black Socialist Republic in the Americas and the
student-led Sandinistas achieved revolution in Nicaragua in 1979.
The question of uprising youth and criminalized mothers was di­
rectly in tension. That same year in New York the First National
Conference of Third World Lesbians and Gays was a place for gay
men and lesbians of color to articulate themselves as a group, dis­
tinctly from the largely nationalist groups representing people of
color and the white-dominated groups representing lesbians and
gays in the 1970s.
In her keynote address to open the gathering, Audre Lorde
spoke directly to the responsibility of the people gathered to the
next generation of youth, making it clear that they were collaborat­
ing on the future, not just with their own individual children, but
with young people in general who deserved to be liberated not only
from homophobia and racism, but from a violent, competitive,
environmentally destructive society. In the Third World Lesbian
Caucus, this collectivist stance was made even more explicit.
According to "Doc" (a mother who attended the caucus and
wrote about it for Off Our Backs, a major lesbian periodical), as the
women gathered wrote their official statement of the Third World
Lesbian agenda, they explicitly thought about the labor of mother­
ing as shared mothering and claimed responsibility for the children
of all individual lesbians of color as a collective of third world lesbi­
ans. It is not clear how this particular group implemented this be­
lief. In fact, Doc herself mentions that she prioritized going to this
session but was late because of childcare concerns. Conceptually,
collective responsibility for the labor of mothering and the well­
being of the children in lesbian of color families has revolutionary
implications. This concept came to life for Pat Parker, a Black les­
bian poet in Oakland when she and her partner filled a courtroom
with lesbian chosen family members in response to a legal chal­
lenge to her and her partner's right to adopt their daughter because
they would not have sufficient "family support:'6
Today, in a consummately neoliberal era, questions of custody
have become even more nuanced. Many queer families face the re­
ality that the state will track down sperm donors and treat them
6 Judy Grahn at the Sister Comrade gathering in honor of Parker and Audre
Lorde, November 2007, at First Congregational Church in Oakland, California.

 111/Ulllt'l uu1::,e1ve:::, I

as fathers in order to avoid giving lesbian parents state assistance
for raising their children, should the need arise. And there is also
a precedent now for affirming lesbian and gay custody of children
when it serves the state's financial interest (if it means the state will
not have to provide assistance for the well-being of the children). If,
as Audre Lorde wrote in The Black Unicorn, "our labor has become
more important than our silence;' when it comes to lesbian and
gay custody law, money has become more important than devi­
ance.This move by the state to affirm gay and lesbian parents with
money and to violate the rights of lesbian parents without money
in particular (when it comes to treating non-parent donors as par­
ents) can be traced directly back to the criminalization of so-called
welfare queens as the state divests itself from the lives of poor kids.
The fact that richer, whiter gay and lesbian parents are placed
in a position to separate themselves from the wider, poorer LGBTQ
population, especially the LGBTQ population of color, was antici­
pated in June 1979 by an interracial lesbian couple who wrote an
article in a special issue of Off Our Backs where lesbians of color
sought to address the dominating whiteness of the publication.
Mary Pena and Barbara Carey wrote their critique of the conversa­
tion on lesbian motherhood, insisting that questions of race and
class needed to be central to the conversation. Their call, as moth­
ers, for a vision of lesbian mothering that was not about assimilat­
ing into existing white supremacist norms of family was instruc­
tive then and is instructive now. Their idea of parenting was not
designed to get the benefits of the existing system, but rather to
create something new. They celebrate the opportunity to "develop
within our children the new idea that they can function without pa­
triarchal authority:' While much of the custody narrative then and
now is based on patriarchal ideas that say the children are owned
by (property owning) parents, they instead say emphatically:
THEY WILL NOT BELONG TO THE PATRIARCHY
THEY WILL NOT BELONG TO US EITHER
THEY WILL BELONG ONLY TO THEMSELVES.
Raising this precedent in 2016 by no means trivializes the daily
struggles of queer families to support each other and to have au­
tonomy over their lives, especially when it comes to the struggles
of poor and working-class LGBTQ people to have the right to daily
parent their children. However, this reminder of an earlier moment

L 

in anti-racist queer consciousness is also crucial to how we think
about the question, concept, and project of family outside of the
terms set by white supremacy and patriarchy-terms under which
the richest, whitest, and most assimilated might get crumbs, but
the majority of our communities will always lose.
Part of the project of seein!(mothering as a qu r collaboration
with the futur(¾has to do with transforming the parenting relation­
ship from a property relationship to a partnership in practice. This
possibility is alive in our collection and in our communities in a
way that not only opens up possibilities of non-dominating rela- tionships with our children, but which also makes visible and viable ----.. ,
meaningful relationships between children and adults who do not J
have the legal or biological status of parenthood.
Black lesbian feminist Diane S. Bogus wrote about the labor
of mothering without the name mother performed by many non­
biological mother figures including herself as the non-mom parent
of her partner's biological children. Interestingly, in 1977, on the
same page of the periodical Lesbian Tide that covers a number of
custody battles by lesbian parents, Diane S. Bogus coins the term
"mom de plume;' searching for a term that connects her work as a
mother without the status of motherhood to her intertwined cre­
ative work as a writer. This collection follows that trajectory. The
writers in this collection look at mothering as a creative practice
defined not by the state, but by our evolving collective relationship
to each other, our moments together and a possible future.
Toward a Motherful Future

"Not fatherless ... How about motherful?"
-Khadijah Matin, Sisterhood of Black Single Mothers, 1986
The ongoing exclusion and criminalization of people of color, poor
people, and LGBTQ people from the status of motherhood in re­
lationship to the state sets the stage for creativity around the labor,
energy, and existence of the practice of mothering. As Cathy Cohen
points out in her 1997 article "Punks, Bulldaggers, and Welfare
Queens;' the figure of the impoverished and deviant mother is a
queer figure in the United States, whether that mother is part of the
LGBTQ community or not.From the mid 1970s through the 1980s

 11uvL11t::1 vur:::,e1ve:::, I ..Jl

in Brooklyn, New York, a group called the Sisterhood of Black
Single Mothers emerged through and around activist activities at
Medgar Evers College with the leadership of Daphne Busby and di­
rectly took on the demonization and pathologization of Black sin­
gle mothers and their children.The purpose of the Sisterhood was
to provide tangible logistical support to young parents and to also
reframe the practice of parenting as a single woman (and ultimately
also as single men or young couples) autonomously and positively.
The project consisted of a proactive youth program, I<:ianga House,
which provided long-term housing for young mothers, logistical
and legal support to help mothers and their children stay together, a
mentoring program through which more experienced single moth­
ers mentored new single mothers, and eventually a fatherhood col­
lective for teen fathers or future fathers.
The work of the Sisterhood of Black Single Mothers was af­
firmed and intertwined with other Black feminists at the time.The
work of the collective was featured in one of Kitchen Table: Women
of Color Press's "freedom organizing pamphlets" as an important
community model to be replicated. The dedication of a publica­
tion about this mothering work specifically by a women of color
press founded by Black lesbian feminists and with a goal to address
interlocking oppressions by publishing work by women of color
with an emphasis on including work by lesbians is significant. The
pamphlet itself, It's a Family Affair: The Real Lives of Black Single
Mothers by Barbara Omolade, also directly links the demoniza­
tion of Black single mothers to the demonization of Black lesbians
within and outside the Black community and points out that this
shared demonization is about the threat of women who live their
lives in a way that shows that they do not need patriarchy or sub­
servience to men.
The work of the Sisterhood of Black Single Mothers is a queer
work in that it reframes mothering as a collective project that fore­
grounds the practical and intangible needs of those whose survival
is most threatened in their community. Toward this end they refuse
the pathologizing language placed on female-headed families.They
insist that families nurtured by women are "not fatherless ... how
about motherful?" By shifting the terms, they make a poetic move
that highlights the abundance of mothering, the power of moth­
ers and the collaboration between mothers that makes the fami-

lies least affirmed by the state dangerous, powerful and necessary.
We can see the continuation of this work that centers poor and
disenfranchised mothers in the work of Young Women United in
Albuquerque, New Mexico, and Mamas Rising in Austin, Texas,
which both support mothers of color, and in particular mothers
who qualify for public assistance in accessing affirming support
while giving birth and at every moment in the mothering process
with an analysis that connects the revolutionary work of mothering
poor children of color to a collaborative embodiment of the future.
Part of the role of this collection is to make visible the connec­
tions between a queer feminist of color practice and theory around
mothering, intergenerationality and the future and jlcbat we see as
the most crucial and challenging work of our time,  practice of
mothering as an alternative building practice of valuing ourselves
and each other and creating the world we deserveJ

 