 Anthropocene Childhoods

 Feminist Thought in Childhood Research
Series editors: Jayne Osgood and Veronica Pacini-Ketchabaw
Drawing on feminist scholarship, this boundary-pushing series explores
the use of creative, experimental, new materialist, and post-humanist
research methodologies that address various aspects of childhood. Feminist
Thought in Childhood Research foregrounds examples of research practices
within feminist childhood studies that engage with post-humanism, science
studies, affect theory, animal studies, new materialisms, and other postfoundational perspectives that seek to decenter human experience. Books
in the series offer lived examples of feminist research praxis and politics in
childhood studies. The series includes authored and edited collections—from
early career and established scholars—addressing past, present, and future
childhood research issues from a global context.
Also available in the series:
Feminist Research for 21st-Century Childhoods: Common Worlds Methods,
edited by B. Denise Hodgins
Feminists Researching Gendered Childhoods: Generative Entanglements,
edited by Jayne Osgood and Kerry H. Robinson
Theorizing Feminist Ethics of Care in Early Childhood Practice,
edited by Rachel Langford
More-Than-Human Literacies in Early Childhood,
Abigail Hackett
The Early Childhood Educator,
edited by Rachel Langford and Brooke Richardson

 Anthropocene Childhoods
Speculative Fiction, Racialization,
and Climate Crisis
Emily Ashton

 BLOOMSBURY ACADEMIC
Bloomsbury Publishing Plc
50 Bedford Square, London, WC1B 3DP, UK
1385 Broadway, New York, NY 10018, USA
29 Earlsfort Terrace, Dublin 2, Ireland
BLOOMSBURY, BLOOMSBURY ACADEMIC and the Diana logo are trademarks of
Bloomsbury Publishing Plc
First published in Great Britain 2023
Copyright © Emily Ashton, 2023
Emily Ashton has asserted her right under the Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act, 1988, to be identified as Author of this work.
For legal purposes the Acknowledgments on p. ix constitute
an extension of this copyright page.
Series design by Anna Berzovan
Cover image: © Lisa5201/ Getty Images
This work is published open access subject to a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International licence (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0,
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). You may re-use, distribute,
and reproduce this work in any medium for non-commercial purposes,
provided you give attribution to the copyright holder and the publisher and provide
a link to the Creative Commons licence.
Bloomsbury Publishing Plc does not have any control over, or responsibility for,
any third-party websites referred to or in this book. All internet addresses given in
this book were correct at the time of going to press. The author and publisher regret
any inconvenience caused if addresses have changed or sites have ceased to exist,
but can accept no responsibility for any such changes.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
ISBN:
		
		

HB:
ePDF:
eBook:

978-1-3502-6238-6
978-1-3502-6239-3
978-1-3502-6240-9

Series: Feminist Thought in Childhood Research
Typeset by Integra Software Services Pvt. Ltd.
To find out more about our authors and books visit www.bloomsbury.com
and sign up for our newsletters.

 ­­Contents
List of Figures
­Series Editors’ Introduction
Acknowledgments
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Anthropocene Childhoods: Situating Speculative Child-Figures
Geontological Figurations of Anthropocene Childhoods
Infecting Whiteness: Child-Monsters at the End of the World
Becoming-Geos: The Stratification of Childhood
Monstrous Love for Regenerative Cyborgs
Parental Stewardship: Bionormative Care as Environmental
Surrogate
Educational Imaginaries for Child-Climate Futures

Notes
References
Index

vi
vii
ix
1
25
47
71
91
115
139
154
165
187

 Figures
1
2
3
4
5

The Boy with the Bones
Becoming Boy-Animal-Monster
Kind-of Friends for the Anthropocene
Masking Monstrosity—Making Killable
Iconography of Abandonment

2
34
41
49
144

 ­Series Editors’ Introduction
The series Feminist Thought in Childhood Research considers experimental
and creative modes of researching and practicing in childhood studies.
Recognizing the complex neo-liberal landscape and worrisome spaces of
coloniality in the twenty-first century, the Feminist Thought in Childhood
Research books provide a forum for cross-disciplinary, interdisciplinary, and
transdisciplinary conversations in childhood studies that engage feminist
decolonial, anticolonial, more-than-human, new materialisms, post-humanist,
and other post-foundational perspectives that seek to reconfigure human
experience. The series offers lively examples of feminist research praxis and
politics that invite childhood studies scholars, students, and educators to engage
in collectively imagining childhood otherwise. Until now, childhood studies
has been decidedly a human matter, focused on the needs of individual children
(Taylor, 2013). In the Anthropocene (Colebrook, 2012, 2013), however, other
approaches to childhood that address the profound, human-induced ecological
challenges facing our own and other species are emerging. As Taylor (2013)
reminds us, if we are going to grapple with the socioecological challenges we
face today, childhood studies need to pay attention to the more-than-human,
to the non-human others that inhabit our worlds and the in human. Toward
this end, Feminist Thought in Childhood Research series challenges the
humanist, linear, and moral narratives (Colebrook, 2013; Haraway, 2013) of
much of childhood studies by engaging with feminisms. As a feminist series,
the books explore the inheritances of how to live in the Anthropocene and
think about it in ways that are in tension with the Anthropocene itself.
Emily Ashton’s Anthropocene Childhoods: Speculative Fiction, Racialization,
and Climate Crisis is the sixth volume in the series. As the title suggests, this
book focuses on “racialized child-figures in speculative texts of literature
and film that story the end of the world through some sort of climate related
disaster.” Ashton boldly asks “which child-figures have a future—are the
future—in these times called Anthropocene?” Aligning with heterogeneous
and sometimes incommensurable theories, Anthropocene Childhoods not

 viii

­Series Editors’ Introductio

only complicates the equation of the child with the future under climate
crises conditions, but also thoughtfully argues how Anthropocene childhoods
circulate through social and cultural texts in the shadows of ongoing
colonialisms, anti-blackness, capitalism, and patriarchy. Thinking across
feminist Black studies, feminist Indigenous studies, new materialisms,
eco-criticism, feminist environmental humanities, speculative fiction theory,
and queer theories of childhood, Ashton teeters between world-ending and
world-building.
As it engages the equation of the child with the future, Ashton activates
the concept of the Anthropocene as “a watchword” that glosses over “the
material violences, temporal scalings, and incommensurable worldings that
figure a ‘shadow’ behind the ‘shine’ of its current popularity.” It is through its
“apocalyptic trope” that Ashton challenges the reader to call into question
the Anthropocene’s “road to ecological and moral redemption in speculative
texts” that “relies on figurations of terrorists and aliens via anti-blackness,
territorial displacements and new frontier continuities of settler colonialism,
and technoscience advancements rooted in capitalism, militarism, and
imperialism that instead of devastating humanity will somehow now save it
triumphantly.” Yet, Anthropocene Childhoods does not refuse all speculative
texts. As Ashton writes, it is the speculative texts that “engender imaginaries of
not this, as in refusal of present systems and subjectivities; not yet, as in what
might be to come; and what if, as in generative possibilities” that she is after.
Indigenous futurities and Afro-futurisms inspire Anthropocene Childhoods
to argue that the child figures a radical potential for a different future in which
the attributions of innocence and the need for protection and care are not only
restricted to white children. As such, Ashton gives a compelling engagement
of “the value of speculative fiction for thinking differently about children,
childhood, and the future.”
We are certain that Anthropocene Childhoods will be met with deep interest
and enthusiasm by scholars and practitioners in feminist childhood studies.

 A
­ cknowledgments
This book project spans many years during which I have lived on the east and
west coasts of Canada before finishing up in the middle on the prairies. Much
learning in between those moves took place in Malawi. Respectfully, these are
the lands of the Wolastoqey and Mi’kmaq peoples; Lekwungen, Songhees,
Esquimalt, and WSÁNEĆ peoples; nêhiyawak, Anihšināpēk, Nakoda, Dakota,
Lakota, and Métis/Michif peoples; and Chewa, Tumbuka, and Tonga peoples.
I hope the ethics and politics expressed in this work might be received as one
moment in a lifelong effort to be in good relation.
My Grampy always joked with me about my never-ending student status
when he managed to leave school after grade 3 get a PhD, which, for a successful
Grand Falls farmer, meant a Potato House Degree. Grammy left her small
town for the big city as young teenager in order to get her high school diploma.
She instilled in her children and grandchildren the value of education. The
greatest lesson I learned from both of them however was the importance of
family. To my family and friends, thank you will never suffice but I will keep
saying it anyway. Playing, laughing, loving, and just being with my nieces and
nephews strengthens my desire to think-with ideas of otherwise childhoods
and otherwise futurities. Thank you, Sage, Levi, Harry, Merlin, Freddie, Arlo,
and Iris for the inspiration.
I also want to extend a thank you to colleagues past and present who offer
generous support and work to create a better world in small moments every
day. Since my BEd at UNB, I have been privileged to have many feminist
teachers whose fierceness, thoughtfulness, and kindness I greatly admire.
That gift continues with the editors of this series—my sincere appreciation to
Veronica and Jayne.
Portions of Chapter 3 will appear in an “Ecological Challenges with/in
Contemporary Childhoods” special issue of the Journal of Childhood Studies
as: Ashton, E. (2022). Speculative child-figures at the end of the (white) world.
Journal of Childhood Studies. I thank the journal editors for their permission
to reproduce parts of the article here.

 x

 ­1

Anthropocene Childhoods
Situating Speculative Child-Figures

Since beginning this project, I have practiced a daily routine of scrolling
through news sites and taking screenshots of Anthropocene-related stories.
I have quickly accumulated quite an archive. Browsing through my collection,
I log that most of the climate headlines are dark, dim, and foreboding. I also
notice an increasing number of announcements about the end of the world.
Some punchy headlines of late include “The Earth Is in a Death Spiral”
(Monbiot, 2018), “We Have 12 Years Left” (Nunn, 2018), “Climate Change: 12
Years to Save the Planet? Make that 18 Months” (McGrath, 2019), “Our House
Is on Fire” (Thunberg, 2019), “Code Red for Humanity” (The Independent,
2021), and “Global Climate Crisis: Inevitable, Unprecedented and Irreversible”
(Harvey, 2021). While it might seem bad form to date the opening of a book
so strictly, the point I wish to make is that these headlines have become
anything but exceptional. Announcements of end times are proliferating,
and have only been amplified by the global Covid-19 pandemic. The exact
wording may get shuffled around but climate change, extinction, and various
geotemporal slights of hand make up the discourse of the Anthropocene—
the new geological epoch marking destructive human impact on Earth system
processes—and what in one of its more figurative iterations has been called the
“Anthropomeme” (Macfarlane, 2016, para. 34).
Words are not the only things meming these days. The new Anthropocene
normal also takes shape through the repetition and replication of images.
A view of planet earth from space burning red, polar bears wasting away
on melting icebergs, population graphs with rhapsodic hockey stick curves,

 2

Anthropocene Childhoods

and plastic islands polluting acidic oceans to name but a few. One particular
image, however, has stood out to me. The colors are brown, the landscape
is barren, the sky is dark, and the ground is cracking: it is a dying earth. In
the foreground is a lone figure—a young boy sitting in the dirt, playing with
the bones of the deceased livestock that once grazed his family farm (see
Figure 1). When the 2018 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change study
was released—the report that moved up the global over-warming threshold
to 2030—this image accompanied summaries from The New York Times to
the academic journal Nature to the Black Science Fiction Society blog. But, as
I said, I have seen the image before. It was first used closer to its home as part
of a series on the devastating effects of drought in Warrumbungle Shire, New
South Wales, Australia, in June 2018, and later picked up in that context by
Newsweek (Watling, 2019). Since then, the Boy with the Bones has achieved
rapid international circulation.
Another viral success of seeming juxtaposition is a four-and-a-half-minute
short film in which global conglomerate Unilever asks, “Why Bring a Child
into this World?” (Falduit, 2014).1 Since its multi-country launch on World

Figure 1 The Boy with the Bones. Harry Taylor, age 6, by Brook Mitchell @ Getty
­Images 2018.

 Situating Speculative Child-Figures

3

Children’s Day in 2014, the commercial has been viewed more than 70 million
times on YouTube alone. The film-within-a-film captures an affectively amped
process of doubt-reflection-hope as racially diverse sets of expectant parents in
five different countries are recorded viewing a prenatal film. After the requisite
close-ups of the we-are-all-the-same near-term bellies, parents express to the
camera their worries and fears about the future. Next the couples watch the
prenatal film while the camera pans between their reactions and the film itself.
The film opens with horrifying scenes of destruction before quickly moving to
overhead shots of pristine green fields, children splashing in water, and lifesaving prophylactics being administered to toddlers. The reassuring voiceover
tells a heteronormative love story that culminates in the instructive: “Our
children will have better chances of meeting their great-grandchildren than
we ever did . . . . Breathe calmly. Bring your child into world. There has never
been a better time to create a future for everyone on the planet, for those yet
to come.” Then, through happy tears and soft touches, the parents narrate a
renewed faith in tomorrow. It is emotionally manipulative, heavily moralized,
subtly commercialized, and utterly compelling. It urges everyone to “make a
change” because “there’s never been a better time to create a brighter future.
#brightfuture.” But which child-figures have a future—are the future—in these
times called Anthropocene?
The Boy with the Bones and #BrightFuture Child are the first two figures
of Anthropocene Child in this book. They join with other child-figures in
the chapters that follow to complicate the child-future relationship under
conditions of climate crisis. They all inherit an ecologically damaged planet;
they all inhabit a broken earth (Jemisin, 2015). They also exist in worlds
differentially marked by ongoing colonialisms, anti-blackness, capitalism,
patriarchy, and a host of other intersecting issues that pull the (im)possibility
of the future into present view. The Boy with the Bones lives the impact of
climate change now and his future is under threat; the #Brightfuture Child is
under threat now but their future promises universal reprieve. Both suggest a
larger Anthropocene-induced destabilization, a “converging of anxieties over
planetary futures,” what Nigel Clark (2017) names a “crisis of natality” (p. 12).
Thinking crises in a temporality and imaginary of childhood (i.e., natality)
means we cannot simply repudiate the child-future relation.2 Instead, we can

 4

Anthropocene Childhoods

“stay with the trouble” of its de- and recomposition (Haraway, 2016); we can
queer it rather than enact a straight disavowal (Taylor, 2013).
As a heuristic, Anthropocene Child has far reach. As he travels from
Warrumbungle Shire to the global stage, the Boy with the Bones transforms
from a located figure to a universalized one. He is abstracted from place
and made to stand for climate crisis everywhere. At the same time, with
animal bones as playthings, he marks an intimacy with the nonhuman
world, perhaps gesturing toward a form of geontological conviviality that
upsets human exceptional understandings of life. Still, I am reminded of
Michel Foucault’s famous biopolitical mantra of the “right to make live
and let die”—the cattle can die, the green landscape can go dark, but
the same fate for the young boy is too awful to type. Not all lives are
valued. A movement of the particular to universal is also undertaken
by the #BrightFuture Child as five countries become a single stage in an
edited re-production of reproductive fears and futuristic dreams. What
is happening in these movements of Anthropocene Child is a sort of
“double duty in that these child-figures embody species survival” at the
same time as they engage—through risk in the Boy with Bones and safety
in #BrightFuture Child—the “human fantasy of reproduction” (Sheldon,
2016, p. 3). In other words, the child-figures are asked to secure not only
the reproduction of the human in a generational landscape but also the
reproduction of the species in an evolutionary one. While it may be true,
as Unilever insists, that children today might have a greater chance of
knowing their great-grandchildren—at least in the aggregated statistical
form of life expectancy models—those great-grandchildren have a much
smaller chance of ever encountering a pangolin, western prairie fringed
orchid, or coral reef. As well as staving off human extinction, then,
Anthropocene Child is asked to close the gap between the human and
nonhuman world while continuing to elevate humans in the Great Chain
of Being. These massive demands signify a shift in the dominant image
of the child coinciding with the Anthropocene, a move “from the child in
need of saving to the child that saves” (p. 2).
Many children today demonstrate an awareness of this transition from
protected to protector. A prominent example is the growing number of
students striking from schools on Fridays to protest global climate inaction.

 Situating Speculative Child-Figures

5

This movement is growing every day. In an open letter released ahead of a
Global Day of Action on March 15, 2019, the student coalition writes, in part:
Climate change is already happening. People did die, are dying and will die
because of it, but we can and will stop this madness. We, the young, have
started to move. We are going to change the fate of humanity, whether you
like it or not . . . . You have failed us in the past. If you continue failing us in
the future, we, the young people, will make change happen by ourselves. The
youth of this world has started to move and we will not rest again.
(Global Coordination Group of the Youth-Led
Climate Strikes, 2019, para. 1)

These young people understand that climate change is happening now, and they
have no problem calling out adults who talk a big game but do little to address
real problems. Additionally, among the youth activists there seems to be an
intersectional awareness being advanced that runs counter to the mainstream.3
This is especially evident in the work of youth of color activists who recognize
that “there have always been, and will always be indigenous, black and brown
youth at the forefront of creating systemic change and challenging injustice”
(Martinez, 2019), and that “the climate crisis is everything. It’s health care, it’s
racial justice, it’s criminal justice—everything” (Hirsi, 2019). While these youth
climate leaders are also figures of Anthropocene Child, the main focus in this
book is on racialized child-figures in speculative texts of literature and film
that story the end of the world through some sort of climate-related disaster. I
argue that these speculative child-climate relations form an important part of
the “public pedagogy of the Anthropocene” (Sheldon, 2016, p. 150).

Enter the Anthropocene
In the last few years, the Anthropocene has become a matter of intense
scholarly concern. However, “its constitutive concerns—global warming,
genetic technology, biodiversity loss, environmental racism” have been feltlived for much longer (Leong, 2016, para. 3). As such, the Anthropocene is
more than a proposed name for Earth system epochal change; it is not only
a scientific marker. Temporal, ethical, and political challenges of thinking

 6

Anthropocene Childhoods

deep time, deep strata, and deep responsibility have encouraged scientists,
politicians, artists, activists, writers, educators, and academics of all sorts to
take-up the Anthropocene as a gathering term. This widespread interest, as
reflected in the plethora of alternative nomenclature for example, entails a
“complex web of significances—material, philosophical, scientific, ethical,
political, textual” that are not always commensurable with one another
(Saldanha & Stark, 2016, p. 433).4
Since its emergence (Crutzen & Stoermer, 2000), the Anthropocene
concept has moved from the domain of Earth System Science to much
wider usage.5 It has become an important watchword. It signals to me to pay
attention. It condenses immensely complex happenings under a single word.
It blurs geologic time with human lifespan; it mixes planetary capacity with
individualized responsibility. The Anthropocene is perhaps “the closest thing
there is to common shorthand for this turbulent, momentous, unpredictable,
hopeless, hopeful time—duration and scope still unknown” (Revkin, 2016,
para. 1). As a watchword, however, invocations of the Anthropocene often
gloss over the material violences, temporal scalings, and incommensurable
worldings that figure a “shadow” behind the “shine” of its current popularity
(Andreotti, 2012). Composing the shadow is a re-universalization, a sort of
complementary pan-humanity, of the we-are-all-in-this-together sort, that
does not always acknowledge differential distributions of safety and harm that
accompany climate crisis.6 Another concern is that a particular genre of the
human (i.e., the figure of Anthropos) is extended world destructing powers
that once and for all confirm its position atop the species hierarchy. This
figuration of Anthropos has much in common with Sylvia Wynter’s (2003)
critique of the “overrepresentation of Man as the human” itself (p. 260).
With all of these complexities, it is hard to know what to make of the
Anthropocene claim that the human species is now a geomorphic agent altering
the atmospheric, stratospheric, biospheric, lithospheric, and hydrospheric
conditions of the earth. Andreas Malm and Alf Hornborg (2014) note that
an argument provided by some scientists for a species-based neologism, even
given the recognition that humans are just one small part of the Earth system,
is that “what really matters is that climatic disruption originates from within
the human species, even if not all of it is to blame” (p. 65). Nevertheless, a
question that lingers for critical scholars is if we can “really mend our ways

 Situating Speculative Child-Figures

7

with a concept that puts humans right back at the centre” (Hamilton &
Neimanis, 2016, para. 4). One of the Anthropocene’s more vocal critics,
Ellen Crist (2013), is adamant in her repudiation because the “discourse of
the Anthropocene refuses to challenge human dominion, proposing instead
technological and managerial approaches that would make human dominion
sustainable” (p. 129). Less carbon-dependent ways of life can be blocked
from view in fast-paced pledges for techno-fixes and geo-engineering feats;
multispecies interdependencies can be eclipsed by an overwhelming ecoanxiety which places human survival above all. Writ-large the Anthropocene
covers over the humanity’s profound interdependency on other species and
nonlife existents, but that does not have to be the dominant narrative. What
might happen to the figure of the Anthropos is that its exceptionalism may
prove to be “delusional and self-sabotaging” (Taylor & Pacini-Ketchabaw,
2015, p. 6). What I am to show with the figures of Anthropocene Child in this
book is that humans are “only made possible through a diverse network of
technological, cultural, organic, and geological entities” (Palsson et al., 2013,
p. 7). The speculative child-figures in this book are “human—but not only”
(de la Cadena, 2014, p. 256). Bringing speculative fiction together with the
Anthropocene discussion finds imaginaries not solely beholden to Man.

­Apocalyptic Tropes of Speculative Fiction
I find quite provocative the observation that “fantasies of apocalypse are both
a product and a producer of our current epoch—the Anthropocene” (Ginn,
2015, p. 352). The etymology of apocalypse as “revelation, disclosure” connects
to this idea. The Anthropocene, or so the dominant narrative goes, finally
reveals the detrimental effects of human consumptive and extractive practices
on the earth. The recognition of humans as destructive agents—as producers
of apocalypse—should hardly come as a surprise to those paying attention to
how power has been exercised. So, in this way, while the Anthropocene “might
seem to offer a dystopic future that laments the end of the world, imperialism
and ongoing (settler) colonialisms have been ending worlds for as long as they
have been in existence” (Yusoff, 2018, p. xiii). This bemoaning of the end of the
world is nevertheless remarkable in both contemporary scholarly and popular

 8

Anthropocene Childhoods

discourse. Recall, for example, the news headlines that open this book. I
have grabbed onto figurations of the end of the world as a way to engage the
climate crisis, ongoing racisms and colonialisms, and child futurities. This
is because “regardless of when the Anthropocene started, the ending of it is
what is driving the current public preoccupation with it and marks its cultural
significance” (Joo, 2018, p. 2).
Perhaps, most noticeably, apocalypse as a product of the Anthropocene
manifests in the deluge of pop culture disaster film and cli-fi literature produced
and consumed in recent years. This Anthropocene-allied genre “plays out a
fantasy of human near-disappearance and redemption” where exalting life
through survival is poised as the only goal (Colebrook, 2014, p. 197). Limited
shelter, limited water, limited food, limited leisure, limited electricity, limited
transport, and, overall, limited things make up the plot points and settings.
Rarely is it considered that these same limits are the actual conditions many
in the world face daily (Colebrook, 2018): Anthropocene imaginaries of future
ends are the real worlds for many now. Alongside these pop culture texts are
speculative non-fiction bestsellers that imagine humanity’s end. Examples
include The World without Us (Weisman, 2007), The Sixth Extinction (Kolbert,
2014), and numerous self-help preparation-preservation guides along the
lines of “how to survive a zombie apocalypse” (e.g., Thomas & Thomas, 2009).
Furthermore, apocalyptic thinking merges with politics when instead of being
overrun by a tsunami in New York City (e.g., The Day After Tomorrow), or
giant beasts after a nuclear meltdown (e.g., Godzilla), climate change migrants
and refugees become the futurized “object-target” of “white affect” and
fragility (Baldwin, 2016). In these examples, we may begin to see how the
Anthropocene is produced and reflected as apocalyptic trope.
With regard to contemporary post-apocalyptic blockbusters there is a
predictable narrative sequence to most speculative texts. First, a select group
of humans led by a Man (e.g., family man, scientist man, military man, will-bepresident man, Anthropos man) comes face-to-face with humanity’s mistakes
(e.g., hubris, ecological waste, gene manipulation) and realizes he must act.
In many cases the actual disaster happens off-screen as a prequel event to
the main story at hand. Another instigating action might be an apparent nohuman-fault accident where nature is to blame (e.g., asteroid strike, giant
wave, alien invasion), but in which planetary survival nevertheless becomes

 Situating Speculative Child-Figures

9

precarious. Urban centers are typically threatened, flooded, or destroyed, but
a transport hub or military structure remains for temporary safety and worldsaving meetings. The plot progresses as humanity comes closer and closer to
the brink of extinction and a few good men are lost along the way. At the
climax, and after just the right amount of earthly destruction, the hero and
his ensemble save both the day and his family. Lastly, a proper humanity—
not what caused the destruction at the beginning of the story—emerges
(Weinstein & Colebrook, 2017), and oftentimes this is with/through/in the
figure of a child. However, this road to ecological and moral redemption in
speculative texts still often relies on figurations of terrorists and aliens via antiblackness, territorial displacements and new frontier continuities of settler
colonialism, and technoscience advancements rooted in capitalism, militarism,
and imperialism that instead of devastating humanity will somehow now save
it triumphantly. Summarized, the tropic plot line typically proceeds as follows:
(1) humanity is in trouble, (2) humanity is near extinction, (3) humanity is
saved, and (4) proper humanity is (re)becoming.
These are not the sorts of speculative stories I am overly interested in, but
they do serve as a point of departure. Instead, the stories I pull on feature
agentic child-figures who, in relation-with inhuman others, challenge
whiteness, challenge injustice, and challenge an ethics of restoration for worlds
built on violence. As a key hybrid-figure from the Broken Earth books featured
in Chapter 4 offers: “Don’t lament when those worlds fall. Rage that they were
built doomed in the first place” (Jemisin, 2017, p. 7). Amidst the turmoil of
these times, it is my belief that speculative fiction can apportion “windows
into alternative realities, even if it is just a glimpse, to challenge ever-present
narratives of inevitability” (Benjamin, 2016, p. 19). I do not mean this as a
form of escapism where the climate crisis disappears from present concern,
but that white supremacy, settler colonialism, fossil fuel extraction, and antiblackness are not inevitable. The future is not (yet) written in stone. The
speculative engenders imaginaries of not this, as in refusal of present systems
and subjectivities; not yet, as in what might be to come; and what if, as in
generative possibilities.
For my purposes, an important amendment follows this section’s opening
quotation. The sentence continues: “fantasies of apocalypse . . . also take us
beyond this epoch [to] what might be to come” (Ginn, 2015, p. 352). While

 10

Anthropocene Childhoods

what is “to come” is often depicted as an amplified intensification of the same,
that is not the only vision available. Critical imaginings also exist as a form of
“social dreaming that makes different futures possible” (Gergen et al., 2018,
p. 5). These are speculative gestures that are an “Otherwise than this” (Crawley,
2015, para. 18). Much of this important work is found in Indigenous Futurisms
and Afro-futurisms/Afrofuturisms.7 While each genre has its own genealogy,
artists, authors, theorists, and audiences—and the futures they animate might
not be entirely commensurable—they do come together in that “whenever
we envision a world without war, without prisons, without capitalism, we
are producing speculative fiction” (Imarisha, 2015, p. 10). My contribution
to these discussions is better understood to be in conversation with, and to
be read alongside, Indigenous futurities and Afro-futurisms, wherein I turn
my critical lens on those for whom the future is not necessarily a critical act
of imagination but an accumulative continuation. This means having to ask
hard questions of myself with regard to my social justice values and social
positionings and how they impact my work in Childhood Studies. Summed
up by Frank B. Wilderson III (2014) in the context of #BlackLivesMatter, and
for which I am included in his “they”: “Because what are they trying to do?
They’re trying to build a better world. What are we trying to do? We’re trying
to destroy the world. Two irreconcilable projects” (p. 20). Some speculative
futures exist where settlerness and anti-blackness do not, and, as such, there
are limits to my telling.

Situating Anthropocene Childhoods
I locate my work in the interdisciplinary field of Childhood Studies. As such,
I am able to draw on a range of theoretical perspectives including critical
theory, Black studies, Indigenous studies, environmental humanities, and
feminist theory to think through ideas related to children and childhoods.
Childhood Studies also has its own genealogy, short in duration compared with
more traditional disciplines, but a field that has contributed much important
scholarship since the mid-1990s. Its field-defining mantra in the early years
was, “the immaturity of children is a biological fact of life but the ways in
which it is understood and made meaningful is a fact of culture” (James &

 Situating Speculative Child-Figures

11

Prout, 1997, p. 7). In this, we see two major forces at work: the biological and
the social. We can also see how the biological is taken-for-granted as the raw
stuff of childhood that is given meaning by culture. But this is not the only
way the terms have been approached. By way of providing a context for the
emergence of Anthropocene Child, I organize this section in terms of four
themes: biosocial waves, childhood innocence, child-future joins, and the
figure of the child as origin for a particular version of the human.

Biosocial Waves
A short history of Childhood Studies can be told as two movements or waves
(Ryan, 2011). The first wave is recognizable by a strong emphasis on the social
construction of childhood. Scholars put forth an understanding of childhood
as a multifaceted phenomenon that differs over time and place. Discourse,
language, and power were all key analytical values. There was also a push to
appreciate children as agentic citizens valued for who they are in the here
and now—as powerful social actors with unique cultures not solely beholden
to adult desires—as beings and not just becomings (Qvortrup, 2009). The
emphasis on social agency and social construction were, in part, a response
to the dominance of child developmental science in child-related fields. Select
psychological theories and methods were popularized that made claims to know
the interworkings of children, reveal universal sequences of development, and
provide pedagogical formulas for the right ingredients to grow children into
productive adults. At this point, the biological largely became interchangeable
with a form of positivistic child development knowledge that held up the
figure of the “natural” child as subject and their interiority as object. The first
wave set up a binary divide between the social and the biological (Lee, 2013;
Lee & Motzkau, 2011), which took various forms, for example, nature/nurture
or nature/culture, but the social drove research, theorizing, and publication.
What resulted from this first wave were two delimited positions: the first
reduced childhood to an opposition whereby either biological or social
understandings were dominant, and the second was additive in that figuring
out an optimal combination of nature and nurture factors was the goal (Prout,
2005; Taylor, 2013). There were also critiques from within the field that the
complexity of biological perspectives was reduced or at least left behind in an

 12

Anthropocene Childhoods

overwhelming emphasis on social constructionism (e.g., Lee & Motzaku, 2011;
Prout, 2005). My understanding is that the critiques of developmentalism were
not a rejection of the biological in total, but a challenge to any presumption
that biological development is universal, fixed, deterministic, and teleological
(e.g., Burman, 2017). While important, this emphasis did not always presume
a full picture of how the biological is exercised, lived, and understood.8 This is
partly why I do not think the challenge to biological ontologies of childhood
is complete—their power in shaping conceptions of the human continues. If
anything, I think the biological subsumes the social in most child-related fields,
and not the other way around, which is why I use the term bionormative in this
book. Nevertheless, as the field of Childhood Studies developed, important
questions were raised about the limits of dualistic thinking. A key challenge
that signaled a second wave was whether “just two categories are enough to
describe, let alone generate questions about, the great diversity of childhoods
and children” (Lee, 2013, p. 19).
In advocating for a hybrid model of childhood, Alan Prout (2005) was a
major instigating figure of the second wave. Instead of treating the biological
and the social as separate entities, childhood is appreciated as a multiplicity of
nature-cultures. What counts as natures-cultures is expansive and includes a
heterogeneous “variety of material, discursive, cultural, natural, technological,
human and non-human resources” (p. 3). Other binaries also proved to be
limiting, including the supposed theory/practice divide, which, once dissolved,
could draw “sensing bodies, matter and material environments—spaces and
places” together (Lenz-Taughi, 2010, p. 3). This emphasis on matter and
relationality is emblematic of the second wave shift away from postmodern
and poststructural “deconstructive” analyses toward posthuman and new
materialist “reconstructive” practices (Taylor, 2013). Prout’s initial push has
now been generatively and generously expanded upon in ways that decenter
the child by shifting focus from hybrid childhoods to relational wordings (e.g.,
Cutter-Mackenzie-Knowles et al., 2020; Diaz-Diaz & Semenec, 2020).
The two waves story of Childhood Studies is a particular telling. It is
condensed and glosses over the many specificities that make the field so
enticing to me. Still, I am drawn to waves because they do not conjure up a
process of discardment. A wave may run its course but as it laps up on shore
it intermingles with what comes next: a second wave contains the first in its

 Situating Speculative Child-Figures

13

composition. I also like wave imagery because it opens up to diffraction (Barad,
2007; Haraway, 2004). If I throw rocks into the water, waves will redirect, bend,
curve, and spread out. The ripples will crossover and remake each other. There
is interference. I think diffraction might be a better characterization for much
current Childhood Studies work rather than a third wave. Children’s everyday
relations with place, materials, animals, and other species coarsely summarizes
important research and theorizing currently being undertaken, including
scholarship from members of the Common World Research Collection (n.d.)
that pushes beyond a bio-social mixing to “engage the relational webs in which
children already live” (Kraftl, 2020, p. 7). This includes separate ethnographic
works by Margaret Somerville (2017) and Karen Malone (2017) who each
refer to their young co-researchers as “Children of the Anthropocene.” These
children are “born into a different understanding of the stability of the world,
into a storied future of inevitable entanglement in the fate of the planet”
(Somerville, 2017, p. 399). I am hopeful that my contribution can add another
interference pattern to Childhood Studies, one that is left out of Prout’s natureculture listing above: geos.
I approach the Anthropocene as a condition of possibility for a geosreconfiguration of contemporary childhoods. As an everyday example,
I think we are comfortable enough with the fact that human bodies are made
up of a lot of bacteria but we have been a little slower to acknowledge the
mineral entanglements. It seems less well known that “we’re also walking
rocks” (Ellsworth & Kruse, 2011, “Zuihitsu 2”).9 With geos I signify not only
the geological knowledge base and substance of the Anthropocene (e.g.,
rocks, minerals, mountains), but also how speculative child-figures “intraact” with inhuman figures (Barad, 2007).10 In this book, there are pathogens,
zombies, cyborgs, and the earth itself who become with child-figures in ways
that cannot be contained by a bio(socio)normative model of childhood. As
variations of monster-figures, many of the speculative child-figures in these
pages embody modalities of childhood that refuse a bionormative enclosure.
How might a turn toward “geos be a refusal of the child development
perspectives that shape” and delimit children’s worlds (Nxumalo, 2017,
p. 559)? My problematizing of bionormative childhoods is also intended
as an opening into larger discussions about “our present culture’s purely
biological definition of what it is to be, and therefore of what it is like to be,

 14

Anthropocene Childhoods

human” (Wynter, 2000, p. 180). How might the Anthropocene “realize the
child and the human in new ways” (Castañeda, 2002, p. 45)? Can figures of
Anthropocene Child prompt us to “re-imagine human origins and endings
within a geologic rather than an exclusively biological context” (Yusoff, 2016,
p. 5)? Can an antagonistic relation of bios and geos further dissolve into an
intradependent and generative relationship?

Child-Future Entanglements
Lee Edelman’s (2004) queer theory classic No Future knots the figure of the
child and the future together. The sacred, capital-letter Child of Edelman’s
“reproductive futurism” represents the symbolic encapsulation of a desired
social order made through a desirable future: the figure of the Child is the
“redemptive agent ensuring futurity” (Sellers, 2013, p. 71). Yet, the Child is
a figure of the horizon—always ahead, always obscured, always out of reach.
The Child as a universal, sentimental figure through which all matters of ethics
and politics are articulated is wavering. It is not that ethics and politics are no
longer spoken in their name, but that the child-figure’s supposedly redemptive
ability of “renewal of the barren world through the miracle of birth” is more
and more difficult amidst the climate crisis (Edelman, 1998, p. 21). Deputized
preemptively and perpetually as the future, the Child that Edelman rages
against “now stands for a future out-of-date” (Gill-Peterson et al., 2016, p. 495).
Edelman posits that the figure of the Child is “the pledge of a covenant that
shields us against the persistent threat of apocalypse now—or later” (p. 18).
But the world has changed since Edelman wrote his much-cited polemic: the
apocalypse seems all the more imminent and for many it is already here or has
already happened. In the Anthropocene, Edelman’s “no future” is no longer an
alternative to reproductive futurism but “a reflection of it under conditions of
catastrophic climate change” (Out of the Woods, 2015b, para. 20). However,
I want to question whether “no future,” as a thought-experiment, is necessarily
something to be refuted or if the end of the world might offer something
different.
In a review of key feminist, poststructural, and queer theory texts that
make use of the child-future join, Veronica Barnsley (2010) asks: “what
happens if the child-image fails to suggest a future?” (p. 328). Rather than

 Situating Speculative Child-Figures

15

attempt a preemptory response, I want to add a follow-up question. My
addendum: what if the future fails to suggest a child-figure? This question is
just as difficult to answer because it first seems not to suggest any difference
at all. Nevertheless, it does call the imbrication of the child and the future
to account differently, in that, at minimum, the order of reliance is reversed.
In other words, instead of the child-figure failing to suggest a future, the
Anthropocene makes thinkable that there is no future for the child. So, in
a bit of a twist, what if the appeal is not for the future or even for the child
but for the end of the world? What happens when the child as dual figure of
generational (familial) and species (human) survival encounters inhuman
planetary limits (Sheldon, 2016)?
Additionally, the Child that stands for the future in Edelman’s (2004)
treatise was never all children everywhere. Edelman’s Child is a privileged
figure endowed with assurances of a future that are denied to racialized
children. José Muñoz (2009) puts it succinctly: “The future is the stuff of some
kids. Racialized kids, queer kids, are not the sovereign princes of futurity”
(p. 95). Andrea Smith notes an incommensurability of Edelman’s Child with
Indigenous futurities. Smith (2010) quotes Colonel John Chivington of the
1864 Sand Creek massacre who told his fighters to not only kill the Indigenous
inhabitants but “to mutilate their reproductive organs and to kill their children
because ‘nits make lice’” (p. 50). “In this context,” Smith continues, “the Native
Child is not the guarantor of the reproductive future of white supremacy; it is
the nit that undoes it” (p. 50).
Exclusions within the category child also include, as Christina Sharpe
(2016) articulates, how “Black children are not seen as children” (p. 89). Black
children are either animalized, objectivized, sexualized, and/or adultized; they
are positioned “outside of the category of the child” (p. 89). A growing body of
empirical research confirms the unavailability of innocence to Black children:
they are often thought to be older than their biological years; associated with
animals, in particular, apes; and consistently judged as more culpable than
white peers (e.g., Dancy, 2014; Dumas & Nelson, 2016; Ferguson, 2001; Goff
et al., 2008, 2014; Ladson-Billings, 2011). Furthermore, Robin Bernstein’s
(2011) historical work in Racial Innocence maps the division of childhood into
white and Black tracks in the early nineteenth century. At that time, “black
children were libeled as unfeeling, noninnocent nonchildren” (p. 33), and

 16

Anthropocene Childhoods

white children became the embodiment of innocence. Bernstein argues that
childhood and innocence came together as inseparable concepts wherein each
re-invented the other, including their shared exclusions.

Childhood Innocence
The concurrence of childhood and innocence is pervasive in most childrelated disciplines, even though the pairing has a slippery, complicated, and
contested history. Much critical effort from scholars both in and outside
Childhood Studies has been spent challenging the naturalness and normalness
of this union rather than supporting innocence as something inherent to
children or childhoods. For example, important work has traced the historical
join of innocence and childhood to the invention of modernity (Aries, 1962;
Cunningham, 2006); problematized the image of the innocent child in relation
to early childhood pedagogies (Dahlberg et al., 2006); posited innocence as
the binary pivot between adult and child in narratives of social reproduction
(Katz, 2008; Malkki, 2010); located innocence as a geopolitical imaginary
of Northern childhoods used to perpetuate paternalistic discourses about
children elsewhere (Penn, 2007); and troubled the relation of innocence,
desire, and sexuality from queer and psychoanalytic perspectives (Blaise, 2005;
Davies, 1990; Kincaid, 1998; Robinson, 2008; Taylor, 2010; Stockton, 2009;
Walkerdine, 1997). Less familiar to childhood studies are critiques of childhood
innocence from perspectives of Black, Indigenous and environmental studies,
with some key exceptions that I will address next.
For Bernstein (2011), it is not possible to hold childhood in one hand
and innocence in the other because they are wholly sutured together. Since
at least the mid-nineteenth century, “childhood was not understood as
innocent but as innocence itself; not as a symbol of innocence but as its
embodiment” (p. 3). And from the start this “innocence was raced white”
(p. 3). Nevertheless, what typically happens is that the child-figure is wielded
as a “human shield against criticism” where a “universalized conception of
the innocent child effaces gender, class and racial differences, even if it holds
those differences in place” (Jenkins, 1998, p. 14). As Bernstein’s genealogical
work makes clear, however, childhood innocence is not universally available—
effacing difference may be the ideological intent but it is unfilled. Bernstein

 Situating Speculative Child-Figures

17

(2011) names “racial innocence” as the performative ability “to make political
projects appear innocuous, natural, and therefore justified” (p. 33). How does
the Anthropocene perform racial innocence? And how does the figure of the
innocent child work within environmental discourses of the Anthropocene?
Racial innocence transits from childhood through geology to
the Anthropocene in situations where social categories like race, class, gender,
ability, and location are said not matter to matter. Kathryn Yusoff (2018)
demonstrates how attributing innocence to geology is a strategy to naturalize
and neutralize anthropogenic climate change. The ongoing colonial theft of
minerals, bodies, and lands gets reframed in positive terms of accumulation,
modernization, and progress—a #BrightFuture. Yusoff challenges the “the
racial blindness of the Anthropocene as a willful blindness”—and therefore a
performance of forgetting that Bernstein suggests accompanies innocence—
that relates to the normalization of geology as a field of study whose objects of
knowledge (e.g., rocks, soil, minerals) exist naturally outside of politics. What this
idea overlooks are the intimate relationships of racialized peoples with inhuman
matter, which are discussed more fully in Chapter 4. Critical work in Childhood
Studies notes how developmental discourse acts as a recapitulation theory in
that the child’s development “is compared to the development of the species
(with the child as nature, as the origin of the species) from ‘savage’ to ‘civilized’”
(Murris, 2016, p. 81). Read with Yusoff ’s re-framing, the perceived innocence
of a geology that relies on divisions of human/inhuman, nature/culture, and
savage/civilized recapitulates childhood into an unexpected surround.

Anchoring the Human
Due to its tangled relationship with innocence and nature, children and
childhood have long been used to promote a certain understanding of
humanity. Succinctly stated, the child “is conceived as the origin of the human”
(Bignell, 2005, p. 380). Early childhood reconceptualist scholars Gaile Cannella
and Radhika Viruru (2004) argue that “part of the definition of what it means
to be human has been a construction of what is not human—humans are not
animals, humans are not part of the earth, humans are not inanimate, and so
forth” (p. 35; emphasis added). What is most interesting to me is how the child
fits spectrally into this listing as a “not-quite human being” (Lury, 2010, p. 284).

 18

Anthropocene Childhoods

From Darwin’s daddy diary to Rousseau’s romanticism of nature-as-teacher,
the child has been positioned close to nature, including modern-day picture
books and films that show the child as intimate kin with animals (Taylor,
2013). Tyson Lewis (2012) explains, “children have always been precariously
placed in a zone of indistinction between ‘not yet’ fully human and ‘no longer’
simply animals” (p. 285). However, all this boundary play is only tolerable
when the innocent white child is the referent. The child as not-quite and lessthan fully human takes on other meanings when anti-blackness, colonialism,
and Indigeneity are considered. In a world where #BlackLivesMatter faces
such potent resistance, the Black child is animal, the Black child is primitive,
the Black child is non-sentient—as in impervious to pain. Not close but is. And
unlike the white child, the Black child cannot develop or mature out of it. I do
not intend this as the truth of Black children but the “truth for” a particular
understanding of the human today that is based in anti-blackness (Wynter,
2003). Similarly, though not thought through enough in my work, the figure
of the Indigenous child shares much of this spacing with the Black child. As
one note of difference, however, the Indigenous child is not close to nature and
animals but too animist in their kin relations.
Working in a deconstructive historical mode, Wynter (2000) understands
stories as narrating a “specific genre of being human” into reproductive
circulation (p. 196). These stories are not the truth of the human but the
“truth-for” a specific version of the human—not humanity in toto but “partial
humanisms” (p. 196). These stories—for example, the story of positivistic
child development science—provide a framework through which humans are
initiated into worlds and then make sense of themselves within these worlds:
children are born(e) into stories and live these stories into temporal existence.
What this also means is that the story of the Anthropocene and the figure of
Anthropos have inclusions and exclusions already built into the script; however,
the story is not determined once and for all. It is possible to “give humanness
a different future” (Wynter & McKittrick, 2015, p. 9), and to write new genres
and new worlds into being. This is why it is important for Wynter and her
followers to speak of genres of “being human as praxis” and “as performative
enactment,” rather than take the human-as-Man as given and timeless (p. 31).
Wynter (2000) traces the current genre of the human to “the history of the
expansion of the West from the fifteenth century onwards” (p. 198). Wynter

 Situating Speculative Child-Figures

19

(1995a) argues that colonialism insisted upon a species account of humanness,
which entailed a move away from theology toward biology in constituting the
human and rationalizing conquest. This new bio-based humanity found its
origin story in Darwin’s evolutionary narrative which parses humans into
naturally selected and dysselected categories (Wynter, 2003). In Wynter’s
words, this is “our present Darwinian dysselected by Evolution until proven
otherwise descriptive statement of the human on the biocentric model of a
natural organism” (p. 267). In other words, since Darwin, the dominant story
about the human is that “we are biological beings” (Wynter, 2005, p. 361). What
follows as a logical outgrowth from the “biocentric conception of the human”
is “race and racism” (p. 361). This “descriptive statement” of the human maps
onto current biopolitical differentiations of whiteness/blackness and settler/
Indigenous, and continues to become-with histories and practices of violence,
genocide, slavery, extraction, and coloniality (Wynter, 2000, p. 198). It also
maps onto childhood as a recapitulation theory.
Wynter points to the importance of Darwin in creating the biocentric
human through the story of evolutionary theory. Darwin is also an important
figure in the institutionalization of the study of childhood; he published the
first diary of infant development in 1877 (Burman, 2017; Mayall, 2013). In
part, Darwin’s evolutionary ideas were developed through observations he
made about his own children. In them, he perceived that “having had little
time to learn, [children] were close to nature and so provided a route into
adult understanding of what it is to be human” (Prout, 2005, p. 4). Darwin
tracked development patterns of his children which were then scaled up to
indicate the development of the human species as a whole, or, better said, the
racialized and hierarchical story of the human. Another way of stating this
is ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny, explained as “individual development
repeats, in foreshortened time, the development of the species” (Ryan,
2011, p. 448). The result is a racialized, paternalized, and hierarchical story
of the human where so-called primitive races are said to stall at the level of
development of a small child.
This biocentric genre of the human has become, as expressed by Wynter
(2015), “the overrepresentation of Man as the human itself,” and, therefore,
understood as “truth-in-general” instead of a “genre-specific order of truth
through which we know reality” (p. 32). As noted, Wynter does not accept the

 20

Anthropocene Childhoods

Overrepresentation of Man as the human as inevitable and “offers a different
origin narrative possibility” (p. 31). To do this, Wynter extends Franz Fanon’s
work to redefine the human as a hybrid being, both bios and mythoi, which
might “draw attention to the relativity and original multiplicity of our genres
of being human” (pp. 31–2). Another way to say this is that “besides ontogeny
and phylogeny stands sociogeny” (Fanon, 1967, p. 11). Human beings “exist
not as purely natural or biocentric beings or selves, but also are inscribed as
specific modes or genres (types, kinds) of being human” (Kromidas, 2019,
p. 68). Loosely translated, this human is biology and story—we are homo
narrans (Wynter & McKittrick, 2015), which adds a layer of analysis to my
exploration of speculative child-figures and texts in the chapters to come. Bios
and mythoi entangle to make the human: “Human beings are magical. Bios
and Logos. Words made flesh, muscle and bone animated by hope and desire,
belief materialized in deeds, deeds which crystallize our actualities . . . And the
maps of spring always have to be redrawn again, in undared forms” (Wynter,
1995b, p. 35).
Part of me is tempted to connect this emphasis on social and story back
to the constructionism and hybridity of the two waves of Childhood Studies.
However, this would ellipse the openness and situatedness of Wynter’s
(2005) invitation for a new counter-poetics. Stories, genres, and descriptive
statements are inscriptive, and they are lived out adaptively in “response to
the ecological as well as to the geopolitical circumstances in which we find
ourselves” (Wynter, 2005, p. 361). Additionally, the social, does not only have
to signify Man or even the human; there are versions of “more than-human
sociality in which nonhumans are also seen as fully social, as beings engaged
in webs of world-making relations” (Palsson & Swanson, 2016, p. 151). These
narrative possibilities are geostories, which encompass humans and earthly
actors of all sort including the geologic, and stand for a return to story “back
to the ground” (Latour, 2014, p. 17). Geostories grapple with openings that
can extend enough for new worlds, new relationships, and new humans to
be imagined (Haraway, 2016). These stories can rewrite the frames of how
the world is normally understood; for example, the child-orogenes of Broken
Earth exist in symbiosis with geological forces rather than only biological
ones. Geostories have implications for Childhood Studies, the Anthropocene,
and the remaking of the human.

 Situating Speculative Child-Figures

21

Chapter Outlines
Each chapter in this book performs a close reading of a speculative geostory
through directed attention to figures of Anthropocene Child. A close reading,
in my terms, is not unequivocally faithful to its original in that I foreground
certain frames more than others. Bringing texts and figures together can also
produce something new that was not there originally. I do try to respect the
speculative texts I draw from by treating them as theory—this does not mean
that I do not engage and respond, but that the plot points, dialogue, character,
and setting contribute important commentary on the Anthropocene. My main
emphasis will be on how the child-figures engage with the end of the world—
in its various formations—in order to re-imagine geos-futurities.
In Chapter 2, “Geontological Figurations of Anthropocene Child,” I
look to how geos-inspired reconfigurations of childhood might stand up to
biocentric formulations of the human. While I do not want to disavow the
child’s entanglement with bios—as if such an eclipsing were possible—I
do want to complicate it as an entrenched mode of knowing childhood. To
do this I draw on Elizabeth Povinelli’s (2016) work on geontology as a way to
figure forth alternative childhood imaginaries that engage with divisions of
life and nonlife. According to Povinelli, geontology breaks with a biopolitical
assumption that power works via tactics of making live and letting die and is
instead concerned with maintaining the division of life from nonlife. The three
figures Povinelli finds illustrative of this form of governance are the Desert, the
Animist, and the Virus. In this chapter, I pursue how speculative child-figures
intersect with Povinelli’s geontological figures. The Boy with the Bones makes
a reappearance in this chapter in a discussion of the Desert as the infiltration
of nonlife into the lively domain of childhood. Hushpuppy from Beasts of the
Southern Wild (Zeitlan, 2012) is a key Animist figure in my assessment of
geontology as she forefronts concerns about multispecies relations, racialized
structures of abandonment, and the ethical harms of locating hope for the
future in the precarious child-figure. Additionally, I turn to Métis author
Cherie Dimaline’s (2017) speculative novel The Marrow Thieves, in which the
child-figures care for each other and their more-than-human kin in order to
endure another settler apocalypse. There is no heroic individual in this text
and no kin are abandoned; there is a multigenerational, multi-Nation, viral

 22

Anthropocene Childhoods

form of community wherein Indigenous children set in motion a liveable
future through resurgent relations to language, land, and each other. The
generative premise and promise of geontological childhoods carry through
the remaining chapters in this book.
In Chapter 3, “Infecting Whiteness: Child-Monsters at the End of the
World,” I spotlight Melanie, a zombie child called a “hungry” in the novel
and film The Girl with All the Gifts (Carey, 2014; McCarthy & Carey, 2016).
Melanie troubles the strict bionormative construction of a human child.
She is a hybrid-child who is infected by a fungal pathogen that has made
mindless, flesh-eating zombies of the rest of humankind. Hungry-children
are not typical zombie-figures; they are conscious yet imprisoned because
their child-bodies hold a potential cure. Importantly, between the novel and
film Melanie racebends. The film’s visualization of Melanie as a young Black
girl-figure allows me to problematize allocations of humanness. This includes
how Melanie must symbiogenetically become-with pathogen in order to
survive, how a world on fire instigates processes of regeneration, and how an
otherwise world not defined by human exceptionalism might arise in the wake
of destruction. Throughout the chapter, I foreground the work of Black Studies
scholars who theorize the end of the whiteness as a means to create different
systems, forms of belonging, and futurities.
In Chapter 4, “Becoming-Geos: The Stratification of Childhood,” my
speculative companion is Nassun, a child-orogene in N. K. Jemisin’s (2015,
2016, 2017) Broken Earth trilogy. Orogeny is a geologic term that refers to
how mountains are made overtime by seismic displacements in an upward
folding of the earth’s crust. Orogenes in Jemisin’s world have geos-powers
derived from the earth. An example of their abilities is that they can quell
or cause earthquakes. This chapter continues the task of reconfiguring biosgeos childhoods by looking at how the biological and geological subtend each
other. Orogene abilities derive from an innate biological embedment in their
brain stems, which allows them to affect and be affected by the earth’s forces.
Transposed as an Anthropocene geos-subjectivity, orogenes are recognized as
becoming-with strata (Yusoff, 2016). The final section of the chapter considers
how Jemisin frames the end of the world as not a singularity but a multiplicity.
Apocalypse in Broken Earth is a recurrent phenomenon which mirrors what
this world has been for many racialized peoples. It is catastrophe on repeat.

 Situating Speculative Child-Figures

23

I take seriously the provocation that as one world ends another begins. This
impetus to rebuild after the end of the world puts a shudder into teleological
announcements of end times.
The fifth chapter, “Monstrous Love for Regenerative Cyborgs,” brings
together a mismatch of contemporary theorists and figures. The chapter opens
with Bruno Latour (2011) and his re-reading Frankenstein as an analogy for
the Anthropocene condition. Latour argues that Dr. Frankenstein’s true sin is
neither invention nor hubris, but that the doctor abandoned his creature to the
world. The figurative leap Latour makes is that “we” should treat technoscience
creations like children and “love our monsters.” From my Childhood Studies
standpoint, the equivocation of technological invention and child caretaking
raises concerns that are examined in this chapter as a way to foster a speculative
ethics of critical feminist care. The central speculative text in this chapter
is Ruha Benjamin’s (2016) “Ferguson is the Future,” which is a short story
that gives Black Lives Matter an Afrofuturistic face in the techno-scientific
regeneration of young Black lives ended prematurely by police violence. The
story’s main characters take the names of children who have been killed in this
world and who are re-born as child-cyborgs in Benjamin’s speculative world.
In the story, a political reparations movement has been advanced alongside
scientific stem cell technologies so that Black children murdered by police are
given a second life. This again complicates a straight-forward understanding
of biological determined childhoods. In re-imagining cyborg figures that test
divisions of life and nonlife, Benjamin’s story encourage critical scholars to
“anticipate and intervene” now in racialized “logics of extinction” (p. 22).
Chapter 6, “Parental Stewardship: Bionormative Care as Environmental
Surrogate,” shifts focus from the child-figure to the parental relationship within
conditions of climate crisis. My concern is how bio-care and environmental
stewardship interchange for one another in the Anthropocene. In other
words, I aim to make problematic “parental love as the antithesis and antidote
to environmental destruction” (Johns-Putra, 2016, p. 521). To do so I look
to parental figures, mothers specifically, in The Handmaid’s Tale television
adaption of Margaret Atwood’s (1986) novel who refuse to abandon their
offspring. This refusal comes at a price as the parents make all else secondary. It
may seem at first that this kind of intense parental care is a refusal of Sheldon’s
(2016) swing from the child in need of protection to the one who does the

 24

Anthropocene Childhoods

saving, but, while these texts put the relation in tension, I do not think they
void the transition. Instead, racialized heteronormative fertility, preservation
of the human species, and the threat of a dying earth reinforce the figure of the
child as futurity. In apocalyptic texts of this sort, I contend that child survival
becomes a metonym for species survival and parental love becomes analogue
to “planetary stewardship” (Steffen et al., 2011). As such, it is the bionormative
parent-child relationship that is the focus of this chapter rather than a specific
child-figure per se, and how the devastation of this bio-bond reflects “anxieties
surrounding the demise of white supremacy” via the family form at the end of
the world (Joo, 2018, p. 4).
In the final chapter, “Educational Imaginaries for Child-Climate Futures,”
I challenge Edelman’s (2004) declaration that the figure of the Child must not
“be confused with the lived experiences of any actual . . . children” (p. 11). I do
not think the lines between child-figures and children are so clear cut; instead,
they are entangled. It is not a 1:1 correspondence, but it is a relationship.
As such, I try to keep Povinelli’s (2013) cautionary words in mind when
working with child-figures: “Why don’t we ever ask what it is like to be this
figure?” Some related questions that move between worlds and challenge any
borders between them include: What is it to be a toxic-child? What is it to
be “born pre-polluted” (MacKendrick & Cairns, 2019)? What is it to be the
one who is supposed to save? Can thinking-with child-figures at the end of
the world grapple with the kinds of conditions, resources, and imaginaries
required to capacitate lives actually capable of flourishing? To engage these
concerns, I consider the value of speculative fiction for thinking differently
about children, childhoods, and the future. It can be both an exercise in cruel
optimism (Berlant, 2011) and a “necessary experiment” in living and relating
otherwise (Nxumalo & ross, 2019). I also gather figures of Anthropocene Child
from earlier chapters together in order to think-with speculative proposals for
educational futures from the Common Worlds Research Collective (2020) in
hopes of learning to live well together with life and nonlife.

 ­2

Geontological Figurations of
Anthropocene Childhoods

Initiated by Michel Foucault (2003 [1976]), analyses of contemporary forms
of governance tend to map a shift from sovereign power (i.e., “take life or let
live”) to biopower (i.e., “make live and let die”) in order to explain how power
is structured and lived today (p. 241). The central figures of these formations
have always been humans: our institutions, our heath, our behaviors, our
sexuality, our economics, our education. However, for Elizabeth Povinelli
(2016) and geontologies, a different relation subtends sovereign, disciplinary,
and biopolitical divisions, that of life and nonlife. Whether taketh and giveth,
life and death occupy the same side of the governmental equation: Life (Life
{birth, growth, reproduction} v. Death) v. Nonlife (p. 9). Life and death are
differences in degree, but not differences in kind. Understood in geontological
terms, life instantiates a “biontological enclosure of existence” (Povinelli et al.,
2017, p. 171), which necessitates that a difference be made and stayed between
lively/inert, sentient/unfeeling, animate/inanimate, organic/inorganic, and
bios/geos. What is being exposed by the climate crisis and the accompanying
Anthropocene discussion however is the “trembling architecture” of this
division (Povinelli, 2016, p. 16). There is growing awareness of human impact
and reliance on nonlife—nonlife also has a major effect on human well-being.
That said, bios and geos have never been wholly separate—it is biosgeos all the
way down.
As a strategy of governance, the life versus nonlife division has been
deployed destructively and racializingly as an “attribution of an inability of
various colonized people to differentiate the kinds of things that have agency,
subjectivity, and intentionality” (Povinelli, 2016, p. 5). In terms of settler

 26

Anthropocene Childhoods

colonial techniques, an alternative ontological understanding of nonlife
provides an ongoing rationale for casting Indigenous peoples within “a
premodern mentality and a postrecognition difference” (p. 5). In other words,
Indigenous difference can be acknowledged (both as less than and as different
than) so long as it does not disrupt dominant arrangements of settler colonial
governance (Povinelli, 2011). Nonlife can be kin, can be sentient, so long as
settler superiority is not altered. Povinelli (1995) shares a story of a government
official attending a speech by her Indigenous friends about a sacred Dreaming
site named Old Man Rock. At one point during the talk, a friend turns to
Povinelli and asks: “He can’t believe, eh, Beth?” (p. 505). Povinelli answers, in
part, “He doesn’t think she is lying. He just can’t believe himself that Old Man
Rock listens” (p. 505). The snippet provides an example of how the “cunning
of recognition” operates in ways in which a belief is acceptable but an analytics
of truth is not (Povinelli, 2002). Nothing has to change if the official believes
these women believe what they say, but if it were accepted as truth that Old
Man Rock listens then the Dreaming could not be destroyed for mining or
other extractive economies. Different modes of existence, relationship, and
responsibility would be necessary. That Indigenous peoples believe rocks can
listen, and that politicians believe Indigenous peoples believe this, poses no
real threat to late liberal modes of settler colonial governance. Such recognition
actually supports these modes in the sense that a multicultural space can be
provide for the expression, and even celebration, of alternative beliefs, while
nonlife can still be dug up, polluted, and destroyed.

Generating Geontological Childhoods
In Geontologies: A Requiem to Late Liberalism, Povinelli (2016) lays out
variations in how the division of life and nonlife has been performed. Life
and nonlife often take form as that “which supposedly arrives into existence
inert and that which arrives with an active potentiality” (p. 173), for example,
the sort of difference between a stone and a baby. When I hear the last clause
of the quotation—active potentiality—I am taken to the figure of the child
as the dominant imaginary of life. In the formula presented above, Life (Life
{birth, growth, reproduction} v. Death) v. Nonlife, the bionormative child is

 Geontological Figurations

27

perhaps the superlative embodiment of the first polynomial expression. Each
bracketed term of Life—birth, growth, and reproduction—is foundational to
the child’s developmental constitution as origin of the human. This includes
how power operates in late liberalism, particularly by linking the child to the
future (Edelman, 2004). The equation might be even be rewritten Life (Child
v. Death) v. Nonlife. The figure of the child’s placement on side of life is not
only due to its biological beginnings but also to its social constitution. This
involves the dominant ideas of Childhood Studies outlined in the last chapter:
childhood is a social construction and children are social actors. The relations
of biological and the social with child-related disciplines can be summarized
as: Nature + culture = childhood? and Childhood = the biological +/– the social?
(Ryan, 2011, pp. 443 & 446). The first is an additive approach where nature and
culture exist as “incommensurable entities that are then seen as contributing
a distinct proportion of the material that goes into the making of childhood”
(Prout, 2005, p. 3). The latter expression aims to capture how “Western
childhood is at once a biosocial process of formation and a biosocial mode of
power” (Ryan, 2011, p. 446). Analytically and heuristically the biological and
social can be pulled apart in the (re)making of childhoods, but in actuality
their contributions are undividable and remain solidly on Life’s side.
My interest is not to heavily dissect the components of the childhood
equations but to point out that each expression of bio-social dualism (Lee
& Motzkau, 2011), and even its hybridization (Prout, 2005), still generates
a formula of Life=Childhood. Life then becomes a condition of possibility
for childhood, whereas nonlife, for the most part, gets pushed out of view
or is made oppositional. Edelman argues that the figure of the Child is the
symbolic-referent around which the entire political enterprise turns. “The
Child,” Lee Edelman (2004) writes, “has come to embody for us the telos of
the social order and came to be seen as the one for whom that order is held in
perpetual trust” (p. 11). The figure of the child as such, made possible in the
above equations (i.e., figurations), depends on its tie to life and life depends
on it. The future that the child epitomizes, and that Edelman rallies against,
is not possible if the child is attached to nonlife. The provocation I want to
offer is Life (Child) v. Nonlife (Child), where the versus is less of an opposition
and more of a relation. The child in this expression is always intra-acting with
something and/or someone else.

 28

Anthropocene Childhoods

The biosocial child is when, where, and whom “the appeal of life—in it’s
newness, it’s potentiality, it’s vulnerability—is at its most intense” (Clark,
2017, p. 4). Nigel Clark (2017) posits that precisely because of this intensity
is a potential to “begin thinking beyond biological life” (p. 4), which entails
thinking beyond human exceptionalism as well. A disarticulation of bios from
the human might open up to forms of otherwise existence. As mentioned in the
introduction, my touchstone for an understanding of bionormative childhoods
is a rich body of work from Childhood Studies that problematizes an image of
the child as a naturalized developmental subject (e.g., Burman, 2017; Canella,
1997; Fendler, 2001; Pacini-Ketchabaw, 2011; Taylor, 2013). This child-figure
is rendered knowable by deficit-based scientific theories and constructed as an
incomplete and disempowered becoming who is acted upon by adults.1 This
child is the center of much research and pedagogy. Also contained within the
bionormative frame is a narrow conception of family based on a heterosexist
parental regime of shared genetic code (Baker, 2008; TallBear, 2019). While a
bionormative imaginary has long structured work in child-related disciplines,
I want to add speculative forms of geos to the equation and shift the child from
a center position toward emplacement with more worldly relations.
In thinking-with figures of Anthropocene Child, I move through a three-tier
framework that engages with geontological provocations. This arrangement
builds on Rebekah Sheldon’s (2016) noticing of a shift from the image of the
child in need of protection to the child tasked with doing the protecting, but
add a layer of resistance to the heightened demand. Firstly, child-figures reflect
problematics of the contemporary world without interrupting dominant
patterns of thought, materiality, and governance. Here, the child is the future
and the future is the child. The figure of the child upholds a biosocial dualism,
even in its contestation. Secondly, child-figures are tasked with protecting a
world in which they have been made disposable. This incites critical questions
about distributions of racialized harm and also exposes the limits of survivalist
logics. These child-figures struggle with the versus in the geontological formula
(Life vs. Nonlife); it disciplines, it racializes, and it consumes them. Thirdly,
child-figures refuse current arrangements of existence and set in motion new
worlds, even if the contours, forces, and politics cannot yet be fully described.
These are child-figures who are in symbiotic relations with nonlife, and
therefore cannot be solely positioned on the side of life, especially when the

 Geontological Figurations

29

end of the world is their timespace. These child-figures largely maintain the
agency that biosocial understandings attribute to them, but it gets refigured
and redistributed as relationality is their true superpower. Taken together, this
framework allows me to grapple with speculative geontological figures and
figurations of worlds that are not this, not yet, and what if.

­Figures of Geontology
To recap, geontology is a contemporary mode of governance concerned with
maintaining the division of life from nonlife. This perceived rift is under
increasing pressure by the climate crisis, which is to say that geontology is
not so much new as newly visible (Povinelli, 2016). The three figures Povinelli
finds illustrative of geontology are the Desert, the Animist, and the Virus.
For Povinelli these figures are not escapes from power but symptoms of how
it works and also where it fails. Povinelli’s three figures “represent the nodal
points in contemporary struggles to make sense of a current destabilization of
this foundation division” between life and nonlife, including the Anthropocene
defining proclamation of humans as a geologic force (p. 16). The figures can be
summarized as follows:
The Desert stands for discourses and strategies that re-stabilize the difference
between life and nonlife by asking how we can stop the drift of life into
the inert; the Animist discounts the difference between nonlife and life by
claiming everything is alive with potentiality; and the Virus uses and ignores
the division for the purpose of diverting its energies in order to extend itself.
(p. 173)

Returning again to the formula cited earlier assists my explanation: Life
(Life{birth, growth, reproduction}v. Death) v. Nonlife. Applied to the figures,
the Desert reaffirms the versus between life and nonlife, the Animist dissolves
it, and the Virus jumps back and forth over it. Povinelli presses on the point
that these figures are neither exits nor escapes from power, nor are they the
answer to anthropocentric climate change. They are symptoms, not solutions;
for example, the take-away is not to all become animists now. Importantly,
these figures are also “not subjugated subjects waiting to be liberated” (p. 16).

 30

Anthropocene Childhoods

They already engage otherwise worlds even as they have to wade through the
environmental, economic, social, political, racial, and colonial destruction of
this one to endure.
Povinelli offers up the geontological figures with two caveats. The first is
that these figures are not seeking inclusion in dominant way of knowing and
being (i.e., life). These figures displace and confuse hard divisions of life/death
and bios/geos. They are expressions of a formation of power and “windows
into its operation,” and “not a repressed truth of human existence” that if only
widely known and accepted then things would automatically change (p. 15).
In settler capitalist societies in particular, much has been invested in keeping
life and nonlife epistemologically and ontologically separate. So to care about
and for geontological figures is not to (re)emplace them in the current order
of things, or to reverse relations of dominance (i.e., nonlife over life), but to
understand them “as a way station for the emergence of something else” (p. 15).
These figures are not entirely free from current governmental structures yet
are not completely enclosed within them either. They indicate possible worlds
otherwise than late settler liberalism and biopolitical rule.
Povinelli’s second provision is that the Desert, Animist, and Virus “are tools,
symptoms, figures, and diagnostics” of late liberal settler governmentalities that
are not universally applicable or fixed. While Povinelli’s figures of geontology
find resemblance and connection with the speculative child-figures I study, I
am curious if texts and authors from other places and with other genealogies
would imagine differently. Late liberal settler modes of governance rely on
divisions of bios/geos but there are worlds in this world “in which these
enclosures are no longer, or have never been, relevant, sensible, or practical”
(p. 16). This has resonance with Claire Colebrook’s (2018) suggestion to rethink
the Anthropocene’s “concern with ends” by looking “to literary experiences
of what it is like to be already without a world, to have already experienced
social death” (p. 276). This alternative might generate something other than a
narcissistic imperative of “we ought to be saved” because the post-apocalypse
“might offer them a chance for existence” (p. 277). Colebrook is careful to
submit literary experiences as a source rather than literal ones, but she also
extends outside the text to peoples and communities who struggle “with the
experience of near-extinction well before the vogue of the post-apocalyptic”
(p. 277). I pull from these ideas that figures of governance might be different

 Geontological Figurations

31

in non-settler nations and economies, as they might be for communities that
have already had their worlds ended (Todd, 2015).
Figures of Anthropocene Child give heed to Povinelli’s geontologies. What
follows in this chapter is not about aligning child-figures absolutely into
Povinelli’s schemas but seeing what is possible when potential connections
are mapped out. There are many points of connection between the
speculative child-figures in the coming chapters and Povinelli’s three figures
of geontology. In this chapter however I overlay Povinelli’s figures with my
three-tiered arrangement by revisiting the Boy with Bones as a figure of
the Desert (Miller, 2018), Hushpuppy from Beast of the Southern Wild as a
figure of the Animist (Zeitlin, 2012), and a multi-age, multi-Nation group
of Indigenous child-figures in The Marrow Thieves as a figure of the Virus
(Dimaline, 2017).

Playing Desert: The Boy with the Bones
Povinelli’s figure of the Desert encapsulates the anxieties surrounding the
end of the world. By this I mean the disappearance of life—not only or even
mainly in relation to death—into nonlife. An Anthropocene-related term
for the ultimate withdrawal of vitality is extinction. For Povinelli, the Desert
“dramatizes the possibility that Life is always at threat from the creeping,
desiccating sands of Nonlife” (p. 19). The figure of the Desert stands for life
lost, life at risk of being lost, and also life that can be regained “with the correct
deployment of technological expertise or proper stewardship” (p. 17). This is
the kind of save-the-world mentality that motivates techo-utopic, survivalist
fantasies played out in Hollywood disaster blockbusters but that are also
evident in ecomodernist discourse. Nonlife awaits defeat in these worldings.
For the ecomodernists, a group I turn to in Chapter 6, deserts have not yet
been brought to life because humans “have not yet found an economic use for
them” (Asafu-Adjaye et al., 2015, p. 19). Povinelli makes a distinction between
the desert as a barren landscape and the figure of the Desert as an affect that
arouses a deep desire for liveliness, but the overlap is often difficult to tease
apart. An example of this would be the ongoing technoscience research seeking
to colonize Mars and the speculative films that imagine life lived abundantly
on this formerly barren frontier (e.g., The Martian, The Space between Us).

 32

Anthropocene Childhoods

An alternative example of the Desert from earlier in this book is the Boy with
the Bones (see Figure 1, Chapter 1), otherwise known as Harry Taylor, who is
pictured against a barren landscape playing with the bones of his family’s dead
livestock after a prolonged drought.
Photographer Brook Mitchell (2019) recounts the story of Harry and
his family after revisiting them a second time about a year after the first
photoshoot. The initial visit was ten months on from the New South Wales
state declaration that the region was in severe drought. At that time, some
places had received a bit of reprieve, but the town of Coonabarabran was still
severely affected. Mitchell described the scene at the family-run Windy Hill
farm as dire: “the dams were empty, the paddocks littered with the rotting
carcasses of fallen stock. Clouds of dust whipped up as cattle rushed for scarce
rations hand fed by the family” (para. 11). Harry was six years old at the time
and had recently asked for rain as his birthday wish. He did not get it. It would
be six more months until rain drops hit the dry soil. Harry made the same wish
at seven. This time heavy winter rains poured down on the farm. Greenery
was back—nonlife was life again. The headline from a local newspaper which
ran the updated pictures from Mitchell’s second visit read, “From dust bowl to
lush green land” (Wood, 2020). The new shots include Taylor standing amidst
waist-height healthy crops.
I found my thoughts wandering back to the Boy with Bones again given how
hard Warrumbungle Shire, New South Wales, was hit by fires in January 2020.
More than five million hectares were destroyed in the region, including more
than 2000 homes (BBC, 2020). A cycle of drought, regrowth, and fire is the
temporality the Boy with the Bones inherits and inhabits. Furthermore, I am
concerned about how drought brought about the end of the world for much
livestock and other nonhuman existents on the farm, and the fire may have
brought another catastrophe. Who among them survived the drought only to
have their world ended by the fires? What happened to the bones—did the
Boy’s playthings burn up? I am also thinking about what cannot die because
they are never considered to have lived in the first place; in other words, the
rocks, air, streams, and landscapes that have been altered by climatic events.
I recognize the Boy with the Bones as a figure of the Desert because his world
is where there was once much life but now that vitality is severely reduced only
to come back and be threatened yet again.

 Geontological Figurations

33

Povinelli’s figure of the Desert is where life might regenerate, particularly
given the right technoscience inventions. Windy Hill farm was renewed with
rainfall this time, but what will happen in the future if/when droughts or
fires return. What if Harry’s wish does not come true? Within this context,
the child-figure “signifies the future we (adults) threaten, the connection to
nature we (adults) have corrupted and the human spirit whose ingenuity will
overcome the (adult-made) disasters of the present” (Sheldon, 2016, p. 39).
This is to ask the Boy with the Bones to become protector against ecological
destruction and take-up premature death as his playthings. I have my doubts
about the likelihood of technoscience innovation to overcome anthropogenic
climate change, but that does not mean that creativity and resourcefulness do
not happen in smaller moments. In a way, looking back at the photo of the Boy
with the Bones, I imagine him having retained joy in play amidst destruction.
As a viewer of the photo, however, I wonder if my interpretation falls back upon
an image of the innocent child and their intimacy with the natural world that
has always been “raced white” (Bernstein, 2011, p. 8). Can my sentimentality
acknowledge that “joy is not innocence; it is openness to caring” (Haraway &
Tsing, 2019, p. 20)?
José Muñoz (2015) notes that “poor people of color, Indigenous people,
and people in the global South are punished and pathologized for their
improper engagement with nature/animals, namely, for survival and
sustenance rather than recreation or companionship” (p. 211). Have I been
reveling in thinking-with the Boy with the Bones within this formulation? In
another photo in the same original series, the Boy with the Bones is shown
against the same dark, dusty backdrop. However, this time he is standing tall
and in front of his face he is holding up a full-faced horned skull of a sheep.
In the caption, Mitchell explains that the Boy with the Bones calls this his
“monster hat” (see Figure 2). I am quite taken by this photo of becoming-boybecoming-animal-becoming-monster (Deleuze & Guattari, 1987). Yet, while
I see the posthuman potential, I am nevertheless uncomfortable with how I
am privileging the vitality of the Boy with the Bones over the dead sheep and
dying landscape. If I were to ask myself whose life is more valuable, it would
largely be a rhetorical exercise. I continue to grapple with these uncertainties
in Chapter 3 with Melanie and with Hushpuppy from Beasts of the Southern
Wild in the next section.

 34

Anthropocene Childhoods

Figure 2 Becoming Boy-Animal-Monster. Photo by Brook Mitchell @ Getty
­Images 2018.

­Saving the World: Burdens of Beasts
With the figure of the Desert, Povinelli (2016) captures “the drama of
constant peril of Life in relation to Nonlife” (p. 15), whereas a different drama
is embodied by the Animist. The difference between life and nonlife is not
significant to the Animist “because all forms of existence have within them
a vital animating, affecting force” (p. 15). There is no nonlife, not really.
A caricatured exclamation of the Animist is: “everything is alive and we are
all related.” The foremost figure of the Animist in the popular imagination
is Indigenous peoples. However, Indigenous peoples’ relations with morethan-humans have been used as a rationale for discipline in late liberal settler
governmentalities. Making kin with land and animals has not been respected.
It has been used as a rationale for discounting Indigenous ways of knowing
and being with the world, which, under dominant governmentalities, have
been described as illogical and as childish. Child psychologist Jean Piaget
claimed that very young children attribute feeling and intentions to inanimate
objects, like their teddy bears, but grow out of this belief as they progress
through stages of cognitive development and develop more sophisticated

 Geontological Figurations

35

thinking. I am not saying Indigenous understandings are the same as the
children Piaget observed, but drawing a parallel to the bigger discussion the
figure of the Animist encapsulates: who can be animist? A question I have
about the Anthropocene moment is whether this discounting of animism is
shifting. For example, Indigenous caretaking practices are now being sought
out as harm-reductive ways of caretaking for the planet. Is this recognition,
adaptation, assimilation, extractivism, honoring, or something else? The figure
of the Animist is not locked to Indigenous peoples in Povinelli’s formulation
either—New Age spiritual practitioners, new materialism/vitalism theorists,
and individuals who are neurodiverse like Temple Grandin are other
representatives of the Animist (p. 17). In sum, Animist figures are “those who
see an equivalence between all forms of life or who can see life where others
would see the lack of life” (p. 18). Examples from later chapters include the
orogenes of Broken Earth and their geos-powers. However, here I think-with
Hushpuppy as a figure of the Animist who reminds me that racialization needs
to be taken into account in posthuman suppositions.
Benh Zeitlin’s (2012) Beasts of the Southern Wild (hereafter Beasts) is
ecological fairy tale, magical realism, and a romanticization of survivalism
made more severe by environmental, racial, and economic inheritances. The
film opens with Hushpuppy (actor Quvenzhané Wallis) sculpting a sandcastlelike structure for a chick in the dirt. She holds the chick up against her cheek
and hears the heartbeat of the whole world before softly lowering the tiny
being onto its new abode. The camera pans out and the audience realizes
that the play is happening inside a ramshackle structure—Hushpuppy’s own
dirt castle. There is not much difference between Hushpuppy’s home and the
scrap yard outside, nor with her father’s tin-sheet shack that is located 100
feet away from her solitary encampment. Hushpuppy is six years old. This
is a “throwaway world” (Yaeger, 2013). In a uniform of stained white tank
top, underwear, and rubber boots, Hushpuppy checks the vitals of the pigs,
roosters, and dogs nearby. Without any fear of getting cinched, she presses
a crab flat to her face in order to hear its muted pulse. Later, she will do the
same for a leaf and her sick father. Hushpuppy is also the story’s narrator,
philosophizing off-screen about her actions on-screen, she tells us: “All the
time, everywhere, everything’s hearts are beating and squirting and talking to
each other” (2:26). In Hushpuppy’s world, everything is alive, and everything

 36

Anthropocene Childhoods

is connected. Hushpuppy is at one with animals and “at one in and with the
dirt” (Sharpe, 2013, para. 5). Hushpuppy’s animist oath is “the whole universe
depends on everything fitting together just right” (21:30).
Hushpuppy’s father, Wink, makes sporadic appearances. Wink’s
drunkenness and neglectfulness co-exist with his love of place and hypermasculinist ambition for his daughter to “beast it.” Wink also suffers from a
terminal blood disorder that impacts his heart health. After disappearing for
days Wink returns just in time to pluck Hushpuppy from her shack that is
ablaze. Terrified of her father’s anger, Hushpuppy runs off only to be caught
and struck down by Wink’s hand. Hushpuppy rises, closes her first, and hits
Wink in the chest. As Wink falls to the ground, Hushpuppy fantasizes about
the polar icecaps crashing into the ocean and a band of ancient aurochs
awakening from extinction. Simultaneously thunder rumbles in the distance
signifying an impending storm. Both the tempest and the beasts are moving
toward her in ways in which mysticism and realism meld into one another.
Hushpuppy seems to think that her punch set off this cascade of world ending
events: “Sometimes you break something so bad that it can’t get put back
together” (33:25). Familial dysfunction and climate disaster are intertwined
with the distribution and disposability of life in The Bathtub.
The Bathtub is an isolated bayou community literally sinking into the
waters of a post-Katrina world. Everyone and everything share space here: dirt,
animals, humans, ghosts, and the discarded possessions of capitalist materialism
that wash ashore. The Bathtub is cut off from the mainland by a levee system.
Only instead of keeping water out in a protective mode that failed in Katrina,
these levees are keeping the water in. When the big storm hits there is nowhere
for the water to go: The Bathtub is drowning. Much critical reception of the
film ignores the complexity of precarity and praises the portrayal of a multiracial, anti-capitalist community who just manage to make do. A multi-award
winner on the festival circuit, Beasts is heralded as “sheer poetry on screen: an
explosion of joy in the midst of startling squalor” (Lemire, 2013), “beautiful,
funny, timely and tender” (Wise, 2012), and “a blast of sheer, improbable joy”
(Scott, 2012). Conversely, all I can think about is a society with no sustained
chance of much of anything let alone flourishing. The Bathtub’s inhabitants
have to leave or die as the waters rise, and this inevitability stalks “the film’s
ambition to valorize feral human nature” (Nyong’o, 2015, p. 251).

 Geontological Figurations

37

There are scenes that distract from the effort, endurance, and exhaustion
of survival (Povinelli, 2011), and facilitate the audience and critic applause.
For example, Hushpuppy tells us that The Bathtub has more holidays than
anywhere else on earth. Their celebrations are joyful—there are drinks,
fireworks, music, laughter, and dancing in borderless fields. They often feast
together on bottomless volumes of fresh seafood, unburdened by formal
dining etiquette that might otherwise insist on plates and cutlery. On the film’s
promotional poster, Hushpuppy runs through the grass with massive bursts
of firelight pouring from the sprinklers in her hands. She seems magic. The
children go to school when they want; they play together and with animals
whenever they desire. Despite these moments, or maybe because I know they
cannot last, I share with Tavia Nyong’o (2015) an overwhelming “anxiety about
cinematic depictions of black (and other subaltern) people as primitives on a
continuum with nonhuman animals” (p. 251).
This leads me to the reception of Beasts in scholarly circles, which can
be gathered under two broad characterizations. First, much like the press
reviews, scholars render a story of multi-racial climate change resilience and
resistance—what Patricia Yaeger (2013) praises as “dirty ecology.” Second,
Beasts is received as relishing in a “romance of precarity” wherein any attention
to racialization makes the triumphant aspects of point one impossible and
irresponsible (Brown, 2013; Sharpe, 2013). In its most generative moments,
Beasts asks viewers to re-examine humanity’s relationship to the more-thanhuman world and how all existents are altered by climate change. Perhaps
though what I am most drawn to is the displacement of biological kinship as the
center point of relationships. The Bathtub is “a mixed-race, multi-generational
community that realizes humans are not at the top, or the center, of the world”
(Joo, 2018, p. 79). However, there is little time and space for animacy hierarchy
in a world so engrossed in everyday survival. This is why I hesitate to hold up
The Bathtub as some sort of bastion of alter-kin making. Hushpuppy tells a
stranger, “I can count all the times I’ve been lifted on two fingers” (1:18:35).
Valorizing non-bionormative kin-making in these circumstances overlooks
the fact that Hushpuppy is abandoned multiple times by multiple people
and multiple systems. While Beasts is “thoroughly critical of the idea of the
biological family as natural” (Joo, 2018, p. 80), its precarious patchworking of
kin is not an antidote to biocentric idealizations.

 38

Anthropocene Childhoods

A particularly intriguing assessment of Beasts comes from Yaeger (2013) in
her conceptualization of “dirty ecology.” Yaeger begins her analysis by noting
that Beasts serves as a synecdoche for America’s history of environmental
racism. However, after mentioning these racial politics, Yaeger moves on to
other things. In doing so, Yaeger argues that Beasts “refuses the realism of
social critique and advances instead into hubris land, into a new realm of
myth making for the twenty-first century” (para. 3). For Yaeger, the kinds
of critiques suggested in her opening lines, and which I detail next from Black
feminists, are “eloquent” but “off the mark” (para. 9). For Yaeger, the mythic
triumphs over the racial and political:
Beasts is not a slice of life or a realist screed; its business is mythological: it
proffers a sacred narrative with overtones of awe and cosmic investigation.
Querying the social order, it offers strange pedagogies about how we should
live in a melting world.
(para. 9)

­ n the one hand, the “strange pedagogies” Hushpuppy learns are self-taught
O
lessons of self-reliance and self-sufficiency. They are about how to survive on
a broken earth and endure the everyday slow violence of climate change. The
Bathtub’s school teacher, Miss Bathsheba, instructs “Y’all better learn how to
survive now” (9:32), and a big part of that message is a reconfigured relation
to nonlife. I can get behind Yaeger’s critique of a pristine, beautiful nature and
call to care for brutalized landscapes. However, I cannot fully back Beasts’
pedagogical implications in ways Yaeger celebrates. For example, at a rare
“feed-up time” provided by Wink he tells Hushpuppy to “share with the dog”
(2:50). For Yaeger, this dinner scene in Beasts contradicts the main message
of the Anthropocene that tells humanity to “see themselves as a geologic
force preying on the planet,” and instead Wink teaches Hushpuppy “to know
ourselves as a species dependent on other species” (para. 7). In that ephemeral
moment of caretaking, I can see Yaeger’s meaning, but I cannot forget another
scene a few minutes later when after days of being left to fend for herself,
Hushpuppy blows up her shack. The cause? Hushpuppy was heating herself
a meal of tinned cat food to eat on her propane stove. So, while there may
be much truth to another of Miss Bathsheba’s teachings that “Meat. Meat.
Every animal is made out of meat. I’m meat. Y’all asses meat” (8:30), I am

 Geontological Figurations

39

uncomfortable with the juxtaposition of food scenes and even more so with
Hushpuppy’s repeated abandonment.
After the big storm, Hushpuppy and Wink float through a submerged
Bathtub looking for signs of life. Most of the residents, although reluctant, left
before the storm. There are only a few survivors now, human and nonhuman,
and this number will lesson as the days go and the water cannot recede. As
they float along in their derelict boat made from a truck bed and empty oil
drums, Hushpuppy peers down at dead animals submerged beneath the
water’s surface: “They’re all down below trying to breathe through the water.
For animals that didn’t have a Dad to put them in the boat, the end of the
world already happened” (29:05). I think there is an argument that the end of
the world is ongoing for Hushpuppy as well: her father is dying, her home is
burnt, her community is drowning, her future seems determined. As the days
go by more plants and animals die from the salinized waters, Wink also gets
sicker, and the aurochs come closer. Yaeger interprets this differently than I do.
She understands Hushpuppy as “an early avatar of who we need to become” in
the Anthropocene (para. 18). In the slippage of the figural to the literal, I hope
Hushpuppy’s life is not the fate of children today. The question I hold onto is:
“How does a little black girl child orphaned and abandoned become a vision
for climate resistance for so many people who watched the film?” (Sharpe,
2013, para. 8).
The film’s source material is a play called Juicy and Delicious which features
a white ten-year-old boy as lead, and the setting is Georgia rather than the
Louisiana bayou (Alibar, 2013). How does this revisioning of location and the
presence of a Black girl-figure alter the optics of survivalism? Several Black
feminists argue powerfully that making the protagonist a young, precocious
Black girl “is not at all accidental” (Nyong’o, 2015, p. 262). Hushpuppy’s
blackness is necessary because “how else could . . . the violence of extreme
poverty, flooding, the violence of a six-year-old girl child living alone in her
own ramshackle house with no mother or father, be inspiring and not tragic?”
(Sharpe, 2013, para. 7). Blackness naturalizes precarity in ways that displace
history and deimagine futurity. Audiences do not ask how or why Hushpuppy
got in this situation because her poverty fits into pre-established racial
narratives. Christina Sharpe (2013) explains that “at least part of the disaster
on view here is everyday Black life lived in the wake of slavery and neither

 40

Anthropocene Childhoods

this film nor many of its viewers actually account for that life as disastrous”
(para. 6). bell hooks (2013) situates Hushpuppy as yet another representation
of “abused and abandoned black children, whose bodies become the playing
fields where pornographies of violence are hidden behind romantic evocations
of mythic union and reunion with nature” (para. 21). The film is grounded in
a “Western fantasy of the primitive” that encourages audiences to celebrate
Hushpuppy as a “brave survivalist” battling not only the elements, her father,
and her imagination, but a mainstream societal order that would dictate how
she should live and behave (Brown, 2013, para. 4). To see Hushpuppy as a
redeemer figure is to ignore the thousand things that should otherwise make
us shudder. hooks argues, “it is truly a surreal imagination that can look past
the traumatic abuse Hushpuppy endures and be mesmerized and entertained”
(para. 19).
As a figure of Sheldon’s (2016) Anthropocene-related slide in the image of
the child, Hushpuppy is protector of the wild, which includes her father and
The Bathtub residents. Additionally, as a figure of the Animist, Hushpuppy
understands that everything and everywhere is connected. She has an
uncanny ability to commune and communicate with animals. One particular
scene stands out for me here. The Bathtub residents flee a state shelter that
housed them after the flood and escape home in time to meet the arrival of the
aurochs (see Figure 3). The adults recede from view and Hushpuppy comes to
the front. Hushpuppy and the giant beasts come face-to-face and after sharing
intense looks the aurochs bend a knee, lower their gaze, and leave the bayou.
Hushpuppy says to the aurochs, “You’re my friend, kind of ” but “I’ve gotta take
care of mine” (1:22:05).
In connecting with the beasts, Hushpuppy “claims responsibility for the
devastation embodied by the aurochs and manifested in the land, and for her
whole community’s future” (Cecire, 2015, p. 166). Innocence is not available
for the Black child (Bernstein, 2011); she is responsible for her community’s
survival. As figure of the Animist, Hushpuppy not only sees life in the
most reduced circumstances but she’s able to communicate with a range of
multispecies existents. The film closes with Hushpuppy’s narration: “I see that
I am a little piece of a big, big universe, and that makes it right” (1:26:30).
Nyong’o (2015) finds problematic that the figure of a Black girl is “asked to
perform the work of imagining the survival of a civilization that has abandoned

 Geontological Figurations

41

Figure 3 Kind-of Friends for the Anthropocene. Film still from Beasts of the Southern
Wild, directed by Benh Zeitlin @ Fox Searchlight 2012. All rights reserved.

her” (p. 251). This points to the pitfalls in elevating Anthropocene Child as
a figure of the protector. In my attempts to think-with Hushpuppy I keep
returning to the questions: what is it to be this figure (Povinelli, 2013)? Why
do theorists, and I am complicit here, locate a potential otherwise in those
most precarious? Why is suffering assumed as resistance and the basis for a
new way of being in the world? In a powerful essay titled, “In Defence of the
Wastelands: A Survival Guide,” nēhiyaw writer Erica Violet Lee (2016) begins
contouring a pedagogical response that I am reaching out toward:
To provide care in the wastelands is about gathering enough love to turn
devastation into mourning and then, maybe, turn that mourning into
hope. . . . Hope, then, is knowing there is more to living than surviving;
believing that some worlds must exist for us beyond survival. Even when
we must piece those worlds together from gathered scraps, slowly building
incandescent ceremonies out of nothing but our bodies, our words, and
time. . . . When we make a home in lands and bodies considered wastelands,
we attest that these places are worthy of healing and that we are worthy of
life beyond survival.
(paras. 33–4; emphasis added)

It is not that The Bathtub or its residents are unworthy of care, but that there
is no form of care made available that can match up to the classed, racial, and

 42

Anthropocene Childhoods

ecological damage. No matter how much Hushpuppy wants to protect her
kin—animal, land, and human—she cannot face down the Anthropocene.
In contrast, The Marrow Thieves provides a speculative imagining of care in
the wastelands of post-apocalyptic Canada that gestures at life beyond survival
within community—survival because of community.

Viral Contagion: Care for Collectives
Hushpuppy is a geonotological figure of the Animist and also a figure for whom
the inheritance of environmental racism is extreme. The weight of the future
will be too much for Hushpuppy in the long term, in part because she bears
the heaviness alone, as was exemplified in her encounter with the aurochs.
The final child-figure I think-with in this chapter is not an individual child
but a group of Indigenous children from different Nations that come together
to build a common world. With them, I shift from singular child-figures
(even when in relation) and take a step toward refusing “the centrisms of the
individual child and foreground the enmeshed and heterogeneous common
worlds that children inherit and inhabit” (Taylor, 2013, p. 87). The Marrow
Thieves is a multilayered, speculative, and decolonial story about “collaborative
survival in precarious times” (Tsing, 2015, p. 2). Instead of the more expected
attachment of Indigenous characters with the Animist, I associate this band
of survivants with the figure of the Virus.2 It is a speculative story told from
within an ongoing apocalypse, where life and nonlife are in constant interplay.
The Marrow Thieves is about how life and nonlife nourish each other: the
Indigenous children’s survival depends on what is typically characterized
as nonlife—for example, Story and ancestors and land—and these existents
depend on the children and elders carrying them along for their survival.
­Povinelli (2016) explains that the defining difference between the Desert
and the Virus is the former’s passiveness and the latter’s intentionality. In other
words, the Desert awaits a technoscience fix from elsewhere while the Virus
“is an active antagonistic agent” making moves (p. 19). Furthermore, the
Virus is distinguished from the Animist because it muddies the oppositions
of life/death and bios/geos rather than assuming everything is alive as a
starting point. For Povinelli (2016), the Virus has as “its central imaginary . . .
the Terrorist” (p. 19). The Virus is what the Desert and Animist become if

 Geontological Figurations

43

radicalized (p. 19). Figures of the Virus for Povinelli include Ebola, nuclear
power, zombies, and eco-activists who—depending on perspective—are often
called terrorists (p. 19). In present-day Canada, this includes Indigenous land
defenders and other anti-petroleum protestors who stand up against pipelines
being installed through Indigenous territories. An example is the Wet’suwet’en
peoples, particularly the Unist’ot’en clan, who for years have been preventing
Costal GasLink from finishing their pipeline. If completed 2 billion cubic feet
per day of fracked gas will pass through their traditional territories. Many land
protectors have been arrested; their camps have been raided repeatedly; many
have their social media illegally monitored—all of this by state police who are
rarely referred to by such an incendiary term as terrorist. The Virus transgresses
“the borderlands between activists and terrorists across state borders and
interstate surveillance” (Povinelli, 2016, p. 19). The Virus is an international
activist-terrorist, which takes on additional meanings in consideration of how
Indigenous peoples navigate nation-to-nation relations among themselves
and outside state enclosure and colonial borders. However, to be the Virus
is to always be “under attack” (p. 19), which plays out speculatively in The
Marrow Thieves.
Métis author Cherie Dimaline’s (2017) The Marrow Thieves is a postapocalyptic speculative story set in Canada in the year 2050. An environmental
apocalypse has destroyed all that is taken for granted about modern life.
Dimaline describes the situation as follows: “The earth was broken. Too much
taking for too damn long, so she finally broke. But she went out like a wild
horse, bucking off as much as she could before lying down” (p. 136). There were
melting ice caps, tsunamis, tornados, earthquakes, and the pipelines “snapped
like icicles and spewed bile over forests, into lakes, drowning whole reserves
and towns” (p. 136). The population reduced by half and those remaining
were on the move as “the shapes of countries were changed forever, whole
coasts breaking off like crust” (p. 136). This speculative world is not wholly
Desert but quickly becoming one. Apart from Indigenous peoples who have
some sort of immunity, the settler population has lost the capacity to dream.
Without dreams they are going mad—drugs can only haze away so much.
The Canadian government—supported by Science and Church—believes that
Indigenous bone marrow holds the cure to their dreamless nightmare. The
exact pathogen causing the loss of dreams is unknown and unnamed, and, like

 44

Anthropocene Childhoods

Melanie in the next chapter, those excluded from the category human hold the
promise of a cure.
In an effort to acquire research subjects, the government first asked for
Indigenous volunteers. Rightly suspicious of settler state politeness, the
solicitation efforts failed to garner enough experimental subjects. So next
“they turned to the prisons. The prisons were always full of [Indigenous]
people” (p. 129). After running through the captive population, there still
was no cure and the state needed more experimental bodies so “they turned
to history” for advice on how best to keep Indigenous peoples “warehoused,
how to best position the culling” (p. 129). History had the solution in the reimplementation of residential schools. As the schools rematerialized there
were rumors about a technoscience breakthrough—an instrument had been
invented that could extract dreams from Indigenous peoples’ bones. The
rationale behind the first rollout of residential schools was to “kill the Indian
in the child,” but this reincarnation had no such pretence.3 To harvest the bone
marrow was to literally kill the Indian and the child; Indigenous peoples were
“little more than a crop” (p. 36). Settler history taught Indigenous peoples to
be distrustful of state medicine and schools so those who were able took to the
land and headed North. Their Indigenous history held the teachings necessary
for survival. However, their escape was made more difficult by a new police
force called Recruiters who were tasked with tracking and capturing them for
dissection.
The main action kicks off when a young Métis teenager named Frenchie
has to flee an urban center after Recruiters capture his brother, mother, and,
assumingly, his father. Exhausted after days on the run, Frenchie passes out in
the forest to be found by Miigwans, an adult member of a mismatched, throwntogether band of seven Indigenous children and an elder named Minerva.
The child-figures include Anishinaabe, Métis, and nêhiyawak belongings and
they range from seven to seventeen years old. Each character is introduced
in a separate chapter through a “coming-to” Story. They have all experienced
trauma, loss, abandonment, and pain, but suffering will not be the main story of
their lives. They heal through regenerative relations of collective care and thus
the coming-to signifies a new strength and resilience in community, even at the
end of the world. Throughout the text are words in nêhiyawêwin, as Minerva is
a fluent speaker who shares with the child-figures Story, song, ceremony, and

 Geontological Figurations

45

teachings inherent in the language itself. For the children who do not know
the language, like Frenchie, they desire it more than any other comfort of a lost
world. Importantly though, while they long for language and “the old-timey,”
The Marrow Thieves does not dwell on some nostalgic idealization of a pristine
past or romantic wilderness (p. 29). This crew is engaged in creating futurities.
The child-figures learn to hunt and build camps. They listen to traditional
stories, perform ceremony, strengthen plant and animal relations, and share
their own histories and tragedies in ways that allow them to grow together.
“We needed to remember Story,” shares Frenchie (p. 142). The heart of this
speculative story is caretaking and kin-making.
The common world the child-figures and their teachers create in the woods
is not one of heteronormative family, patriarchal leadership, or generational
segregation. Everyone is cared for. Physically, Minerva slows them down
and often has to be carried, but she is a highly valued member of the group.
Although her body is failing, Minerva’s spirit is strong, and the children never
abandon her. The same goes for the youngest group member, RiRi, whose size
prevents her from making the same contributions as the teenagers. Yet she
is not disposable. The lesson, “No one is more important than anyone else”
(p. 58), which applies to the Indigenous characters as much as the more-thanhumans they encounter on their journey. Cherokee scholar Daniel Heath
Justice (2018) writes in Why Indigenous Literatures Matter (2018) about the
importance of being in good relation:
Relationship is the driving impetus behind the vast majority of texts by
Indigenous writers—relationship to the land, to human community, to
self, to the other-than-human world, to the ancestors and our descendants,
to our histories and our futures, as well as to colonizers and their literal
and ideological heirs—and that these literary works offer us insight and
sometimes helpful pathways for maintaining, rebuilding, or even simply
establishing these meaningful connections.
(p. xix)

The end of the story brings about a direct clash with settler Recruiters and
Minerva sacrifices herself so the others can escape. But instead of running
away they regroup and plan a rescue. The attempt does not go according to
plan and Minerva is shot by police. At this point, we learn that when the

 46

Anthropocene Childhoods

scientists tried to harvest her dreams, she set the residential school on fire with
her nêhiyawêwin songs. Over the course of the text, the child-figures come
to recognize and respect the power of their language. Language is a Virus in
that it ignores the division of life and nonlife “for the purpose of diverting
its energies in order to extend itself ” into the surrounds and save (Povinelli,
2016, p. 173). Language is also immunity rather than pathogen; it is what
protects the Indigenous peoples from losing the ability to dream. The childfigures also learn what outlives bionormative bodies—a sense of geontological
existence that cannot be killed—Minerva’s ongoingness is language and Story
and ceremony and kin and land. Dreams are in all these relations and not
like the settlers assume a bio-substance in bones. The anguish of Minerva’s
death is tempered by the joy of an unexpected reunion. Miigwans reunites
with his partner Isaac, who has escaped capture, and who is also a fluent
speaker. Although Isaac does not yet have the worldly experience of an Elder
like Minerva that is fine because “the key doesn’t have to be old, the language
already is” (p. 227).
The child-figures in The Marrow Thieves do not walk alone. Nor is any
single individual made responsible for the ruined earth or for saving it. Like
the Virus, they are under assault because their bone marrow may be a bio-fix
but also because their worlds are not organized by life and nonlife divisions.
They are also terrorists in the sense that they resist and refuse settler futurities.
The Marrow Thieves is clear that climate change and settler colonialism go
hand-in-hand and that to regenerate worlds requires renewed relations with
land, more-than-human kin, and each other. Language—and everything
entangled with and embedded within it—was their immunity and their future.
The Marrow Thieves encourages me to consider how the end of the world can
mean otherwise: it can be the end of apocalypse, the end of settler colonialism,
the end of anti-Black racism, the end of extractivism, and the flourishing of
Anthropocene Child in common worlds. These otherwise possibilities are
provocations for the chapters that follow. I think that speculative fiction and
speculative figures, particularly The Marrow Thieves and its Indigenous youth,
offer a glimpse of what otherwise might feel, look, and be like.

 ­3

Infecting Whiteness
Child-Monsters at the End of the World

There is no shortage of critical and popular work that upholds the figure of the
child as the epitome of futurity. This futurity depends on a particular formation
of life that is defined by a “metabolic imaginary” (Povinelli, 2016), which
is recognizable by biological processes of birth, growth, development, and
reproduction.1 This imaginary is perhaps most fully encapsulated in the biocentric image of the child in all its potentiality (Arendt, 1958; Castañeda, 2002).
The provocation I want to delve into is if foregrounding geos-childhoods can
put under pressure “our present culture’s purely biological definition of what
it is to be, and therefore of what it is like to be, human” (Wynter, 2000, p. 180).
This definition has long disciplined humans and inhumans via racialized
hierarchies of life. Life, in this sense, takes meaning from what it is not—life
is that which is not nonlife—life is sentient, energetic, and active. It is also
what is under threat in the climate crisis, or, at least, what is behind much ecoanxiety: extinction is nonlife forever. This chapter (re)tells a geostory about
Melanie from the speculative novel and film titled The Girl with All the Gifts
(hereafter Gifts) (Carey, 2014; McCarthy & Carey, 2016). Melanie is a zombiechild called a “hungry,” who, unlike the prototypical zombie, is conscious,
caring, and agentic. However, Melanie and her kin-kind are also imprisoned
and experimented upon because their bodies might hold a cure for a global
pandemic. Melanie is “human—but not only” (de la Cadena, 2014, p. 256): she
is child, she is pathogen, she is racialized, she is monster—she blurs any easy
cuts between life and nonlife.

 48

Anthropocene Childhoods

I structure this chapter by way of several overlapping deliberations. First,
Melanie brings into question what constitutes the properly human subject.
Melanie problematizes racialized allocations of humanness through her visual
embodiment of both blackness and monstrosity. Second, I explore how the end
of the world for Melanie is the end of the racialized and militarized systems
of oppression that did her violence. Melanie invites me to consider a series of
questions about the end of the world, including: for whom might the end of
the world not be a cause for mourning (Wilderson, 2015)? What if the end
of the world is a renunciation of anti-blackness and “settler futurity” (Tuck &
Yang, 2012)? What possibilities emerge when refusal and resistance are the
child-figure’s response to saving the world? Third, as a figure of both child and
virus, Melanie troubles divisions of life/nonlife, immunity/exceptionality, and
innocence/responsibility that govern the present and are put under increasing
pressure in the Anthropocene. Melanie and the pathogen exist in a symbiotic
relationship wherein each needs the other to thrive. Lastly, drawing on the
work of Sylvia Wynter (2000), Melanie and the child-hungries provide a new
origin story for a hybrid, “counterhumanism” of Anthropocene Child.

Fungal Pathogens: Infecting Whiteness
For the most part Gifts plots along like any other post-apocalyptic zombie
film, that is, until the very end. The setting is a world much like this one,
London specifically, in the near future. A mysterious fungus has infected
nearly everyone on earth turning them into mindless, flesh-eating zombies.
The few remaining humans—mostly female scientists and military men—have
gathered on an armored base where the scientists among them search for a
cure. Everyone who comes into direct contact with the pathogen becomes
infected, except for a mysterious group of children who were born to infected
mothers. Melanie and these other “second gen” hungries have retained the
ability to think, feel, and care. They attend school and are learning to read and
write imaginative stories. However, they are also locked in cells at night and
have their heads, arms, and legs strapped to wheelchairs when outside solitary
confinement. If these child-hungries smell or touch humans they transform
into ravenous, instinctual zombies just like the others. Nevertheless, why

 Infecting Whiteness

49

I argue this story matters is that one particular child-hungry sets off the end
of the world. Before this happens though the number of child-hungries on the
base gets fewer and fewer. Their biology—their bodies—holds the possibility
of a vaccine. The research process entails dissecting the child-bodies in ways
in which they cannot survive. The day Melanie is taken for dismembering, a
large horde of hungries attack the base allowing her to break free from the
operating table. Dr. Caroline Caldwell, Miss Helen Justineau, Sergeant Parks,
and a handful of soldiers manage to escape with Melanie in tow.
The debate about whether or not the child-hungries are human or monster
continues throughout the duration of both the novel and film. Never is it
considered that there are possibilities of existence outside these dualistic
oppositions. Perhaps debate might be too strong a descriptor as everyone
but Justineau conceives of the child-hungries as inhuman monsters. If there
is any lingering doubt about the child-hungries’ species-status it is primarily
because they outwardly resemble any other ten-year-old child. In spite of
their appearance, however, the Sergeant is keen to remind his colleagues that
“not everyone who looks human is human” (Carey, 2014, p. 29). The publicity
posters and preview clips for the movie feature Melanie wearing a full-faced,
clear muzzle type of mask, which the survivors insist she wear for their
protection once they flee the invaded base. This mask serves as a persistent
reminder of her monstrosity (see Figure 4). Not only is it the sort of guard that

Figure 4 Masking Monstrosity—Making Killable. Film still from The Girl with All the
Gifts directed by Colm McCarthy @ BFI Film Fund 2016. All rights reserved.

 50

Anthropocene Childhoods

I imagine is used to constrain animals, but its transparency allows Melanie’s
blackness to remain visible. With it, Melanie’s “form remains identifiably
human, but recognizably monstrous” which is a tactic of “making-killable” in
contemporary culture (Gergen et al., 2018, p. 11; see also Haraway, 2008).
Caldwell, on the other hand, takes a hard-line approach to making-killable
but disguises it behind the neutrality of science. Caldwell’s view is that “the
moment of death”—meaning a geos-zombification in this context and not
a biological-metabolic death—“is the moment when the pathogen crosses
the blood–brain barrier. What’s left, though its heart may beat, and though
it speaks . . . it is not the host” (Carey, 2014, p. 63). The species battle line is
thus drawn between human and fungus, despite their coexistence in the childhungries. The second gen hungries have formed a symbiotic relationship
with the pathogen—the fungus and the child collaborate to survive and are
inseparable from one another. Melanie and the fungus have found ways to work
together, not always in equal or nonviolent ways, but not always in conflictual
ones either. Child and fungus are a practice of “becoming with” (Haraway,
2008) that designates the child-hungries as a figure of Anthropocene Child.
The child-hungries most dedicated defender and favorite teacher is
Justineau, a military-trained psychologist who both reads the students stories
and keeps anecdotal records of their behaviors. Justineau and Caldwell
constantly battle about the humanity of the child-hungries. Justineau shames
Caldwell for dissecting the children without anesthetic. Caldwell’s response is
that “they don’t respond to anaesthetic . . . .Which in itself ought to tell you that
the subjects’ ontological status is to some extent in doubt” (Carey, 2014, p. 80).
While Justineau purposefully refers to the child-hungries as children rather
than monsters, what counts as human for Caldwell is an ability to feel pain.
Sentience, as a marker of the human, has a long anti-Black history that merges
the speculative world of hungries with this world. Its specificity traces back
to the denial of sentience to create the slave as property (Wilderson, 2010).
In brief, the dominant narrative was that enslaved Black persons did not feel
pain—therefore they could be worked to the bone, beaten, and assaulted—
but after the abolition of slavery these racist tropes needed a new place to
land. In Racial Innocence, Robin Bernstein (2011) reveals how the “libel of
insensateness” was regrafted onto “children’s culture” after abolition in the form
of the unequal allocation of childhood innocence (p. 51). In this refiguration,

 Infecting Whiteness

51

whiteness equals innocence and blackness equates insensateness. Childhood
becomes “a cover under which otherwise discredited racial ideology survives
and continues, covertly, to influence culture” (p. 51).2
At stake in a perceived ability to feel pain is “inclusion in the category of
the child and, ultimately, the human” (p. 36). The last conversation Melanie
has with Caldwell is telling in this regard. Melanie asks, “We’re alive?” and
Caldwell responds, “Yes. You’re alive” (McCarthy & Carey, 2016, 1:36:05). Even
the admission of aliveness from Caldwell does not mean that she thinks the
child-hungries should be exempt from the scientific experiments that end their
lives. One can be alive—can be a form of life—without being human, which is
why sentience is important to keep in mind. In Gifts, the child-hungries bioexceptionalism makes them capable of living-with the pathogen but it does not
translate into a worthiness for life. In this case, their exceptionality means that
they are too far removed from the bionormative human, which, as mentioned
earlier, makes them killable.
In the transition from page to screen a few characters in Gifts racebend,
meaning the characters’ race changes as the medium does. Included are the two
main characters of Melanie and Justineau. Their race is reversed in the film:
Melanie (played by Sennia Nanua) is Black and Justineau (Gemma Arterton)
is white. The concept of racebending was popularized as a term of protest
against the casting of white characters in the live-action film adaptation of
Avatar: The Last Airbender, although it is a longstanding Hollywood practice
(Racebending.com, 2011). Nowadays it mostly involves casting decisions that
have a discriminatory effect on a minority group or unrepresented community.
I write mostly because, at least in the case of Melanie, the change makes Gifts
something more than a traditional zombie story. As a small point of personal
sharing, I do not actually like zombie movies—the blood, gore, and violence
are not something I count among my preferred leisurely or scholarly activities.
Without this casting change I doubt I would have given Gifts a second thought
and I certainly would not be writing about it here. Novel and screenplay
writer Carey has said in interviews that the casting choices were race-neutral,
meaning that the parts went to the best actors for the job (Weisberger, 2017).
But his apparent color-blindness has unintended consequences.
Carey insists that race is not consequential to the book so it should not
matter in the movie either. I disagree. In the first chapter of the novel are

 52

Anthropocene Childhoods

multiple racialized descriptions of the two protagonists. On the first page, we
are told, “Her name is Melanie. It means ‘the black girl,’ from an ancient Greek
word, but her skin is actually very fair so she thinks maybe it’s not such a
good name for her” (Carey, 2014, p. 9). Melanie prefers the name Pandora,
an important point I will revisit in a later section. On the second page, we
get a further description of Melanie as “ten years old, and she has skin like
a princess in a fairy tale; skin as white as snow. So she knows that when she
grows up she’ll be beautiful” (p. 10). This phrase is so loaded with racialized
tropes that I think matter a great deal. I sincerely doubt the child-hungries are
afforded the movie-going privileges of Disney consumption on the military
base, yet white-princess-power still somehow becomes a point of self and
societal worth in a zombie story. A few pages later is a description of Justineau
from Melanie’s point of view:
Miss Justineau’s face stands out anyway because it’s such a wonderful,
wonderful colour. It’s dark brown, like the wood of the trees in Melanie’s
rainforest picture whose seeds only grow out of the ashes of a bushfire, or
like the coffee that Miss Justineau pours out of her flask into her cup at break
time. Except it’s darker and richer than either of those things, with lots of
other colours mixed in, so there isn’t anything you can really compare it to.
All you can say is that it’s as dark as Melanie’s skin is light.
(p. 23)

This description is how Carey alerts the reader to Justineau’s blackness
without ever having to write out any racially explicit terms. While it is a
welcome reprieve from many productions in that the novel equates blackness
with beauty, nevertheless, the up-front textual position of these racialized
descriptions—whether positive or negative—conveys to me at least some
significance. My stance is that race and racebending are pivotal to the story’s
overall impact and to the significance of refiguring geos-futurities in the film.
After the military base is attacked, the humans who escape must rely on
Melanie to guide them undetected through the hordes of hungries in the city
center. While out collecting food for her captors, Melanie makes two important
discoveries. The first is that fungal seed pods that house the pathogen have
grown to cover one of London’s highest and most phallic shaped buildings.
The second discovery is a group of feral child-hungries much like her, only

 Infecting Whiteness

53

they have not yet learned to speak. Returning to the temporary shelter Melanie
learns from Caldwell that if the seed pods were to open then the pathogen
would become airborne and infect all remaining humans. After some careful
thought Melanie decides that she does not need or want to die to save a few
remaining humans who have treated her as inhuman-instrumental other. To
cite a particularly powerful moment, Melanie says to Caldwell: “Why should
it be us who die for you?” (McCarthy & Carey, 2016, 1:36:10). Next Melanie
leaves the lab and sets ablaze the fungal tower of spores. The fire opens the
seed pods thus effectively ending the world, or, more carefully stated, ending a
world. As the pods burn, Melanie has one last conversation with the Sergeant
who had been injured nearby. The Sergeant wails, “It’s over. It’s all over.”
Melanie responds, “It’s not over. It’s just not yours anymore” (McCarthy &
Carey, 2016, 1:41:05).

­The End of the (White) World
Melanie chooses to destroy the world instead of scarifying herself to it. In
doing so, she brings possibilities for a new world into existence. This also
brings into alignment, even if momentarily, the world of speculative fiction
and anti-blackness in this world. Hari Ziyad (2017b) shares their surprise and
delight at the ending:
Because I am so used to humanity being granted a sanctity it does not
deserve, I fully expected Melanie . . . to sacrifice herself for her human
captors . . . . When juxtaposed with the argument put forth by some Afropessimists that humanity is reliant upon the subjection and enslavement of
Black people, Melanie’s refusal of humanity is in clear contrast to what we
are taught about Black people’s possibilities. We, the living dead in America
(for what else but death is a life that doesn’t #matter?) are told that we can
only try (and always fail) to become more human or sacrifice ourselves and
our communities for the continuation of human society.
(para. 9)

Instead of a limited form of inclusion in a white-supremacist-militaristichuman-biocentric society, Melanie sets in motion a more “liveable world” by
“fac[ing] up to the outrage of human exceptionalism” and delivering a deadly

 54

Anthropocene Childhoods

blow (Haraway, 2008, p. 106). The liveable world for the child-hungries has to
be the end of the human-exceptional world, otherwise they will remain hunted
specimens for a potential human cure. If the humans were to find an antidote,
all indications suggest that the child-hungries would be eliminated once and
for all. They would be of no more use to humans. The co-existence of humans
and hungries is never entertained as a viable option.
In most speculative stories, monsters await defeat by humans—the
relationship is simplified as a battle between bad versus good. We know who is
supposed to win. Monsters are analogous to those who embody difference in this
world. Often, the monster figures are explicitly racialized. This is a preemptive
strategy to rationalize the violence they will face. It is what is expected, “for it
mirrors the spectacle of symbolic violence against the Dark Other in our own
world” (Thomas, 2018, p. 1). However, “when people read fantastic texts from
the perspective of the monster . . . they find themselves in completely different
terrain” (p. 3). “Gifts dares to imagine a happy ending for its monsters, and
that is simply amazing,” journalist Sherronda Brown (2017) excites (para. 6). A
story in which whiteness “becomes dismantled through the intentional action
of a Black child enhances the theme of decolonization that is already present in
the zombie narrative” given its African and Haitian origins (para. 6).3 Melanie
is a figure of the terrorist from the point of view of human exceptionalism
and whiteness: she is “the face of decolonization from the perspective of the
interests and entities that decolonization threatens” (Kawash, 1999, p. 238).4
For the likes of Caldwell, the Sergeant, and the institutions they represent
(i.e., Science and Military), Melanie is a threat but also a potential savior—the
complexities abound. Tiffany Lethabo King (2019) writes about “grammars
of suffering” that violently and perpetually unmake Black and Indigenous
lives in the making and sustaining of the human. Melanie is able to refuse this
grammar and flip it—suffering is not her end story. Gifts ends up potentiating
a world that does not require Black death in order to exist. And this fact snaps
apart the overlap of speculative and real worlds that I just mentioned.
Gifts puts in motion an end of the world as an end to “humanity as whiteness,”
as Ziyad (2017a) phrases it (p. 143), meaning that the end of the world for
Melanie is the end of the systems of oppression that did her violence and that
elevated the bionormative child and biocentric human (Wynter, 2003) above
all other forms of existence. The end of the world is not the end of all life in

 Infecting Whiteness

55

Gifts—the figure of Povinelli’s (2016) Desert is not the child-hungries future.
Instead, there is a possibility of regenerative reworlding. At the end of Gifts,
wide-panned camera shots of a hungry-filled London cityscape show greenery
already taking back space in abandoned concrete structures. These images also
happen to be actual drone footage of the ghost town of Pripyat in Ukraine near
Chernobyl—a literalization of the regeneration possible after disaster and after
humans have gone (IMDb, 2016). This is the “possibility of life” and nonlife
ongoing together “in capitalist ruins” (Tsing, 2015).
Blackness has long overlapped with ideas of monstrosity; however, recently,
“the figure of the monster has been reclaimed by Black subjects” (Bey, 2016,
p. 51). In this vein, Joy James (2013) offers the Black rebel cyborg as an
inhuman figure who, drawing on Frantz Fanon, “sets out to change the order
of the world” (p. 65). To be a Black rebel cyborg means no longer seeking
inclusion in the white supremacist state. The Black rebel cyborg “relinquishes
the unachievable goal: striving for a socially recognized humanity” (Vargas &
James, 2013, p. 200). This was one of the lessons Melanie learns. For much of
the film, she longs to be accepted by her captors—to be counted as human
just like them. But in ultimately refusing to sacrifice herself and her childhungry-kin, Melanie comes to understand the human as a figure of “Settler/
Master(Human)” that is never going to be otherwise (Wilderson, 2010). More
than just a refusal of whiteness, however, Melanie comes to “refuse blacknessas-victimization and reconstitute blackness-as-resistance” (James, 2013, p. 68).
This adds a layer to Sheldon’s (2016) proposal about the slide of the childfigure from protected to protector in the Anthropocene. Rather than saving
the world, Melanie generates another option: she refuses, she resists, and she
destroys. She opens up an otherwise that privileges multispecies becomings.
I am not promoting Gifts as some sort of manual for revolution. I share it
as a thought-experiment. For me, the take-away from Gifts is not about there
being no humans in this world, but it is about the structures and institutions
of systematic oppression that keep whiteness at the top by way of rendering
others inhuman, less-than-human, nonhuman, or any other arrangement
that maintains whiteness as the supremacist referent. Another articulation
I am leaning on to make this argument comes from the Combahee River
Collective (2002) and their classic “A Black Feminist Statement,” which reads
in small part: “If Black women were free, it would mean that everyone else

 56

Anthropocene Childhoods

would have to be free since our freedom would necessitate the destruction
of all the systems of oppression” (p. 215). I think about this in line with the
vision proposed by the Black Lives Matter Global Network: “We fight for our
collective liberation because we are clear that until Black people are free, no
one is free” (BLM, 2016, para. 11). This points to how flourishing is a collective
undertaking. Melanie rearranges the world in ways in which Wynter’s (2003)
Man is no longer omnipotent: she is free and so are her fellow child-hungries.
In ending a world not only does Melanie achieve freedom from incarceration
and experimentation but so to do her kin-kind (and some other more-thanhumans too). The overhead shots of rewilding that close out Gifts begin with
a close up of the child-hungries. Melanie has returned to the military base to
free the child-hungries from their cells and we see them sitting together among
the feral child-hungries. They are a multiaged, multiracial, multispecies squad.

Community through Contagion
While Melanie may appear to commit a solitary act when she sets the seed pod
tower ablaze, her each movement and thought depends on a synergetic relation
with the pathogen. The Melanie-pathogen relation helps me appreciate “that
no one stands or acts alone, that all human lives are inextricably enmeshed
with others (human and more-than-human) and that all human actions are
implicated with and have implication for others (including nonhuman others)”
(Taylor, 2013, p. 117). The fire and its releasing of the pathogen will end the
world for humans but for other species it will be regenerative. These differential
reverberations are especially pertinent today considering the coronavirus,
including how marginalized communities have been further disadvantaged
and disproportionally infected/affected. Covid-19 makes clear that humans
are not the only actors on the stage and that survival is difficult, necessary,
and never enough (Shotwell, 2020). In this section, I want to linger with the
enmeshment of human and virus. All humans are part virus—it has always
been in our DNA (Tsing, 2015, p. 143). Humans are full of microbes—they
outnumber human cells by a rate of ten-to-one (NIH, 2012). “Everyone carries
a history of contamination,” Tsing insists, “purity is not an option” (p. 27). The
contributions bacteria make is crucial for human survival, we could not live

 Infecting Whiteness

57

(e.g., digest our food) without them. The virus is entangled with other species;
it needs others to endure. So do we.
As introduced in the last chapter, Povinelli (2016) theorizes the Virus as
a key figure of geontology that disrupts and confuses the antagonism of life
versus nonlife amplified by the Anthropocene. For Povinelli, the virus is not
definable by either term because each uses the other to extend themselves. The
preeminent pop culture formation of the virus is the zombie, which Povinelli
summaries as “Life turned to Nonlife and transformed into a new kind of
species war—the aggressive rotting undead against the last redoubt of Life”
(p. 16).5 To this Gifts adds a complex layer as Melanie is not in a state of either
existential or corporeal decomposition, but re-enlivened through an imaginary
akin to what Ashleigh Wade (2017) theorizes as “viral blackness.” Wade (2017)
proposes a “theory of world making through viral blackness” that challenges
associations of the virus solely with the spread of harmful pathogens (p. 34).
Instead, Wade figures virality as the transmission of generative compositions
like #BlackLivesMatter. In today’s anti-Black and settler colonial world, Wade
points out, “containment is extremely important for maintaining control, but
the viral cannot be contained” (p. 35). Neither could the pathogen in Gifts.
It moves, it spreads, and it mutates. Andrew Baldwin (2016) argues that
“the guarantee of white supremacy lies in its capacity to contain the excess”
(p. 84), and, since viral blackness is always in movement, it is in excess of
repossession, and a future for whiteness becomes uncertain. Despite scientific
and militaristic efforts in Gifts, neither the child-hungries or the pathogen
could be fully controlled. Yet to be the virus, Povinelli (2016) insists, and as
we saw with The Marrow Thieves in the last chapter, is to always be “under
attack” (p. 19).
For me, the pathogen in Gifts is especially intriguing as a figure of contagion
because it interrupts the cycle of virality as something inherently malicious
and oppressive. Melanie and the pathogen need each other in a relational
equation not set on conquest. Additionally, Wade importantly moves the
figure of the virus from individualized bodies to collective ones. With the
protests that followed Michael Brown’s murder in Ferguson as her case study,
Wade traces how viral blackness moved from online spaces to the streets
and back and forth again and again. Viral blackness configures community
in ways supportive of the viral as a “deterritorializing mode of subversion

 58

Anthropocene Childhoods

to white supremacist systems” (p. 36). I read this into Pricilla Wald’s (2008)
work on contagion that reframes the virus as “not inherently about killing but
rather about changing” (p. 139). This perspective understands the virus as an
embodiment and enactment of worldmaking.
The main focus of Wald’s (2008) work on contagion is unpacking the
taken-for-granted literariness of the “outbreak narrative,” which includes
attention to its rhetorical devices and storytelling strategies in both scientific
press, news articles, and blockbuster films. Wald notes a dominant pattern
whereby “conventions of horror and myth” reduce the complexities of
pathogenic emergence to “an apocalyptic battle between heroic scientists
and the hybrids who embody the threat” (p. 257). The outbreak narrative
follows a predictable pattern which includes identifying the virus, naming
the disease, outing its carriers, tracing its travel routes, developing
prophylactics, and curing the disease and dis-ease. What starts as a horror
story of human versus pathogen ends as a “timeless and ritualized story
of renewal in which Humanity is reaffirmed as it is redeemed by Science”
(p. 260). Not all pandemics fit this narrative structure, however, especially
those that do not have a cure and/or cannot be easily contained. In these
cases, for example, Covid-19, SARS, and HIV/AIDS, responsibility gets
recirculated from “science to society” (p. 255).6
As documented earlier, Gifts has the lab, scientists, and hybridity of the
outbreak narrative but also challenges many of the conventions outlined
by Wald, especially the triumphalism of science. Nevertheless, it is from
science that part of Gifts’ horror emerges. The scientific story of the
Ophiocordyceps unilateralis fungus provides a realistic, scientific frame from
which the speculative story in Gifts grounds itself. Known colloquially as
the zombie-ant fungus, Ophiocordyceps unilateralis takes over the central
nervous system of bullet ants in tropical rainforests causing the ants to leave
their colony, bite down in a “death grip” on a leaf which induces paralysis,
and then sprout fungal stem-like spores from their exoskeleton (Hill 2013).
This description mirrors the immobilization of expired hungries on the
London streets; blooms exude from decomposing bodies as life and nonlife
combine. In Gifts, this real-life fungus has found a way to jump the speciesbarrier, which makes it new yet still familiar (recall the making killable
discussion). Melanie and her hungry-friends have similarly broken the

 Infecting Whiteness

59

species line: both fungus and child have mutated—are mutants. While the
child-hungries are pathologized, they are also protected because they are
necessary for a cure. Given my film-spectatorship training, I assumed that
science would triumph, and humanity would defeat the zombie threat. I fully
expected a cure. Wald cites this form of anticipatory confidence as a means
of “sanction[ing] the status quo” so that “social existence” does not have
to be significantly rearranged (p. 268). Both the Anthropocene discussion
and the outbreak narrative pull on “the promise and authority of science in
the heroic service of a threatened Humanity” (p. 257). This is where Gifts
makes another impact: the status quo is challenged, science fails to provide
a solution, humanity does not survive, and a serious refiguration of global
existence is set in motion.
In making apparent the narrative organization of pandemic performances,
Wald highlights shared links between communicable, communication,
and community, which could be used to “evoke a profound sense of social
inter-connection” (p. 12). Neither disease, sickness, nor infection were the
original associations of the term contagion. Wald points out that contagion
literally means “to touch together” and it first “referred to the circulation
of ideas and attitudes,” for example, “revolutionary ideas were contagious”
(p. 12). This connects again with Wade’s (2017) theorizing of viral blackness
that moves between virtual spaces and physical places in the constitution
of resistant communities. There is a disruptive and transgressive potential
inherent to pathogens: the virus needs others to endure. Contagion has
similar qualities: transformative, fluid, hard to control, and disrespectful
of boundaries. With contagion, human individualism and exceptionalism
are again challenged. Tsing (2015) expresses how we are undoubtably
“contaminated by our encounters; they change who we are as we make way for
others. As contamination changes world-making projects, mutual worlds—
and new directions—may emerge” (p. 27). What might be possible if we grab
onto the notion of “contamination as collaboration” in ways that re-make
community and care for those humans and nonhumans most vulnerable
(Tsing, 2015, p. 27). What tentative “alliances in the Anthropocene” might
allow for “collaborative survival in precarious times” (Tsing, 2015, p. 2)?
How can these relationships be cultivated in ways that respect difference,
diversity, and incommensurably?

 60

Anthropocene Childhoods

Otherwise Origin Stories
While the repetitious structure of the outbreak narrative can help us anticipate
the way pandemics unfurl in this world, Wynter’s attention to stories
demonstrates the power of narrative in the overall making of worlds. Wynter
understands origin stories as narrating a specific genre of being human into
reproductive circulation. These stories are not the truth of the human but
the “truth-for” a specific version of the human—not humanity in toto but
“partial humanisms” defined by a “descriptive statement” (Wynter, 2015,
p. 196). Origin stories provide a narrative framework through which humans
are initiated into worlds and then repeatedly make sense of themselves within
these worlds. What this also means, for example, is that the figure of biocentric
Man has inclusions and exclusions already built into the script; however, the
story is not determined once and for all. It is possible to “give humanness a
different future” (Wynter & McKittrick, 2015, p. 9), and to write new genres
and new worlds into being. This is why it is important for Wynter and her
followers to speak of genres of “being human as praxis” and “as performative
enactment,” rather than take Man as the human as given and timeless (p. 31).
Cathy Peppers (1995) reads Octavia Butler’s Xenogenesis trilogy (also
known as Lilith’s Brood) through Haraway and Foucault to reassert a value for
origin stories outside hegemonic narrative patterns. Butler’s trilogy stories the
“genesis of an alien humanity” wherein the complications and complicities of a
new beginning for humans and more-than-humans are considered (p. 47). The
first book, Dawn, begins after an earthly apocalypse brought on by nuclear war
and a few remaining humans are “rescued” by an alien species of Oankali. The
human subjects are put to sleep for years and unconsciously prodded, tested,
sampled, and studied before being awoken to the “choice” of reproducing
with the Oankali or being made sterile. Xenogenesis is a therefore an origin
story but not one in which humanity as it has been survives. It “is a story with
difference . . . reproduction with a difference, the (re)production of difference”
(p. 47). This is not an innocent story either. Humans and aliens do not escape
legacies of forced consent and miscegenation. Peppers’ argument for revaluing
origin stories like Xenogenesis proceeds with a close reading of Haraway:
While Haraway claims in “A Cyborg Manifesto” that “the cyborg has no
origin story in the Western sense,” it is important to note that she does not

 Infecting Whiteness

61

say that cyborgs have no origin stories. She makes a distinction between
traditional Western origin stories, which are based on “salvation history,”
and are “about the Fall” . . . and cyborg origin stories, which “subvert the
central myths of origin of Western culture” by focusing on “the power to
survive, not on the basis of original innocence, but on the basis of seizing the
tools to mark the world that has marked them as other.”
(p. 47)

­ ith support from Haraway, Peppers calls to account the “anti-essentialist,
W
anti-origins attitude taken up by mainstream” critical theorists who fail to
recognize that those “whose stories have been written out of the dominant
accounts have different stakes in the desire to re-write origin stories” (p. 48). It
is only possible to disavow origin stories when you have them; it is only safe to
reject foundations when you are already on solid footing. This why otherwise
origin stories matter. What are the origin stories of the child-hungries?
Before the drama of the military base escape, viewers are offered a series
of stories within the bigger story of a zombie apocalypse. The first is the myth
of Pandora’s Box that is read to the hungry-children by Justineau, the second
is a creative story shared by Melanie as part of a classroom exercise, and the
third is a version of Schrödinger’s cat in a box—one of a series of thought
experiments that Caldwell shares with Melanie in order to test her reasoning
abilities. I want to dwell with these stories through concepts offered by Wynter
(2000, 2003, 2005), including origin stories, hybrid beings, and homo narrans.
While on a superficial level “boxes” thread these stories together, what also
knots them is a potential entrapment within a hegemonic form of humanism
that instead of proving inevitable are possible to rewrite, renarrate, and live
otherwise.
Viewers first encounter the child-hungries all together in a classroom. They
are arranged in rows and strapped down in their chairs. The lesson we drop in
on has the children reciting the periodic table back to their teacher. Thankfully,
this rote learning does not last long. Soon Justineau enters, having finished
her regression analysis, and takes her place as head teacher. The children are
pleased and immediately request a story. Justineau warns she might get in
trouble for veering off the curriculum so the children suggest that Greek myths
count as history and therefore story is permissible. Justineau picks up a book
and reads them the story of Pandora. The film cuts between Justineau reading

 62

Anthropocene Childhoods

in the classroom and the recitation of the story as background soundtrack to
Melanie wishing a pleasant evening to her armed captors as they lock her in
her cell for the night. The guards respond to her polite gesture by calling her
“Cujo” and “it,” and, in other moments, a “friggin’ abortion.”
As for the story Justineau reads, we hear that Pandora’s creation is tied
up with Zeus’s wish for revenge, Hephaetus’s obedience, and Epimetheus’
weakness. But neither the child-hungries nor I am particularly interested
in those figures—we want to hear about Pandora. Given my interests here,
I cannot help but linger with how Pandora is made of clay—composed of the
earth itself—a geontological figure from a different time and place. Pandora is
ordered made by Man, remade by Athena and Aphrodite as desirable according
to the male gaze, and then given a box as she is sent off to live among men.
She is warned that the box (or jar, depending on the translation) can never be
opened or severe consequences for humanity will result. Pandora eventually
opens the box “whereupon every plague and tribulation, every misfortune and
evil thing in the world came pouring out, and they have afflicted mankind ever
since” (McCarthy & Carey, 2016, 05:28). Pandora realizes what is happening
before the box empties and closes the lid with one thing left inside: hope. The
myth is meant as cautionary tale. Like Eve in a related origin story, qualities
inherent to women (e.g., curiosity, disobedience, lack of impulse control—
characteristics also often attributed to the child) cause all the trouble. The
idiom “don’t open Pandora’s box” warns against starting something new and
unknown as there might be unwanted consequences.
In most versions of the myth, hope remains inside the box. Pandora is
therefore accused of making another mistake by trapping what is good inside:
she condemns humanity to suffering forever. In Justineau’s telling, Pandora
“lifted [hope] in her hands and set it free. Hope is the good thing that makes
you able to stand all the bad things” (06:30). For most of the film, the childhungries embody hope for the human exceptional world: they are a potential
cure, and for that they endure dehumanizing treatment. But instead of hope for
inclusion in the world as is, Melanie makes a new world possible with her fiery
act of refusal. Hope can be a form of cruel optimism wherein we are complicit
in desiring something that “is actually an obstacle to our flourishing” (Berlant,
2011, p. 1), an idea I revisit in the book’s conclusion, but, for now, it is important
to note that hope can be otherwise—hope is a gift to the child-hungries from

 Infecting Whiteness

63

a fellow geontological friend named Pandora. In the novel, Justineau tells the
child-hungries that Pandora “was a really amazing woman. All the gods had
blessed her and given her gifts. That’s what her name means—‘the girl with all
the gifts.’ So she was clever, and brave, and beautiful, and funny, and everything
else you’d want to be” (Carey, 2014, p. 27). Melanie thinks similarly: she voices
concern about the unethical blame placed on Pandora, wishes that Pandora
was her name, and is curious about the secrets being hidden from the childhungries, including the story of their origins.
A day or two passes and viewers are taken again to the classroom to hear
the second story I want to highlight which is written by Melanie. At this
point, we still are not sure why these children are restrained and there is not
much in the history of zombie films that prepares us for what we will see next.
Child zombies are rare. If present at all, they take the form of “changelings . . .
monsters who have been swapped in for child; even though they may look like
children, talk like children, and act like children, they really aren’t children
at all and therefore don’t deserve to be treated like children” (Renner, 2016,
p. 12). This is how the soldiers and scientists treat the child-hungries, but I am
far from convinced that the child-hungries can or should be expelled from the
category child altogether. As we enter the classroom, we watch the students
struggle to translate their imagination onto paper. The camera zooms in on
a few of their hands holding pencils—we see different pincer grips, different
levels of handedness, different stages of motor control. After a period of quiet
composition, Justineau asks for volunteers to read aloud their stories. Melanie’s
hand shoots up. She begins:
Once upon a time, in ancient Greece, there was a woman. She was very
beautiful, the most beautiful and kind and clever and amazing woman in
all the world. One day, she was walking in a forest when suddenly she was
attacked by a monster. It was a friggin’ abortion and it wanted to eat her. The
woman was really brave. She fought and fought, but the monster was big and
fierce. She couldn’t kill it. She broke her sword and her spear. The monster
was about to eat her but then a girl came running up . . . . She fought the
monster and killed it and cut of its head and went galumphing back. And the
woman. . . . The women said, “You are my special girl. You will always be with
me and I’ll never, never let you go.” And they lived . . . . They lived happily
together ever after.
(11:52)

 64

Anthropocene Childhoods

The story brings Justineau to tears and Melanie profusely apologies thinking
that she has told a story incorrectly. Justineau comes over to Melanie and
softy touches her on the head. This causes the Sergeant to rush into the room,
scolding Justineau as he does. Parks decides to rub off the blocker ointment
from his arm and stick it beneath the nose of a child-hungry. The blocker gel is
to mask human smell and once removed we see the child-hungries transform
for the first time. They foam at the mouth, they gyrate in their chairs, they snap
their teeth—they change from a prototypical child-figure to something more.
The Sergeant snaps at Justineau, “You think something’s human because it’s
vaguely the right shape” (15:15).
Wynter draws on Césaire and Fanon to put forth her theory that humans
are not only biological beings but are a “storytelling species . . . the human
is homo narrans” (Wynter & McKittrick, 2015, p. 25). From Césaire, Wynter
plays on his “science of the Word,” which means that “the study of the Word
(the mythoi) will condition the study of nature (the bios)” (p. 18). From
Fanon, Wynter builds on his theory of sociogeny to conceive of the human
as a hybrid being. For Wynter (2015), “our ‘stories’ are as much a part of what
makes us human . . . as are our bipedalism and the use of our hands” (p. 54).
Drawing from the sciences, Wynter also forwards the idea that storytelling
allows for autopoiesis, a form of self-(re)generation that attends to “the ways
life comes into being” (Erasmus, 2020, p. 50), and/or the “capacity to turn
theory into flesh” (Wynter, 2000, p. 51). This means that humans “constitute
themselves as subjects within specific physical, historical, psychosocial and
power formations that are themselves shaped by human design” (Erasmus,
2020, p. 51). So, it is not only that child-hungries are the “right shape” to be
recognized as human, but that they have storytelling capacities within which
they (and others) story themselves as human (or are storied out of being
human). This storytelling capacity “has been used to uphold and reinforce
the dominant world order, it also has the potential to rupture humanism from
within” (Truman, 2019, p. 1).
As the film proceeds, we understand better why Melanie’s story is
remarkable. The child-hungries’ origin story is revealed in a way that makes
the “friggin’ abortions” nickname particularly crass. The Sergeant and his
squad used to leave the base to do retrieval and supply runs in nearby
towns. On one of those trips, they discovered newborn child-hungries

 Infecting Whiteness

65

inside an abandoned hospital maternity ward. The assumption is that the
mothers became infected while pregnant and passed on the pathogen
to their embryos. The mothers’ corpses were found “cored”—all organs
around their mid-sections were gone—the child-hungries “ate their way
out” (51:50). This is an awful image to visualize: the origin story of the
child-hungries is violent. The military convoy transported the infant childhungries to the base where they have been locked up ever since. Melanie,
nevertheless, has learned about forests, monsters, swords, spears, bravery,
murder, and to desire a maternal kind of love. These were things she had
not experienced, but they become the story of her hungry-self. Melanie was
not the monster in her story either; she was a survivor—the hero—because
“they lived.”
Until the Sergeant made the child-hungries transform, Melanie seemed
unaware of their hungry form. Yet from the story we can glean that it was
not necessarily biology that Melanie supposed made her human—in this case,
being the “right shape”—but her constitution in and through story. Melanie’s
alternative origin story matters. Wynter explains, “In this case we are no
longer, as individual biological subjects, primarily born of the womb; rather,
we are both initiated and reborn as fictively instituted . . . kin-recognizing
members of each . . . referent-we” (Wynter & McKittrick, 2015, p. 34). Taking
seriously Wynter’s homo narrans as “a function that made us who we are as a
species, this very ‘mechanism’ can be used speculatively to rewrite the human”
(Truman, 2019, p. 5). Melanie and the child-hungries are not determined by
their awful entry into the world, their origin story can be otherwise. Is this the
gift that Gifts offers us? Is this what Melanie’s story-within-a-story about love,
compassion, violence, and hope also performs? Is the origin story the world on
fire—a world not yet written?
The third story I want to recount also concerns the child-hungries
emplacement within a bios-mythoi worlding. Caldwell uses logic problems
to test Melanie’s ability to think both rationally and creatively. The particular
thought experiment I want to focus on is a version of Schrödinger’s cat
experiment, which is told without the details of quantum superposition being
a point of interest. Instead, the biocentric question of concern is whether the
cat is alive or dead. Caldwell explains the problem to Melanie as, “There’s a
cat in a box. It could be alive or dead. Fifty-fifty. How would you find out?”

 66

Anthropocene Childhoods

(08:51). Melanie’s quick response is that she would open the box (perhaps
forgetting—or not—the lessons of Pandora from earlier) and take a look.
Caldwell replies that seeing, listening, or disturbing the box in anyway is
not permitted. Intrigued, Melanie responds that she would like to consider
it further and get back to her. Caldwell agrees and scribbles in her notebook,
“Exquisite mimicry of observed behaviours,” which recalls the behaviorist
school of child development. In this way of knowing, children are said to learn
best by watching and listening to adults as a form of observational learning
(e.g., Bandura, 1971), and Melanie is excelling. Caldwell then asks Melanie for
a number between 1 and 20 and Melanie responds 13. We hear Caldwell call
“transit” as the scene ends and cell door opens. The next day in class, Melanie
keeps looking around and asking about Kenny. We learn that Kenny was in
cell 13, and we wager he has been taken away for experimental dissection.
Later on, Melanie is asked again for a cell number and she responds 4, which
is her lockup unit. Melanie has figured it out and the next day she is brought
to Caldwell for experimentation. While we have no reason to foresee the
fiery ending of seed pod dispersion, this is an early indication that Melanie
will not sacrifice her kin-kind for the humans that incarcerate them. When
Melanie enters the lab, Caldwell ask again, “Is the cat alive or dead?” Melanie
responds, “The cat’s not in the box,” to which Caldwell returns, “The standard
answer is . . . it’s both. Alive and dead and the same time. But it’s what you
came here for, isn’t it? The answer to the mystery. It’s you, Melanie. In this
analogy you open the box . . . and you find yourself there. I’m sorry.” (22:43).
Melanie is not only the cat—both alive and dead, human and pathogen, child
and monster—but also Pandora—she releases a plague on humanity, which
simultaneously instantiates hope for the child-hungries. The future Caldwell
was trying to achieve was incompatible with Melanie’s, and so, at the end of the
film, Melanie materializes a new origin story for a world shaped by contagion.
This new origin story is not one of autopoiesis but sympoiesis.
While Wynter draws on the concept autopoiesis in her work, I do not
intend to lock her down into an individualistic frame of interpretation.7
Wynter’s work continues to be theorized and reconceptualized, for example,
by Zimitri Erasmus (2020) and Bedour Alagraa (2021), as more relational and
intradependent. Instead of autopoiesis as something humans perform alone,
Erasmus reinterprets this process as the “making of the world as a symbiotic

 Infecting Whiteness

67

and relational process . . . a way of knowing—not only the human, but life—
which postulates that human, animal, and organic life-systems co-create the
world in this technological and information age” (p. 52). Taking this further,
and toward what I take as a gesture of nonlife’s intra-active capacities, Erasmus
reads the hybridly human (i.e., “biological/organic and symbolic/mythmaking”) as “sym-bio-lic being” (p. 52). The sym is meant to highlight the
symbolic (i.e., logos and mythoi), but I think it can be doubled up to embrace
the symbiotic—life and nonlife in mutually co-constitutive relationships,
something explored in more detail in the following chapter. In the case study
at present, sympoiesis find form in the intra-action of pathogen and child:
Sympoiesis is a simple word: it means “making with.” Nothing makes itself;
nothing is really autopoietic or self-organizing . . . . Sympoiesis is a word
proper to complex, dynamic, responsive, situated, historical systems . . .
Sympoiesis enfolds autopoiesis and generatively unfurls and extends it.
(Haraway, 2016, p. 58)

In a description fit for pathogens and child-hungries, Haraway presumes,
“critters do not precede their relatings; they make each other through semiotic
material involution, out of the beings of previous such entanglements” (p. 60).
Origin stories told through the figure of the child find theoretical affinity
with Hannah Arendt’s (1958) concept of natality. Natality is a note of
optimism in her large corpus of work most recognized for incisive accounts
of totalitarianism and the banality of evil.8 Arendt describes natality as when
“something new is started which cannot be expected from whatever may have
happened before . . . so that with each birth something uniquely new comes into
the world” (p. 177). Each child is “unique, each capable of new initiatives that
may interrupt or divert the chains of events set in motion by previous actions”
(p. xvii).9 Recalling the discussion in Chapter 1, Clark (2017) flips Arendt’s
hopeful concept on its head by suggesting that the Anthropocene encapsulates
a looming “crises of natality: a waning of that resurgent hope attending the
coming into the world of new life” (p. 159). However, Clark also holds onto
something generative in Arendt’s insistence that natality “stresses that the
birth of a child has a miraculous potentiality, repeating—as it does each time—
the improbable of emergence of organic life from the domain of inorganic
matter” (p. 164). Clark therein extends natality from biopolitical reproduction

 68

Anthropocene Childhoods

to geontological possibility. The crisis that Clark gestures toward includes
dangerous levels of greenhouse gasses, rising temperatures, and toxic waste,
for example, that have increased anxiety about “spectres of mutation, pollution,
proliferation, and dehiscence” that feed into an “apprehension of nonhuman
agency” (Sheldon, 2016, p. 177). Rebekah Sheldon (2016) argues that the
figure of the child is called to “bind [nonhuman agency] back, reconsolidating
liveliness within the charmed circle of human futurity” (p. 177). Through
the figure of the child, the damaged Earth system—including uncontainable
pathogens and pandemics—can be brought back to human auspice, thereby
reiterating the ideological elision of continuing ecocide. Melanie and the
child-hungries upset this possibility. The dominant image of the child has long
been “a redemptive agent ensuring futurity” (Sellers, 2013, p. 71), but Melanie
insists on a follow-up question and response: future for whom?
In this chapter, I have tried to spotlight how Gifts gestures toward what
otherwise origins and otherwise survival might look, feel, and be like. As
explained, this otherwise is not an innocent undertaking in Gifts and involves
a world on fire where destruction and regeneration coincide. Thinking with
Melanie and the pathogen has been in an effort to grapple with belonging,
anti-blackness, questions of the human, damaged landscapes, and pathogenic
disturbances, while staying open to not this, not yet, and what if of speculative
possibilities. While I have tried to highlight Melanie’s becoming-with pathogen
in ways that trouble the image of the child as an innocent, individualistic hero
figure, I am aware of slippages. My worry is that conceiving of Melanie as a
“brave survivalist” (Brown, 2013, para. 4) places undo responsibility on a Black
female child-figure to claim responsibility for the end of the (white) world
and the survival of her hungry-kin in a new world (Cecire, 2015; Nyong’o,
2015). It is an ever-present danger in the movement of the figure of the child
who saves to one doing the protecting, surviving, and, even, destructing. A
concern emerging from this work that requires more engagement is how we
might think with speculative child-figures at the end of the world in ways that
grapple with the kinds of conditions, resources, and imaginaries required to
capacitate lives actually capable of flourishing in this one.
I hope a takeaway from this geostorying of Gifts is not that a speculative
figure or fiction can “save us—but it might open our imaginations” (Tsing,
2015, p. 19). What is most generative about speculative fiction is its capacity

 Infecting Whiteness

69

to “experiment with different scenarios, trajectories, and reversals, elaborating
new values and testing different possibilities for creating more just and
equitable societies” (Benjamin, 2018, para. 31). What happened to be most
just for the child-hungries was the end of a world. Otherwise origins and ends
are possible, and story has a major role to play. The next chapter foregrounds a
speculative series that engages with what might emerge in the wake of the end
the world. It also continues questioning the value of survival for survival’s sake
in worlds that elevate a particular genre of the human above all other forms
of existence. Whereas Gifts ends with a world on fire, however, N. K. Jemisin’s
Broken Earth trilogy begins with the end of the world. The first words of the
series capture this difference: “Let’s start with the end of the world, why don’t
we?” (Jemisin, 2015, p. 1). As such, Jemisin never lets readers sit comfortably
in potentia of a new world. The child-figures in the series are not granted any
assurance of futurity either. This is a world that ends again and again and again.

 70

 ­4

Becoming-Geos
The Stratification of Childhood

In the last chapter, a figure of Anthropocene Child ended a world to begin
another that might not be so cruel to her kin-kind. The world Melanie insisted
upon was one where a fellow speculative species—the orogenes of N. K.
Jemisin’s Broken Earth trilogy—might not only survive, but, along with the
child-hungries, come to thrive. Neither hungries or orogenes are the sort
of companion species that humans show themselves capable of living-with
(Haraway, 2008); they are “incompanionate” species “with whom interspecies
relating may not be so obvious or comfortable” (Livingston & Puar, 2011,
p. 4). Some call them monsters in the pejorative, but I am not so quick to turn
away from what is different or difficult. “You may be a monster,” the narrator
of Broken Earth surmises, “but you are also great” (Jemisin, 2015, p. 232).
Jemisin’s award-winning trilogy is supportive of my continued efforts to deamplify a particular genre of the human as Man (Wynter, 2003), anchored in
place as it is by the figure of the bionormative child. Jemisin aids this effort by
foregrounding geos in the constitution of both beings, relations, and worlds.

Geos Beings and Becomings
In Jemisin’s worlding, orogenes have geos-powers derived from and shared
with the earth. Orogeny is a concept from geology that refers to how mountains
are made overtime by tectonic displacements—a slow upward folding of the
earth’s crust. Orogenes have the ability to connect with and redirect earthly
energies—they can symbiotically produce or negate seismic movements like

 72

Anthropocene Childhoods

earthquakes, frost freezes, or tidal waves. With orogenes as protagonists what
counts as human is not taken-for-granted in the world of Broken Earth but is
up for geos-refiguration. This can be read into Kathryn Yusoff ’s (2013) figuring
of the Anthropocene “as a provocation to begin to understand ourselves as
geologic subjects, not only capable of geomorphic acts, but as beings who have
something in common with . . . geologic forces” (p. 781). The child-figures in this
chapter, particularly a child-orogene named Nassun, embody and enact these
provocations in ways that may have anticipatory significance for this world.
My understanding of geos-powers is indebted to key feminist teachers.
First, Elizabeth Grosz’s geopower is “the force, the forces, of the earth itself ”
that exceed human control, despite our best efforts (Grosz et al., 2017, p. 135).
This challenges an Anthropocene recentering of the human atop the species
hierarchy—as if we are acting alone on the world stage. Second, Elizabeth
Povinelli’s (2016) geontopower captures the tactics, strategies, knowledges,
and practices that maintain the division of life (bios) and nonlife (geos) in
late liberal capitalist economies of difference. This includes disregarding the
agentic potentiality of those who are nonlife (e.g., rocks, minerals, chemicals),
and governing humans who are too close to nonlife (e.g., Indigenous peoples
and their more-than-human kin). Third, Yusoff (2018) brings together
both theorists to figure geopower as “both the inhuman context in which
biopolitical life is organized and as a concept that opens thinking towards
cosmic forces” (p. 205). This includes how the humans exist in an ecological
web that depends on nonhuman matter, and also that there are relations
between inhuman existents that impact planetary systems in ways not
delimited by the Foucauldian mantra to make live and let die. Thought with
Broken Earth, geos-powers emerge from the intermingling of bodies, stones,
energetic threads, and earth. In so doing, “Jemisin critiques divisions between
life and nonlife to reveal the contiguity of geological, biological, and imaginary
worlds that transcend” the human as Man (Dowdall, 2020, p. 161).

Geos-Figuring Speculative Worlds
In the world of Broken Earth multiple temporalities and perspectives are
simultaneously at play. The epic fantasy moves between deep planetary time
and human lifespans. The temporal juxtaposition of human life and earth life

 Becoming-Geos: The Stratification of Childhood

73

is remarked on by the narrator, a creaturely figure of inhuman timespaces
themselves: “human beings, too, are ephemeral things in the planetary scale.
The number of things that they do not notice are literally astronomical”
(Jemisin, 2015, p. 150). What the Broken Earth novels do, attributable to
Jemisin’s layered world-building, is help me notice geos-spatiotemporal scales
and relations, and thereby begin to think of space, time, and earth as quasicharacters themselves.
The background to the apocalyptic event that opens the Broken Earth series
is that forty thousand years ago humans tried to extract all of Earth’s energy
and ended up driving the Moon out of orbit. This is explained as follows:
Then people began to do horrible things to Father Earth. They poisoned
waters beyond even his ability to cleanse, and killed much of the other life
that lived on his surface. They drilled through the crust of his skin, past the
blood of his mantle, to get at the sweet marrow of his bones.
(Jemisin, 2015, p. 379)

Reminiscent of the description of the destruction of Mother Earth in The
Marrow Thieves, this also connects to causal descriptions of the Anthropocene
in that mass fossil fuel and mineral extraction have destroyed the relative
stability of the Earth system. In Jemisin’s series the Moon is Father Earth’s
child. Father Earth’s response to his child’s atmospheric expulsion is to
implement the Seasons, which are apocalyptic climatic events like volcanic
eruptions, floods, and earthquakes that end the world for a while but not for
once and all. Storying a planetary existence in paternal terms might seem
overly anthropomorphic save for the fact that humans have never been the
center of this world, so all qualities and relations cannot be attributed back to
them. The world of Broken Earth is a supercontinent called the Stillness that
has always homed inhuman existents; the inhabitants of this planet are acutely
aware of their multispecies intra-dependence.
The lifelike qualities that define the human, particularly children in the
prime of development, are those most often denied to geologic forms. For
example, nonlife does “not seem to participate in social life . . . they do not
seem to have interiorities, they do not strive, they do not metabolize, they do
not reproduce or seem to respond” (Palsson & Swanson, 2016, p. 152). Jemisin
troubles this set of exclusions with her set of speculative creatures that include

 74

Anthropocene Childhoods

orogenes, stone-eaters, and Father Earth. Immediately, Earth as Father is set
up as atypical; Mother Earth is the more familiar figure, a feminine nurturer
and site of life. Yet it was Father Earth who took care of everyone for a long
time: “he crafted even, predictable seasons; kept changes of wind and wave
and temperature slow enough so that every living being could adapt, evolve”
(Jemisin, 2015, p. 37). Father Earth now inflicts destruction out of revenge,
out of pain of losing his son. He has interiority; he has motive. Earth has
agency, lots of it. Humans realize this too late, after they have selfishly taken
too much. They mistakenly thought, Jemisin makes clear, that “someone
must suffer, if the rest are to enjoy Luxury . . . . Better the earth . . . . Better to
enslave a great inanimate object that cannot feel pain” (Jemisin, 2017, p. 334).
Much like the case with the child-hungries in the last chapter, this is not true.
We also learn that Father Earth’s attachment to his child is stronger than the
parental bio-bond of the more human characters in the series. Theirs is an
intimacy and sustained trauma that transgress the short timeframe of human
lifetimes. Father Earth will not be ignored if the end of the world is ever to
end. He demands a response. In the Stillness, humans are instead “with and of
the earth, and the biotic and abiotic powers of this earth are the main story”
(Haraway, 2016, p. 55).

Geostorying a Broken Earth
The first novel is called The Fifth Season (Jemisin, 2015) and recounts the stories
of three orogenes: Essun, a middle-aged woman; Damaya, a newly discovered
child-orogene; and Syenite, a teenage student trained at the Fulcrum, which
is a government school for orogenes that has more in common with the
military base in Gifts than the infamous magic of Hogwarts. Before the main
characters are introduced, the narrator tells of a great and powerful orogene so
disgusted with how his kin-kind have been used and abused for centuries that
he fractures the Stillness along its most vulnerable fault line. What is suggested
is that this could be the start of how “the world ends. For the last time” (p. 14).
Essun feels the shockwaves of the ground being ripped apart, so she runs
home to her children, who also happen to be orogenes, not that anyone in
their “comm” (i.e., community) is aware that they have been living among

 Becoming-Geos: The Stratification of Childhood

75

these feared beings. In an excruciating scene, Essun discovers the dead body
of her toddler son, killed at the hands of her husband, and quickly realizes her
daughter, Nassun, has been kidnapped, also by her husband. Her world ends
twice in mere moments—ecocide and grief. Essun’s search for Nassun is the
narrative thread that carries the three novels forward. However, there is much
more than a straight temporality at work. Near the end of the first novel, the
three figures of Essun, Damaya, and Syenite are revealed to be the same person
at different stages of their life.
In the second and third books, narrative attention redirects toward Nassun.
Nassun is eight years old when the story begins. She has untapped geos-powers
of enormous potency. As an orogene, Nassun exists in excess of the nature/
culture divide that traditionally delimits childhood. She is both bios and geos,
and not a mixing of two mutually exclusive components either but biosgeos—
one. Donna Haraway’s (2004) “naturecultures” would be a close parallel. Even
more apt, Nassun is a Chthonic one, the “powers of Terra” form in, through,
and with her (Haraway, 2016). Upon discovering Nassun’s orogeny, her father
insists that they find a cure and they travel to a place rumored to know of an
antidote. This search is the focus of the second book called The Obelisk Gate
(Jemisin, 2016). Once they arrive, however, Nassun learns to accept her orogeny
as a gift rather than a “disease” or a “poison” (p. 114), much like Melanie in
this regard. Nassun’s control and refinement of her geos-abilities grow quickly
under the watchful eye of a Guardian—who, unbeknownst to her, is the same
being who almost forty years ago found her mother and brought her to the
Fulcrum. Guardians are members of the ruling class who are tasked to “track,
protect, protect against and guide orogenes” (Jemisin, 2015, p. 409). Guardians
are particularly cruel figures in that they speak of love while exercising
authoritarian control over the young, oftentimes resorting to violence.
As Nassun battles within herself about her orogeny, she also grapples with
the implications of broken bio-bonds on a broken earth. Nassun’s mother has
been tough on her, trained her secretly in orogeny, and withheld the affection
that Nassun most desired. Her father murdered her brother, cannot accept her
geos-powers, and longs for her to become someone much less extraordinary.
These bio-relations are linked up to systemic oppression in the Stillness.
The despicable way society treats orogenes is felt-lived in intimate moments
between parent and child. Jemisin pays attention to “the impact of structural

 76

Anthropocene Childhoods

oppression on parents and children—how the pressure to keep her children
alive in a world hostile to their existence drives Essun, and how Nassun
experiences that pressure as a child” (Oler, 2018, para. 8). And while I am
not going to rationalize the father’s behaviors, it does show how a historicized
conditioning of hate and fear gets acted out on those not considered fully
human. Jemisin has repeatedly said in interviews that her formulation of
oppression is influenced by anti-Black racism and settler colonialism. The
trauma Essun experiences as a child-orogene has intergeneration effects on
Nassun in ways that reflect what happens in this world, particularly in the
context of residential school survivors. I return to this point later.
The third book, The Stone Sky (Jemisin, 2017), ventures way back in
geological time to trace how the Seasons unfolded and how the subjugation of
orogenes was normalized over the centuries. In this way, the colonization of the
orogenes is intertwined with that of the earth in a Mobius strip-like relation.
In an Anthropocene connection, this illustrates Yusoff ’s (2018) argument
for the co-constitution of the inhuman wherein both earthly materials and
subaltern bodies are formed in relations of negation to what counts as proper
humanity. Nevertheless, unable to be fully controlled, both orogenes and earth
contain “within them the same potential to shatter the control that has been
so painstakingly, and brutally, constructed by the [human] majority” (Oler,
2018, para. 7). The climax of the trilogy occurs when Nassun and Essun finally
reunite. However, they meet on opposing sides. Should the world end once
and for all and with it the systems of governance that have kept orogenes
enslaved, as Nassun desires? Or should orogeny be used to return the Moon
to the Earth’s orbit and end the Seasons once and for all, as Essun wishes? Like
Melanie, Nassun is not a child-figure in need of saving: she can protect the
world as is, become its destroyer in an affirmation of not this, or instigate a
future of what if.

Geos-Powers in Inhuman(e) Worlds
As noted, Essun/Damaya/Syenite and Nassun are inhuman figures called
orogenes or roggas in the derogatory slang of the Stillness. Like its semantic
equivalent in this world, the use of the rogga “slur is deliberate. A dehumanizing

 Becoming-Geos: The Stratification of Childhood

77

word for someone who has been made into a thing” (Jemisin, 2015, p. 140).
Orogenes are able to gather energy from the earth and other lively matter: they
can “manipulate thermal, kinetic, and related forms of energy” (p. 462).
They have enormous power, for example, they can reach down to sediment
underneath the ocean floor and raise it up into mountains. In short, orogenes
have the power to bring about the end of a world but mostly they stop the end
from happening—orogenes quell much more than cause. The lines between
what is sentient and inert are blurred to such an extent that everything in the
ironically named Stillness has vital potential.
Orogeny has a biological base in that geos-powers depend on the sessapinae,
which are “paired organs located at the base of the brain stem” (p. 343). This
bio-embedment allows orogenes to “sess” the earth’s movement—think of
this as a kind of ongoing earthly relational awareness. Additionally, orogenes
symbiotically draw upon the earth’s energetic forces—think of this as a sort of
becoming-geos-with. Orogene abilities are innate, present from birth, and at
first instinctual: bios and geos always already exist intra-actively in orogene
children. Because orogeny can easily kill, orogenes become targets for being
killed. Damaya is told by her Guardian that she is one of the lucky ones.
Though locked in a barn as a child by her Still (i.e., human) family she was
given just enough food and shelter to survive, and, unlike many other orogene
children who are abandoned, she never accidentally kills anyone. Orogenes
who survive early childhood are brought to the Fulcrum to be trained by
Guardians. Through indoctrination and discipline—what Guardians count
as care—orogene children are taught to control their powers. For example,
Damaya “learns how to visualize and breathe, and to extend her awareness
of the earth at will and not merely in reaction to its movements or her own
agitation” (p. 197).
Jemisin says that she modelled the Fulcrum school system on the Stolen
Generation of Indigenous children in Australia (Hanifin & Jemisin, 2015), but
these schools were a technology of genocide in most settler colonial states.
Like with the Fulcrum, many Indigenous children in Canada were taken from
their families, stripped of their language, given new names, and made to be
ashamed of their culture’s gifts. Not everything is transposable though. Some
orogene children become breeders for the Fulcrum. Even though orogeny is
not a guaranteed genetic inheritance the odds do increase when two orogenes

 78

Anthropocene Childhoods

reproduce. So, while orogenes are hated, they are also desired; this reproductive
insistence splits orogene-children from equivocations of Indigenous children
in settler states. The goal of settler colonialism is elimination, not reproduction
(Simpson, 2011; Smith, 2010; Wolfe, 2006). The Fulcrum also hires out
orogenes for assignments in which they move earth in productive ways, for
example, clearing a harbor of coral so ships can enter and trade. Whatever the
form of labor—reproductive or economic—the orogenes are made slaves and
the Guardian/Fulcrum masters. This relates to critical questions of who and
what counts as human in the novels. Alabaster tells an inquiring Syenite: “But
each of us is just another weapon, to them. Just a useful monster” (Jemisin,
2015, p. 143). Later he tells her: “That we’re not human is just the lie they tell
themselves so they don’t have to feel bad about how they treat us” (p. 354).
Identifications of monster and human do not stay still but shift from abject to
admired, and condemned to desired.
In press for the series, Jemisin relays that Essun/Syenite/Damaya and
Nassun would be seen in this world as Black, and, as such, she purposefully
wrote the series as a “Black female power fantasy” (Hurley & Jemisin, 2018,
p. 470). Blackness is not mainly an exteriorized feature in the Stillness, which
connects with Hartman’s (1997) explanation of blackness as an aspect of
“social relationality rather than identity . . . a contested figure at the very center
of social struggle” (p. 57). Blackness is much more than skin deep. Jemisin
(2015) describes the orogene children of the Fulcrum as “all different: different
ages, different colors, different shapes” (p. 193). Physical features adapt to
environmental conditions in the Stillness, and Jemisin developed markers
along these lines. Orogeny in Broken Earth is a means for Jemisin “to question
widespread cultural assumptions about the ‘natural’ divisions between race,
species, and matter that underpin hierarchies of the human” (Dowdall, 2020,
p. 151). Orogenes do not share skin color, which challenges the externalization
of biological racism. Nevertheless, they are the “dysselected” ones (Wynter,
2003)—beings racialized as naturally inferior by another biological feature
(i.e., sessapinae). Without skin color to rely upon, orogene-children are
made recognizable as a racial group by other means (e.g., black uniforms),
and they are a hated, feared, and violently oppressed one at that. While
orogenes’ symbiotic earth powers are not overly familiar to this world, the
oppression that they face is entirely recognizable. While race in the Stillness

 Becoming-Geos: The Stratification of Childhood

79

may be color-blind, it is just as systemically real as racism in this world. The
Stillness is structured by “racializing assemblages” that jive with contemporary
governmentalities, including state policies, government schools, segregated
communities, surveillance technologies, selective histories, and micropolitical
aggressions (Weheliye, 2014).
The oppression of orogenes has been naturalized over time and space in
such ways that the very existence of the Stillness depends on the sacrifice
of some orogene lives for the benefit of human lives. Orogenes—those not
economically or reproductively valuable—are made disposable and in being
made disposable maintain their usefulness. What I intend by this claim
is rendered apparent in one of the trilogy’s most affective scenes. Syenite,
accompanied by Alabaster, has been sent on an assignment for the Fulcrum.
Deep into their travels they feel the earth shake and they can tell its source is
orogeny. The Fulcrum assigns unruly orogene children or those brought to
school too late to be properly educated (i.e., controlled) to the position of node
maintainer. Node maintainers are stationed at outposts across the Stillness and
their job is to quell any seismic activity that may arise in their vicinity in order
to protect the nearby villages and villagers. Syenite had assumed that the node
maintainers were just “poor fools assigned to tedious duty” (Jemisin, 2015,
p. 119), but what she discovers unbalances her worldview:
The body in the node maintainer’s chair is small, and naked. Thin, its limbs
atrophied. Hairless. There are things—tubes and pipes and things, she has
no words for them—going into the stick—arms, down the goggle—throat,
across the narrow crotch. There’s a flexible bag on the corpse’s belly, attached
to its belly somehow, and it’s full of—ugh. The bag needs to be changed.
(p. 139)

Because orogeny is instinctual, the Fulcrum keeps the child-body and discards
the rest. These children are reduced to “nothing but that instinct, nothing but
the ability to quell shakes” (p. 141).
This makes me want to push the move Sheldon (2016) makes in theorizing
a shift in the image of the child from protected to protector. This orogenechild did much saving of humans while strapped to a machine; however, this
node maintainer also found a way to resist and caused a quake. In doing so he
ended his suffering along with the lives of nearby humans that contributed

 80

Anthropocene Childhoods

to it or were complicit with the system of injustice that required it. He moved
from saving the world to destroying it, which is a form of justice from the
perspective of those who are persecuted. What Jemisin offers, especially in
scenes such as this, is a speculative and serious engagement with structures
of oppression that mirror this world, arrangements that might be otherwise,
and cautions about locating the potential for an otherwise in a subaltern
subject. Who are the node maintainers in this world? What is required
of them? Is their resistance possible? Syenite resolves that “survival is not
the same thing as living” (Jemisin, 2015, p. 441), and this is a question
the Anthropocene discussion has largely avoided engaging according to
Colebrook (2014):
The post-apocalyptic is best read as a question posed: just as the human
species starts to approach the real possibility of its actual non-existence . . .
there is a barely perceived and half-articulated problem of how and whether
humans ought to survive. What is it about humanity that one would want
to accept?
(p. 190)

The Broken Earth trilogy engages these provocations and more. The emergence
of a new “modality of the human”—the orogene—is dangerous and violent
(Weheliye, 2014, p. 8). It is monstrous.

Inhuman Monsters, Inhuman Natures
Picking up on a theme from the last chapter, post-apocalyptic speculative fiction
is full of inhuman monsters of various sorts. There are abundant examples of
cyborgs, zombies, vampires, robots, and anthropomorphic animals that fill
books and screens. Often in such stories another key inhuman figure is a feral
nature set as adversary, for example, viruses, tsunamis, and earthquakes. The
inhuman can also signify human cruelty and violence, as in the inhumanity of
humans. Yusoff (2019) outlines two figurations of the inhuman that extend this
figuration further: first, the inhuman as matter—the earthly substances that
geology takes as its proper object, for example, rocks and minerals; second, the
inhuman as in the making of racial categories and persons, particularly those

 Becoming-Geos: The Stratification of Childhood

81

subjected to the violences of slavery and settler colonialism. In other words,
the inhuman as a technology of “unhumaning” (Sharpe, 2018, p. 172).
Yusoff (2089) explains that there is a material economy that travels across
these compositions—the inhuman doubling composes the extractive and
accumulative logics of the Anthropocene. For example, this brings to mind the
Gold Coast, which was the colonial British name for what is now Ghana. The
Gold Coast was rich in gold, petroleum, and other minerals; it was also rich in
bodies—Black Africans for enslaved labor. The Anthropocene can therefore be
understood as an inhuman assemblage where inhuman substances (e.g., gold,
diamonds) and inhuman bodies (e.g., enslaved persons, miners) are entangled.
What is mined from the earth cannot be thought apart from the human
labor that extracts it and the geographical territories from which it is taken.
Contemporary examples are also plentiful, including the De Beers diamond
mines and Keystone pipelines running through Indigenous territories in what
is currently Canada. Often the lines of difference between the various senses
of inhuman are important to untangle, but, in this chapter, I look at how they
are remade in relation.
In bringing both racist structures and extractivist practices together, Jemisin
illustrates the double sense of the inhuman outlined by Yusoff. The trilogy
slowly unravels how the exploitation of the earth and the racialized oppression
of orogenes are intra-related. The consequences of both are a broken earth:
It is a powerful way of evoking our own relationship to energy during the
Anthropocene; an Afrofuturist projection that sees connections between
various imperial projects of resource extraction. Whether it is the geological
labor of the planet of the biological labor of black bodies, the Empire works
for the assumption of a right to life in all its forms.
(Dowdall, 2020, p. 162)

Importantly, life in the Broken Earth is not just that which is biologically
(i.e., metabolically) alive. It is “life-that which is alive, or was alive, or even
that which was alive so many ages ago that it has turned into something else”
(Jemisin, 2016, pp. 360–1). Life is mineral too. It is geontological perplexity.
Possibilities for inhuman sovereignty lie with Nassun. She must choose
her kin-kind over her parental bio-bonds. Nassun turns her father to stone
in order to free herself and begin to fully intra-connect with earthy forces

 82

Anthropocene Childhoods

in ways that Fulcrum trained orogenes cannot; she also has to battle her
mother to end the oppression of orogenes once and for all. Her geos-powers
are raw and undisciplined. They have not been schooled. Nassun can feel and
visualize silver threads—what she calls magic—which are the forces of life
and nonlife combining all around her: “Magic is everywhere in the world . . .
cultivated in every flower bed and tree line and grapevine-draped wall”
(Jemisin, 2017, p. 209). Magic winds bios and geos together into a network
of life and nonlife:
A web of silver threads interlacing the land, permeating rock and even the
magma just underneath, strung like jewels between forests and fossilized
corals and pools of oil. Carried through the air on the webs of leaping
spiderlings. Threads in the clouds, though thin, strung between microscopic
living things in water droplets.
(Jemisin, 2016, p. 361)

Nassun recognizes and learns to become-with these threads in geosocial
relations: “the inscription of human activities in geologic matter and the
inscription of the geologic in living beings” (Palsson & Swanson, 2016, p. 167).
In the reciprocal exchanges between life and nonlife, Jemisin “opens up a downto-earth form of geopolitics . . . . by attending to different geologic scales—to
living bodies, human and nonhuman; to solid rock; and to the planet itself ”
(p. 151).
The inhuman creatures that I listed atop this section as monsters are not
necessarily how some critical theorists define the monstrous. In an interview,
Yusoff asks Povinelli if she considers the Anthropocene a “monstrous
geography,” meaning “a kind of suicidal exhausting of earth materials”
(Povinelli et al., 2014, paras. 20–1). Povinelli responds that she reserves “the
idea of the monster for that which decisively disrupts the current organization
of the actual—the current distribution of sense,” and, given the current state
of the Anthropocene discussion, something paradigmatically otherwise has
not yet emerged (para. 21). If the Anthropocene is to be monstrous, Povinelli
suggests, it will be because it “forces us to experience the threshold of a coming
impossibility—namely, the impossibility of distinguishing arrangements
of life from arrangements of nonlife” (para. 22). Broken Earth makes this
(im)possibility possible, at least in the speculative realm. Speculative figures,

 Becoming-Geos: The Stratification of Childhood

83

like the orogenes, both uphold and call into question arrangements of life and
nonlife. They “intensify the contrasting components of nonlife (geos) and being
(ontology) currently at play” in the wider Anthropocene discussion in ways
that also interrupt bionormative, innocent, and future-oriented childhoods
and suggest otherwise worlds (Povinelli, 2016, p. 4).
Another strategy for interrupting “the current distribution of sense” with
geontological figures of Anthropocene Child is to call into question the
naming of the Anthropocene as a recentering of biocentric human. Instead,
the Broken Earth finds a kindred spirit in Donna Haraway’s (2015, 2016)
offering of the Chthulucene, perhaps the most speculative oriented addition
to the alternative Anthropocene nomenclature. The Chthulucene is a name
for “for an elsewhere and elsewhen that was, still is, and might yet be” (p. 31).
Chthonic figures are earthy existents—literally the salt of the earth. They
spring from the Greek chthonios, which mean “of, in, or under the Earth
and the seas” (Haraway, 2015, “Chthulucene”). They “are monsters in the best
sense; they demonstrate and perform the material meaningfulness of earth
processes and critters. They also demonstrate and perform consequences”
(Haraway, 2016, p. 2). They are not innocent; they are not self-sufficient; they
are “sympioetic, not autopoietic” (p. 33). The Broken Earth is an elsewhere
and elsewhen of the Chthulucene: it is a multispecies world and worlding of
the earthbound. Its speculative figures—orogenes, stone-eaters, obelisks, and
Father Earth—are made of earth, minerals, and energy.

The Ends of Worlds
The first book of the Broken Earth series opens, “Let’s start with the end of the
world, why don’t we?” (Jemisin, 2015, p. 1), whereas the third book begins,
“Let’s end with the beginning of the world, shall we?” (Jemisin, 2017, p. 1).
Jemisin states that she wanted to trouble the singularity of the end of the world
with her invention of the Seasons:
What I wanted to play with was the concept of “When do we consider an
apocalypse to have begun and ended?” Because in a lot of cases, what’s
considered an apocalypse for some people is what other people have been
living every day. It’s not the apocalypse, it’s just, it’s an apocalypse for you.
(Shapiro & Jemisin, 2018, para. 3)

 84

Anthropocene Childhoods

This is not intended in a relative sense, but in a grounded and situated one.
For many in this world, the apocalypse is not some grand revelation but
everyday efforts to survive the slow violence and environmental racism of the
climate crisis (Nixon, 2011). In Jemisin’s speculative world, every so often the
Stillness experiences a Fifth Season, a particularly severe apocalypse where
death overtakes life for a sustained duration. One of the lessons expressed in
Broken Earth, however, is that “the ending of one story is just the beginning
of another . . . . When we say ‘the world has ended,’ it’s usually a lie, because the
planet is just fine” (Jemisin, 2015, p. 14).
In their work on the end of the world, Déborah Danowski and Eduardo
Viveiros de Castro (2015, 2016) set up a framework of a “world without us”
and an “us without the world” to capture some ontological and cosmological
differences between Euro-Western traditions and Amerindian cosmologies.
The “world without us” is an end of the world formulated “as a separation
or divergence, a divorce or orphaning resulting from the disappearance of
one pole in the duality of world and inhabitant—the beings whose world
it is” (Danowski & Viveiros de Castro, 2015, para. 1). In other words, a
“world without us” is the end of the human species as earthly inhabitants
but the continuation of other forms of existents including the planet. On
the other hand, “us without a world” is a “humanity bereft of world or
environment, a persistence of some form of humanity or subjectivity after
the end of the world” (para. 1). An “us without the world” is the living on
of humans without anything left to allow themselves to know themselves
as human—humanity without a referent, humanity without an Other,
humanity without a monster. In a complementary way, Claire Colebrook
(2019) adds to this idea:
­ ere is very little sense, however, that—despite the common recognition
Th
that the Anthropocene has a violent, destructive, and barbarous human
history as its cause—other (less robustly global and relational) forms of
existence might be viable, desirable, or recognisable. Those other forms of
human existence, which were erased in order to achieve the state-centred
history of humanity that recognises itself as “Anthropos,” are deemed to be
the “end of the world.”
(p. 179)

 Becoming-Geos: The Stratification of Childhood

85

A world continuing on “without us”—after the Anthropos, after Man, and
after whiteness—seems much harder to imagine than the end of the world
altogether. As the torrent of post-apocalyptic film of late entertains, however,
even a “world without us” usually still leaves a few humans behind to get the
whole thing started again. Both the Broken Earth series and Gifts put that
trope under pressure.
As outlined in the first chapter, the typical storyline of apocalyptic stories
involves a white, cis-gendered male, able-bodied hero narrowly averting
disaster. The apocalypse in such stories becomes an opportunity to build a
new world, only the new world is usually the same world “centered on white
male power fantasies in some way” (Hurley & Jemisin, 2018, p. 470). Jemisin
presses on this in ways that bring together perspectives foregrounded by
Indigenous and Black scholars. A point of connection is that apocalypse in
Broken Earth is a recurrent phenomenon and not a one-off event. Jemisin
says, “This is what the world is for some people. It is the apocalypse again and
again and again” (p. 472). Many Indigenous theorists clearly make the point
that they are currently living in the post-apocalypse—Indigenous peoples
have already “endured one or many more apocalypses” (Whyte, 2018, p. 236).
Anishinaabe scholar Lawrence Gross (2016) coins the term “post-apocalyptic
stress syndrome” to capture how living through real apocalypse(s) has multidimensional harmful effects for Indigenous peoples. Indigenous peoples
have “seen the end of their respective worlds,” and this trauma is inherited
intergenerationally (p. 31). While I am not wanting to collapse speculative
fiction with histories of Indigenous genocide, Essun and Nassun do live out
post-apocalyptic intergenerational trauma on the page. Nevertheless, for
Gross (2016), he also notes that Indigenous peoples are actively engaging a
“process of building new worlds, worlds that are true to their past history,
but cognizant of present realties” (p. 33). There is a parallel here as well: in
setting off a series of events to end one world and begin another, Nassun first
learns the history of earth and attempts to honor what orogenes before her
have sacrificed.
Jemisin has noted on multiple occasions that the trilogy was a way for
her to respond to Ferguson and the #BlackLivesMatter movement. For
Jemisin, writing the series meant processing the systemic racism that defines

 86

Anthropocene Childhoods

America for Black people. It is no accident that many of the oppressive
tactics employed by the Fulcrum and the general fear and hatred of orogenes
reflect anti-Black racism in the United States. What the series does though
is provide speculative space for Jemisin to say enough is enough and then
change things: “sometimes a revolution is necessary; sometimes you do have
to burn it all down” (p. 473). Jemisin does not leave it there with a not this,
however, she shows the aftermath of destruction in great detail. Jemisin
insists that we consider “what is at stake in defending a world built on cruelty
and oppression—and what is at stake in ending it” (p. 469). Povinelli (2013)
insists that potentiation and extinguishment go hand-in-hand, so what gets
extinguished if the orogenes become free? Broken Earth details what the
end of the world might look and feel like. The Seasons, particularly the Fifth
Season underway, show that “if you burn it all down, a whole lot of people get
hurt . . . . It’s a giant red rip across the center of the planet, millions of people
dead, more people starving to death” (Hurley & Jemisin, 2018, p. 473). Those
humans who were not immediately killed by the earth’s eruption are left to
suffer. There are poisoned rivers and acidic rains; there is limited infrastructure,
limited food, and limited hope. For inhumans like the orogenes there is a
slower violence, death is not guaranteed as their geos-powers offer some
protection, but survival will be difficult. Its potentiation and extinguishment
together; it is also a speculative depiction of how “decolonization is always a
violent phenomenon” (Fanon, 1963, p. 35).
When the end of the world happens again at the conclusion to The Stone Sky
what happens next is not shared with readers. There is a chance for sustained
orogene freedom, for less hate, for stronger comms, for a more stable climate,
but this will not happen right away. The climate catastrophe does not just end
overnight and survival will be difficult for a long time. Nassun’s final action
is no a guarantee of a less cruel world. Jemisin makes the end of the world
a temporal, situated, and complicated event with no guarantees. In many
ways, how you interpret the end of Broken Earth is contingent upon what you
consider to constitute the end of the world: apocalypse for whom—whose
world ends? Like we saw with the child-hungries, one existent’s apocalypse
might be another’s regeneration. But the apocalypse can also threaten ways
of life, murder many relations, and alter systems of kinship in traumatic
intergeneration cycles.

 Becoming-Geos: The Stratification of Childhood

87

To repeat myself, the end of the world is not a concept or occurrence I take
lightly. What counts as the end of the world is put up for serious discussion
in Broken Earth. In connection with other texts and figures in this book, the
world that needs to go for Nassun and Melanie is not the same world as the
#BrightFuture Child inhabits. It is not the same world that provides me so
many comforts, but it is also not the kind of world or humanity that I accept
as either desirable or inevitable. Ohkay Owingeh writer Rebecca Roanhorse
(2018) posits: “We stand with one foot always in the darkness that ended
our world, and the other in a hope for our future as Indigenous people. It
is from this apocalyptic in-between that the Indigenous voices in speculative
fiction speak” (para. 3). From the in-between are new imaginings, re-visioned
futurities, and forceful assertions of multispecies relations. I better be listening.

Child-Figures as Geos-Existents
Yusoff (2016) coins the term “anthropogenesis” to signify a new origin and
ending story for the human ushered in by the Anthropocene. Despite the
genesis in its composition, anthropogenesis can be read as a story about
endings as much as beginnings. In one sense, the Anthropos is the Holocene
subject’s end—the nearly 12,000-year period of relative climate stability after
the last ice age. In another, the Anthropocene foreshadows the future event of
species nonexistence—humans of all epochs will be gone. What can be born(e)
in/of such endings? Anthropogenesis proffers a rebirth, but not necessarily a
biological one, as “definitions of being must now acknowledge an eternal but
shifting mineralogical root” (Yusoff, 2016, p. 9). This becoming-geos is different
than what might be typically assumed by statements referring to the human as a
geologic force, a common refrain in Anthropocene discourse. The assumption
seems to be that humans exert force on the earth in ways where they stay
the main agent in charge. According to Yusoff, “anthropogenesis does not
acknowledge the human power to force geologic forces,” rather it opens humans
up to “geologic forces that far exceed any human capacity per se” (p. 13). In
other words, this is not a force waged unidirectionally against the rocks by a
solitary individual, but a collective becoming-with rocks in different “geosocial
formations” with differential geos-sociomaterial effects (Clark & Yusoff, 2017).

 88

Anthropocene Childhoods

One of the reasons I am so drawn to Broken Earth is because the orogenes
embody and enact this complex understanding of geosocial formations.
Orogenes are geologic forces but only with and in relation to the earth;
earth and orogene are in a symbiotic geosocial relation. They are speculative
“comminglings of the geologic and the biologic . . . entangled relations of the
earth and biologic beings” (Palsson & Swanson, 2016, p. 150). Orogenes intraact with earthly energies in ways in which neither existent is what they are
outside the relation. To be an orogene is to become-with earth. Broken Earth
depicts how humans, earth, and inhuman existents rearrange around each
other to form and reform worlds.
The world of Broken Earth also challenges a binary of bios/geos understood
as alive/inert. Rocks, steams, clouds, mountains, seafloors, and crystals all
have lively energies in the Stillness. Dividing existents into life and nonlife
does not make sense in this world—everything is connected by threads
of sliver, by Nassun’s magic. Allied to this line of thought is Yusoff ’s (2016)
proposal of the figure of “humanity-as-strata” as capable of epistemologically
and ontologically rupturing the humanism of a humanity that realizes itself
solely in social, cultural, and biological terms. Transposed as an Anthropocene
geos-subjectivity, the human-as-species and human-as-social are recognized
as intimate with strata. As such, geos-subjectivities do not end at the skin,
but they mark flesh and move with flesh into and with the earth (Yusoff,
2018). Orogenes are a speculative figure of what Yusoff ’s humanity-as-strata
and Povinelli’s geontology might look and feel like. In sharing seismic powers
with the earth, Nassun, for example, makes problematic animacy hierarchies
that rank order adult/child, nature/culture, biology/geology, and sentient/
insentient as dominant and preferred ways of knowing and being.
For me, orogene child-figures invite a grappling with “otherwise forms of
existence that do not rely on the reproduction of bio/geo binaries” (Nxumalo,
2017, p. 564). It is not that bios no longer matters but that it matters
differently: it is not the defining feature of childhood. Nassun is biosgeos; she
is engaged in “geontological world-making” (p. 563). If the Anthropocene can
be a “provocation to begin to understand ourselves . . . as beings who have
something in common with the geologic forces” (Yusoff, 2013, p. 781), then
Nassun offers an invitation to think-with her so we can better live-with the
inhuman existents of this world. She allows me to imagine in a speculative

 Becoming-Geos: The Stratification of Childhood

89

form what might be otherwise on this broken earth. From the speculative to
the enactive, the early childhood educators, researchers, and children working
with Common Worlds’ pedagogies are researching these geos-possibilities with
children and more-than-human existents in daily early childhood practices
and encounters (Common Worlds, n.d.). My hope is that my work enters into
conversation with their research. For example, this chapter shares with Fikile
Nxumalo’s (2017) work on “geotheorizing mountain-child relations” a desire
that “geos might be a refusal of the child development perspectives that shape”
understandings of children’s worlds (p. 559). In storying children’s relations
with Burnaby mountain in British Columbia, Canada, through the figure of
child-mountain-rock, Nxumalo manages to “decentre children as the central
actors in these relations by situating the mountain itself as a figure that reveals
extractive settler colonial relations, yet also exceeds and refuses these relations”
(p. 560; emphasis added).
Yusoff (2016) argues that the dominant subject emerging from the
Anthropocene discussion is “a mythic Anthropos as geologic world-maker/
destroyer of worlds” (p. 5). I am drawn to how mythic alludes to the Anthropos
as a genre of Man rather than the human itself (Wynter, 2003). The speculative
child-figures in this book also put a shudder into my singular condemnation
of the idea of destroyer and draw my attention to how the slash in Yusoff ’s
formulation puts making and destroying into relation. Both Melanie and
Nassun destroy their worlds and set about re-making them in ways in which
human and planetary extinction do not parallel each other. How might the
end of one world instigate the beginning of an otherwise world? Can the
monstrous, the viral, and the geos gesture toward less extractive, less disposable,
and less oppressive worldly relations? How might the inhuman monstrosities
of the child-figures provide “potential exit strategies from the world of Man”
(Weheliye, 2014, p. 28)?
In Broken Earth, Jemisin probes possible responses to difference by storying
how Stills and the Fulcrum treat orogenes. Her provocation is that there are
many possible responses to living with difference: “you could accommodate
that difference, you could find a way to wrap your society around that difference
and make it healthier and safer for everybody instead of shoving some into
a horrible place or genociding them” (Wei & Jemisin, 2016, para. 21). Her
point is that living with difference does not have to result in oppression, fear,

 90

Anthropocene Childhoods

discrimination, and death. While I prefer to push beyond the terms of acceptance
understood as inclusion, recognition, and accommodation, I take Jemisin’s
point. I have come to appreciate Melanie’s and Nassun’s difference as too much
to subsume under current configurations of the bionormative child. Their
active potentiality is too threatening to the current order of things. The childfigures are familiar enough to be recognized (i.e., birth, growth, development),
but strange enough in their viral and geos-powers to be excluded and killed.
If Melanie is recognized as fully human then the scientists and soldiers could
not have rationalized as efficiently the experiments they attempted on the
hungries. If orogenes were accepted by the Stills then Damaya’s and Nassun’s
childhoods would not have been lived in fear and shame. My gesture does not
quite work—this is not about absorbing these child-figures into the dominant
framework but about changing the arrangement, which is why I am so drawn
to figurations of the end of the world. Inclusion is not the gift these childfigures desire or deserve. Melanie and the scientific-militaristic-Man complex
were never going to coexist; Nassun and the orogenes were never going to be
handed their freedom. They needed new worlds.
The next chapter continues my engagement with Anthropocene Child.
Figures of child-cyborgs are the main players and they continue the questioning
of whether the inclusion of difference is possible in a world designed to absorb
it. Made of machine parts and lost lives, the child-cyborg figures upset both
biopolitical divisions of life and death and geontological separations of life
and nonlife. They regenerate as “human—but not only” (de la Cadena, 2014,
p. 256), as these child-figures respond to another ongoing crisis: anti-black
violence. Along with Melanie and Nassun, these child-cyborg figures insist
upon grappling with this speculative question: Is it possible to create a world
without racism, capitalism, sexism, ableism, militarism, and whiteness if this
world is not extinguished first (Imarisha & Maree, 2015)?

 ­5

Monstrous Love for Regenerative Cyborgs

In “Love Your Monsters: Why We Must Care for Our Technologies as We Do
Our Children,” Bruno Latour (2011) brings together classic gothic literature,
technoscience ethics, nature-culture attachments, and child-centered
metaphors to think through the Anthropocene predicament. As a starting
point, Latour remarks that Mary Shelly’s (1818) Frankenstein endures in the
contemporary world as a “cautionary tale against technology” (p. 11). This
reading, Latour argues, is sorely mistaken. Not only is the doctor commonly
confused with the monster, but the figure of Frankenstein has become an “allpurpose modifier to denote technological crimes against nature” (p. 19). For
example, Frankenfood and Frankenfish are popular expressions for genetically
modified foods. According to Latour, despite these misappropriations, the
actual transgression is not that Dr. Frankenstein patched together a creature in
a lab but that he deserted the monster. The creature was “not born a monster,
but . . . became a criminal only after being left alone by his horrified creator”
(p. 19). The extension Latour then makes of Frankenstein is that “our iniquity
is not that we created our technologies, but that we have failed to love and care
for them. It is as if we decided that we were unable to follow through with the
education of our children” (p. 20).1 Love could have saved the day and shown
the monster the right way.
Given my scholarly affiliation with Childhood Studies, I am particularly
attuned to invocations of the child. So, while there is much in Latour’s article
to support, I am left wondering just what he is doing evoking the figure of the
child in such a way. After situating Latour’s offering within a wider context of
ecomodernism, I turn to Ruha Benjamin’s (2016) speculative short story called
“Ferguson is the Future” to further think through the technologicalization of

 92

Anthropocene Childhoods

care. Benjamin’s alter-tale of racialized regeneration troubles an ecomodernist
narrative of techno-fixes, and, ultimately, points toward a different future
for Anthropocene imaginaries of the child at end of the world. I then bring
Benjamin’s and Latour’s provocations together by thinking-with María Puig
de la Bellacasa’s (2011, 2012, 2017) work on matters of speculative care and
Naomi Klein’s (2014) proposal for a “kinship of the infertile.”

Frankencene Technologies
Across multiple versions of Latour’s “Love Your Monsters” is a love-technologychild relation that needs unpacking, particularly as it is formed by equivocating
technology “as if ” children.2 In an early iteration, Latour (2007) connects
Frankenstein to contemporary technoscience by asking readers to “finally
atone for: not technology itself, but the absence of love for the technology we
have created” (p. 11). What comes across is a call for unconditional love that
creates a metaphorical ellipsis picked up and revised by the Breakthrough
Institute (hereafter BTI) co-founders Michael Shellenberger and Ted Nordhaus
(2011) as: “Our technologies, like our children, will go wrong. They will
create new problems. We cannot create perfectly formed new technologies,
only flawed ones. We must, thus, continually care for and improve them,
just as we do our children” (para. 11). What work do child-figures do here?
How is care composed? “Who cares? What for? Why do we care?” (Puig
de la Bellacasa, 2017, p. 61). What commensurabilities are drawn between
children, technology, and improvement? How does the relational equation
make accumulation and productionism acceptable? Before discussing “Love
Your Monsters” in detail, I situate Latour’s work within the BTI. The BTI is
a global think-tank that pushes technological and technocratic solutions to
environmental problems. Latour was a senior fellow for the BTI when “Love
your Monsters” was simultaneously published in their journal and e-book
(Latour, 2011; Shellenberger & Nordhaus, 2011).
The BTI advances a vision of continued growth, consumption, economic
development, and technological innovation under the auspice of a “good
Anthropocene” (Asafu-Adjaye et al., 2015). This is a future where “humans
use their growing social, economic, and technological powers to make

 Monstrous Love for Regenerative Cyborgs

93

life better for people, stabilize the climate, and protect the natural world”
(p. 6). Instead of a cautionary diagnosis of the present, the Anthropocene
is received as an occasion for intensified technoscience development and
centralized management. The BTI are successful because there is enough in
their writing that appeals to good sense and a #BrightFuture—that is, if the
inconsistencies are ignored. For example, they disavow environmental politics
grounded in ideas of a pristine nature, which is an important principle shared
by critical environmentalists. However, they also argue that the ultimate goal
of ecomodernism is to “decouple” nature from humanity. Furthermore, they
confront individualized acts of stewardship, for example, backyard gardens
and home composting, as inconsequential on a planetary scale, while also
positing that “the move toward greater individuation, is universal and largely
positive” (Shellenberger & Nordhaus, 2009, para. 8). There is a seductive
hopefulness to the BTI’s writings that is attributable to their rejection of a
“politics of limits” for a “politics of possibility” (Asafu-Adjaye et al., 2015).
For the BTI there is no climate emergency, there are no tipping points, and
solving climate change is not only possible but plausible because of human
ingenuity and exceptionalism. For societies that love to consume this comes
as great news. T. J. Demos (2018) counters this rhetoric, “It’s not surprising,
then, that its ‘politics of possibility’ fails to mention the terms ‘race,’ ‘equality,’
or ‘justice,’ which would help connect to the actual antagonisms of current
social experience” (para. 6). The most well-known expression of the BTI’s
ideas comes by way of the “An Ecomodernist Manifesto,” which is co-written
by eighteen authors (Asafu-Adjaye et al., 2015).
“An Ecomodernist Manifesto” paints a picture of a world getting better,
fairer, safer, and healthier. In the image the authors create, consumption and
well-being go hand-in-hand. In many ways, the Manifesto provides textual
accompaniment to Unilever’s “Why Bring a Child into the World” campaign
that opened this book. Both propagandize the fact that people today have a
longer life-expectancy, less lethal disease, increased access to clean water, and
more participatory governance. Presented in aggregate form the numbers may
well tell this story, but the distributed version is quite different. Coated in the
guise of liberal economic policy and development for the few, the BTI figures
a future world of “vastly improved material well-being, public health, resource
productivity, economic integration, shared infrastructure, and personal

 94

Anthropocene Childhoods

freedom” (Asafu-Adjaye et al., 2015, p. 28). According to the think-tank, all
these feats are achievable through human imagination, innovative technofixes, and economic modernization. Modernization is their watchword and
yet its contours are never fully described, unraveled, or interrogated. For the
BTI, modernization is an assumed good.
While seemingly strange bedfellows given the premise of Latour’s (1993)
We Have Never Been Modern, Latour was initially attracted to the BTI because
of their rejection of an imaginary of an unspoiled nature and their antitechnophobic standpoint. For the BTI, the environmental movement’s most
significant mistake was rejecting “technology and modernization” in the guise
of a leave-nature-alone rationale (Shellenberger & Nordhaus, 2011, para. 8).
However, Latour (2015) has come to rethink, if not withdraw completely, his
support. Nevertheless, Latour’s view of “we must learn to love our technologies
as we do our children” is translated by the BTI as, “we must understand
technology as natural and sacred, not alien and profane” (Shellenberger
& Nordhaus, 2011, para. 7). For me, the figure of the child within this
articulation allows for this transition to the naturalization of technology and
an accompanying attribution of innocence and goodness (i.e., sacredness).
Who could argue against care and love for the child (Edelman, 2004)? Who
could argue against “technology and modernization” that will bring “improved
health or cleaner air” (Shellenberger & Nordhaus, 2011, para. 8)? To meet
the challenges of the Anthropocene, Latour warns that humans cannot “stop
innovating, inventing, creating, and intervening” (p. 20). However, what I find
more interesting is not re-equating child-nature with technology-good but
speculating about child-figures and technologies as “alien and profane.” What
might be possible in this otherwise embrace?

Latour’s “Love Your Monsters”
Latour enacts a rereading of Frankenstein writ large with consequence. With
“Love Your Monsters,” Latour (2011) offers Frankenstein as an allegory with
wide-ranging explanatory effects. Latour posits: “Let Dr. Frankenstein’s sin
serve as a parable for political ecology” (p. 20). By invoking political ecology,
Latour continues his push for a reconceptualization of the relationship
between nature, science, ethics, religion, culture, technology, education,

 Monstrous Love for Regenerative Cyborgs

95

law, and politics from supposedly divisible domains to a mixed-up scene of
entanglement and attachment (p. 21). In evoking the figure of the child and
care relations, Latour also makes any border between the personal/political
and public/private spheres blurry. If someone believes these things can be
separated “thanks to Science (capital S), you are modernist,” Latour argues,
when what the Anthropocene needs are “compositionists” (p. 21). This
message, however, is inconsistent in “Love Your Monsters,” and especially so
when considered in relation to the BTI.
In a sense, Latour’s article posits the monster as a child-figure resulting
from bad parenting. The monster is not nature gone wrong—the nonbionormative birth is not an issue Latour engages—but the creature only
becomes monstrous because he is abandoned by his maker.3 This has echoes
of the child development debate around nature versus nurture. Latour appears
to be on the nurture side with this parable, at least on the surface level. He
offers quasi-parenting lessons with a theological bend: “The real goal must be
to have the same type of patience and commitment to our creations as God the
Creator, Himself ” (p. 20). In reflecting on the piece years later, Latour (2015)
does not seem to change his tune much in this regard. “As you know, if the
creature became wicked, it is because it had been abandoned by its maker,”
Latour laments, “The total hypocrisy of Dr. Frankenstein’s fleeing the creature
instead of coming back and nurturing it to make it socially acceptable to its
fellow organism” (pp. 219–20). Making socially acceptable seems to assign an
awful lot of deliberate power to the creator-paternal figure. It seems to ignore
the fact that the world is particularly cruel to those who are different. Not
only was the monster cast aside by Dr. Frankenstein, but by all the humans
he encountered while making efforts to belong, including learning how to
speak and read English. This nurture heavy reading is entirely possible given
the text of “Love Your Monsters,” however, nature versus nurture (i.e., nature
versus culture) is the sort of division that Latour otherwise opposes. His
early hyphenation of nature-culture conveys a joined rather than separated
domains of practice (Latour, 1993). With his larger body of work as reference,
Latour (1993) understands the nature versus nurture antagonism as a myth
of Modernity writ large—the falsity of an emancipation from nature through
Science where the human is in charge rather than intimately attached. In “Love
Your Monsters,” Latour’s larger point is that we must care for that which we are

 96

Anthropocene Childhoods

always already entangled, including what is commonly divided as nature and
technology, or, in this framing, nature and nurture. This more nuanced point
however has been disregarded by both supporters (e.g., the BTI) and critics
alike (e.g., Klein, 2014).
Another of the odder readings possible with “Love Your Monsters” is a
depiction of technology as somehow an isolated human creation rather than
as the entangled distribution of agencies mentioned above—the monster as
an object of human creation. While much of Latour’s other work interrupts
such an individualist-humanist configuration, the main actors in this text are
human and the nonhumans are acted upon. Nonhumans are not considered
on the same creative level as the godlike Dr. Frankenstein, including any
mention of the monster. The way Latour’s polemic takes off in places allows
for a reading that attributes intentionality to the human scientist alone and
the BTI has seized onto this interpretation. In his later rejoinder to the BTI,
Latour (2015) is strong on this point: “the ecomodernists are also uchronists,
as if they were living a time where they alone were in command” (p. 223).
Understandably, what gets overlooked in “Love Your Monsters” is Latour’s
insistence on a “compositionist” story, as in the “process of becoming ever-more
attached to, and intimate with, a panoply of nonhuman natures” with whom
“we” owe a great duty of care (Latour, 2011, p. 20). I should note, however,
that a compositionist responsibility does not erase all differentiations between
monster and maker, for example, the cut between GMOs and Monsanto or oil
and Deepwater Horizon.
Klein (2014) offers a harsh criticism of BTI and Latour’s essay in This
Changes Everything: Capitalism vs the Climate. For Klein, the BTI fellows and
supporters exemplify the mind-set of “we’ll fix it later” (p. 239), which finds its
bearings in a conception of humans as “The God Species” (Lynas, 2011), both
ideologies she accuses Latour of promoting. In response to Latour’s “whole of
Creation on our shoulders” statement cited above, Klein (2014) responds: “The
earth is not our prisoner, our patient, our machine, or, indeed, our monster.
It is our entire world. And the solution to global warming is not to fix the
world, it is to fix ourselves” (p. 279). While I could make the case that Klein
slips into a similar formulation where humans can save the world by saving
themselves—for Klein by ending capitalism and for the BTI by developing
techno-fixes—her warnings are important nonetheless.

 Monstrous Love for Regenerative Cyborgs

97

For Klein (2014) the monster requiring love “is not some mutant creature
of the laboratory but the earth itself. We did not create it; it created—and
sustains—us” (p. 241). Again, while the easy out might be to accuse Klein of
reversing Gaia for God that would be to gloss over the ethical and political
import of her argument. If love takes form as an uncritical relation to geoengineering, then the earth and all existents will be transformed in ways
hardly imaginable now. The unintended consequences that Latour otherwise
asks us to love will be multi-layered, cumulative, and, likely, destructive. And
they will be all the more deadly for those already vulnerable. Techno-fixes are
no assurance of “nonexploitative forms of togetherness,” which make up an
integral part of Puig de la Bellacasa’s (2017) theorizing of care for “antiecological
times” (p. 24). Perhaps the climate crisis and its Anthropocene relations are
not monstrous because we do not care for technologies, but because we have
loved the logic of productionism too much.

Speculative Frankenfigures
Benjamin’s “Ferguson Is the Future”
While Latour (2011) goes way back in time with Frankenstein, Benjamin (2016)
journeys to the future with “Ferguson is the Future.” The speculative sketch is
set in the year 2064 in Oakland, California, yet this futuristic world remains
deeply engaged with issues of the present. Much technological advancement
has taken place, for example, there are hover cars and inventions of that sort all
around. The most impressive innovations however are the medical-scientific
breakthroughs of the People’s Science Council. Their front piece is the
Reparations Movement and its key initiative of stem cell organ regeneration
that serves to re-enliven child-victims of police violence. The story’s main
character is Aiyana whose job it is to protect the Trayvon Martin Biobank from
Raiders looking to steal stem cells for resale on the “white market” (p. 4). Aiyana
and her team of Risers—which includes Reika, Tamir, and Freddie—keep the
biobanks and cryotanks safe and secure.4 This is especially important as the
Council’s newest and biggest scientific achievement is about to be revealed
at the Revival Ceremony in commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of

 98

Anthropocene Childhoods

the Ferguson uprising. Led by Dr. Lack, the Council has worked tirelessly to
regenerate Eric Garner, who has been held in cyrosleep since he gasped his last
breath in 2014. Eric will be the first adult to “successfully undergo Doubling—
resuscitation and organ renewal. Only children had survived up until that
point, and even then not without complication” (p. 9).
The complications of the regenerative surgeries have been debilitating for
many of the child recipients, particularly in the early days. Aiyana suffers more
than her fair share of “side effects, side affects” (p. 9). Aiyana’s new heart, lungs,
and spine engender post-operative complications like infections, graft failures,
seizures, blackouts, hallucinations, and headaches. This is in addition to the
memories which rematerialize as nightmares from the “chronic stress of living
[and living again] under siege” (p. 12). Despite the many techno-advances,
these somatic traumas still do not have a cure. Given these after-e/affects many
children in the reparations-regeneration program find that “being born again
was more like purgatory” (p. 9). Nevertheless, Aiyana considers herself one
of the lucky ones because with a grant from the Humanity+ Foundation her
“transplant team designed the Chairperson™, the first of its kind—an apparatus
that maintains internal homeostasis so she no longer experiences the original
side effects” (p. 10). Aiyana is cyborg: part human, part technology, part child,
part chair, part artificial organs, part machine, and part redress. She is part life
and part nonlife. With the publicness of the upcoming Revival Ceremony, it is
vital for the Council to prove that the early issues have not only been fixed but
that the technological possibilities have been extended to everyone regardless
of age, gender, and race—as long as you can afford it, that is.
Overtime the healthcare system in the world of “Ferguson is the Future”
transformed. Mandatory gene-testing is required for all citizens for any
medical procedure, including something as routine as a blood pressure check.
Genome-mapping is now the first stage of healthcare, and it is packaged and
sold as the best possible means to offer precision medicine.5 Healthcare is
doubly bankable—both money and genes are currency that can be deposited.
But they are not equally valued, as biocapital has bypassed cash. In this world,
loved ones open up “tissue accounts” for their children instead of college funds
(p. 12). Those who can afford the most cutting-edge techniques bank their
own cells because regenerated tissue produced from one’s own body has fewer
complications than donor cells or generic prophylaxis. The only individuals

 Monstrous Love for Regenerative Cyborgs

99

who receive the regenerative services for free are those who qualify under the
Reparations Act. This law mandates coverage of the treatment costs for childvictims of police violence, who—not by accident—are Black.
The day before the Revival Ceremony, Aiyana’s friend Sandra ushers her
aside to share some stunning information. The break-ins at the biobanks and
even the Raiders are all a ruse, an orchestrated “distraction” dreamed up by
the Council (p. 16). Rumors of the first attacks coincided with a short-lived
pushback to the Reparations Act and the requirement for universal genomemapping. However, once enshrined in Law, the Council found themselves
a pool of experimental bodies unable to resist or consent. Sandra précises:
“There is only the People’s Science Council honing these techniques on the
backs of brutality victims for free. Once they sort out all the kinks, the recipes
are going to be patented . . . proprietary” (p. 17). But the Reparations Initiative
is not all bad, Aiyana thinks in response (and she implicitly asks the story’s
readers to do the same), the police and prisons have been abolished. There
is even a permanent exhibit in the hallowed halls of the Council building
which documents the history of decarceration, including the unjust murders
of the child-transplant recipients. As Aiyana rewinds everything in her mind
however she is stuck on how the museum makes a spectacle of not only her
“own murder, but the whole idea of playing and replaying black death, the
pornography of genocide. Why, in fact, did we need to see to believe?” (p. 12).
Sandra further explains that there is a group of elites called the Immortocracy
within the top tier of the Council who are obsessed with human finitude and
that their regenerated bodies hold the secret to everlasting life. Sandra urges
Aiyana to get to Eric before he becomes an unwilling spokesperson and ensures
the continuation of the Council and their secret society. The next day, as Eric
prepares to address the crowd gathered at the Revival Ceremony, he thinks:
“Murdered by the hands of police, born again by the hands of scientists . . .
both without asking” (p. 18). Next, he stands up and begins off-script, “Who
will pay reparations on my soul?” (p. 18).
Do the names Tamir, Sandra, Freddie, Eric, and Reika sound familiar?
Does Aiyana Mo’Nay Stanley Jones? Jones was seven years old when she was
murdered by police. Shortly after midnight on May 16, 2010, Detroit’s version
of SWAT charged into the house of Jones’s grandmother. Jones was asleep
on the living room couch at the time. Accompanying the police was an A&E

 100

Anthropocene Childhoods

television crew shooting an episode of The First 48, which is an American truecrime program where detectives have 48 hours to crack a homicide case or
face likely failure. The police were looking for a man identified as a suspect
in a murder committed the day before. This was not his home. The suspect
stayed in the apartment upstairs. The police threw a flash-bang grenade into
the house before entering, which is an unusual move according to those wellversed in police tactics: perhaps the explosion was to make better television
(LeDuff, 2010)? One of the police officers fired a shot as he charged in and his
bullet struck Aiyana and ended her short life. Benjamin’s speculative story of
a Reparations Movement with experimental biobanks and a People’s Science
Council with a finitude fixation are an example of how “white life and black
death are inextricable” (Benjamin, 2018, para. 12). The real life of Aiyana
Mo’Nay Stanley Jones (July 20, 2002–May 16, 2010) is another.
After Jones’s autopsy, Dr. Carl Schmidt, Detroit’s chief medical examiner,
told an investigative reporter: “You might say that the homicide of Aiyana
is the natural conclusion to the disease from which she suffered. The
psychopathology of growing up in Detroit. Some people are doomed from
birth because their environment is so toxic” (LeDuff, 2010, para. 8). What
exactly composes this toxic psychopathology? Is it the 50 percent child poverty
rate, the fact that only one in three teenagers graduate high school, the lead in
the tap water, the high child asthma rates from the smog, or the vacant Ford
Motor plants? Life and nonlife form and deform around each other to create
these environmental conditions. Or maybe it is the indemnity of gun lobbies,
the anti-Black police violence, and the kind of perverse pleasure derived from
a reality television genre that confuses violence for entertainment? Detroit
began its long precipitous decline during the 1950s, precisely when the
Anthropocene’s Great Acceleration indicators began to peak.6 Is Detroit the
creator or monster in this scenario? Either way, contrary to Latour’s demand,
it has been abandoned.
In other work, Benjamin (2018) imagines “afterlives” as “a world of
second chances” (para. 3). But what happens in most speculative pop culture
productions of the end of the world is that “second chances are the currency
of white supremacy” (para. 4). Benjamin’s speculative story is particularly
affective because it turns something taken-for-granted about this world, at least
momentarily, on its head. “Ferguson is the Future” is a world where reparations

 Monstrous Love for Regenerative Cyborgs

101

for anti-Black violence are not only possible but have actually happened. The
story plays out a seemingly radical intervention in which Benjamin (2016)
tests out the question: “what if the subaltern were positioned as beneficiary?”
(p. 19). What if the Black child is the one being given a second chance at life?
What if police violence was not the end of Jones’s world? However, as soon
as readers begin to entertain the possibility of a world that materially follows
through on an apology for racialized harms, Benjamin pulls back the proverbial
curtain. Benjamin asks us to consider instead: What cover does care provide?
What secret does science keep? As the story proceeds, the reparations’ gift
of regeneration is revealed to be other than it first seems. The Reparations
Movement becomes another in a line of second chances for whiteness—this
time a forever chance of immortality.
While there is no guarantee of social, reproductive, and technological
justice in “Ferguson is the Future”—and I am not so sure that would be a fair
request anyway—the story pushes in many probative directions. One of the
important moves is that Benjamin does not succumb to a kind of technophobia
of manipulating in/organic life, which would immediately exclude her
from some important contemporary conversations. The reverse is equally
pertinent—techno-fixes and productionist logic without reproductive justice
are shown as insufficient for reparative futures. Other provocations include
how the Black rebel cyborg might offer an imaginary of the otherwise amidst
anti-Black racism and anthropogenic climate crisis.

Figures of the Black Rebel Cyborg
As a regenerative Chairperson™, Aiyana in Benjamin’s speculative worlding
is cyborg. But what kind of cyborg is she? Marilyn Strathern (1991) describes
the cyborg as a figure who brings “together the imaginary and the real . . . that
is, the connections of circumstances in the world today that make it useful
to think with” (p. 36). This is what Benjamin does with her child-figures as
she raises questions about technoscience innovation, reproductive justice,
anti-Black racism, police, bioethics, and futuristic forms of belonging. The
child-figures move from the real to the imaginary and back again; from life to
death to non/life; they also move from the end of their respective worlds to a
speculative world that cannot fully shake off its past. The spectral presence of

 102

Anthropocene Childhoods

the children’s real deaths haunts their imaginary futures, and in this spacing
blackness and cyborgness become linked. Already denied the humanity
conditioned by whiteness in their earthly existence, Benjamin’s child-figures
become Black rebel cyborgs in their speculative regeneration. The Black
rebel cyborg “captures both the nonlinear and postapocalyptic positioning of
black subjectivity, as well as the generative and subversive aspects of the black
experience, in all of its hybrid, mutant resiliencies” (Maynard, 2018, p. 33). As
seen with Aiyana, Black rebel cyborgs are “part divine, part mechanical, part
biological” and “capable of movements that inspire flight” (p. 201).
Using Fanon’s figure of the rebel intellectual and Haraway’s figure of the
cyborg as touchstones, Joy James (2013) figures forth a Black rebel cyborg
that marks “not just the end of the world but the end of humanity” that is
delimited by white supremacy (p. 64). The Black rebel cyborg cannot be “fully
tamed and captured, excluded or subjected by the world that denies our
humanity” (Maynard, 2018, p. 33). There is a “radical alien-ness to blackness,
and to black being” that cannot entirely be contained (p. 29). This excess
provides a narrow pathway for a new form of cyborg humanity to emerge
that might rewrite the dominant genre of Man (Wynter, 2003). As mentioned
with Melanie in Chapter 3, the Black rebel cyborg has the “ability to refuse
blackness-as-victimization and reconstitute blackness-as-resistance” (James,
2013, p. 67), and the difficulty of this transition should not be understated.7
The children who inspired “Ferguson is the Future” reckoned with racism
understood as “group differentiated vulnerability to premature death” in the
white supremacist state (Gilmore, 2007, p. 237). Their lives were disposable;
their lives were not Life. In “Ferguson is the Future,” the speculative worlding
cannot be entirely hopeful or hopeless because blackness remains a “target
of white supremacy” (James, 2013, p. 67). But, then again, how these cyborg
child-figures embark on a “flight from the human” (p. 67) offers a kind of
“hope against hope, the possibility of politics not simply as hope for a different
or better world, but as the ardent refusal of this world” (Bliss, 2015, p. 93).
Evident in the Movement for Black Lives is the confrontation of a harsh truth:
Black “lives do not matter under the state of whiteness. They cannot because
they are not thought of as lives” (Ziyad, 2017a, p. 145). In the speculative world
of “Ferguson is the Future” what resounds is that Black lives matter most in
death—in their death lives on potential for whiteness. The real deaths of the

 Monstrous Love for Regenerative Cyborgs

103

child-figures in Benjamin’s text haunt her telling. In both speculative and real
worlds of Ferguson, Black children are the constitutive exclusion for humanity
proper. In Benjamin’s worlding, they become the literal key to finally solving
human finitude, but only after their (first) death is this possible. Also, take
for example, the Council’s museum exhibit which both monumentalizes and
spectacularizes the death of Black children. In a powerful passage that feels
like it was written in direct conversation with Benjamin, Hari Ziyad (2017b)
reflects on displays of this sort:
Black people cannot make those operating within whiteness “feel our pain”
because we are not understood to feel pain. Empathy-building projects
encourage the incessant streaming and posting of videos and pictures of the
bodies of our dead children, desperate to elicit tears that never come, or
come only to refresh the liberal do-gooder’s spirit. Importantly, whiteness
requires dead Black children and that these deaths be unending.
(p. 153)

These words are hard to read and type and repeat; they render the realworld precursor events of Ferguson inseparable from the speculative world
of “Ferguson is the Future.” Benjamin’s story makes clear that the past is
not past, and even in speculative worlds the specter of Black childhoods
continues to haunt. The point of a museum is to historicize, to commemorate
events that have already happened; after all, Benjamin alerts her readers, the
police have been abolished so would not that be the end of gratuitous police
violence? But the façade of this abolition loses its pretense when the motives
of the Immortocracy are revealed. Even before Sandra explicitly tells Aiyana
of the plan, readers are subtly alerted to the reiteration of racialized politics
in the speculative world. In Benjamin’s story, it is only victims of police
violence that qualify for free stem cell procedures. Victims of systemic,
unspectacular anti-Black racism do not qualify for the state’s program for
new cyborg lives.
Given the long durée of deathly socio-eco-political anti-Black harm, the
Black cyborg cannot automatically be assumed as resistant and rebellious or
able to escape systems of domination and oppression. João Costa Vargas and
James (2013) therefore propose a range of Black cyborgs, which includes those
who reproduce existing structures, those who make modifications from within

 104

Anthropocene Childhoods

the system, and those who refuse absolutely. A cyborg continuum is banded
by the figure of the “angelic negro/negress” at one end and the Black rebel
cyborg at the other (Vargas & James, 2013, p. 194). A particularly exceptional,
multifaceted performance of the Black cyborg-child is assigned to Trayvon
Martin, a seventeen-year-old youth discriminatorily gunned down in his gated
neighborhood while walking home from the corner store. The public outcry
engaged both ends of the continuum, which, in contrasting “younger and
older Trayvons . . . bring[s] us to a space of impossible redemption” (p. 196).
Widely circulated on media and protest placards was a picture of Martin at age
thirteen in a red Hollister t-shirt. Other popular images showed him carefully
cradling a baby, playfully leaning on a snowboard, and smiling ear-to-ear
in a cap and preschool graduation gown.8 In an MSNBC interview, Martin’s
father shared a story about how his son saved his life by pulling him from
a house fire when he was just nine years old. Angelic and heroic: smiling,
caring, playing, learning, saving, childing. I do not offer this as criticism—this
effort of remembering seems a perfectly reasonable response to a life ended
prematurely by anti-Black violence.
Vargas and James argue that Martin can only be innocent if he is also
“angelic. To be angelical is to be supernatural or infantile; to not grow up,
to not have autonomous agency, to not reach puberty, to never rebel against
authority” (p. 195). Images of a teenage Martin appeared in the media as
the trial of his killer progressed. Much was made of Martin trying on a gold
grill for a snap and giving the middle finger to the camera in another. These
pictures circulated with a revised narrative of a problematic teen guilty of
school suspensions, smoking and drug use, and other inflammatory framings
that attempted to paint Martin as somehow responsible for his own death. I
see this as the childing of the early images being replaced by a wilding—a form
of disobedient, unlawful, youthful blackness and brownness that emerged into
popular discourse with the villainization and animalization of the Central Park
Five (i.e., Exonerated Five), who spent their formative years in prison for the
brutal rape of a white women they did not commit. In the anti-Black imaginary
of wilding, Martin’s murderer’s actions could be perceived as somehow
rational and justifiable: preemptive self-defense. Martin was “a youth worthy
of the right to life,” but narratives of innocence and guilt both have the effect
of delimiting his “right of refusal to wear blackness as victimization; the right

 Monstrous Love for Regenerative Cyborgs

105

to fight back” (p. 194). Both ways of figuring Martin then show the “space of
impossible redemption” in the world as currently configured (p. 196).
Vargas and James work with the figure of Martin to bring attention to the
sentimental allure of narratives of inclusion into worlds of whiteness. Martin
could only be widely mourned if an innocent child; Aiyana could only live
as a reborn cyborg. “For a black person to be integrated,” Vargas and James
confirm, “she/he must either become non-black, or display superhuman
and/or infrahuman qualities” (p. 194). Black rebel cyborgs recognize the
incommensurability of democracy and freedom under white supremacy and
renounce the kind of humanity the system requires. Like Eric, they may even
demand “reparations on [their] souls.” For Black rebel cyborgs, the great sin is
not abandonment to the world as Latour suggests, but inclusion as enclosure
in a fundamentally anti-Black world. Black rebel cyborgs refuse what the
state offers as care. One way of reading Eric’s closing words in “Ferguson is
the Future” is as a calling to account and as a relinquishing of claims to the
nation-state. In asking the impossible of and under whiteness, Eric refuses reincorporation into the structures that killed him, gesturing instead alongside
Aiyana and their cyborg kin-kind “toward new ways of black becoming”
(Maynard, 2018, p. 29).

Monstrous Love for Regenerative Cyborgs
“Ferguson is the Future” makes up the middle section of a longer article by
Benjamin (2016) titled “Racial Fictions, Biological Facts: Expanding the
Sociological Imagination through Speculative Methods.” The article opens with
the statement: “The facts, alone, will not save us” (p. 2). Benjamin’s point is that
the facts of racism are all around: consider employment wages, high school
graduation, mother and child mortality, child apprehension, arrests, prison
sentencings, and poverty. All these facts have numbers, rates, and percentages
that do not attest to a problem of population but of anti-Black racism, settler
colonialism, and white supremacy. Succinctly put, “we are drowning in ‘the
facts’ of inequality and injustice” (p. 2). Yet scholars and activists of color are
repeatedly asked to prove racism exists. At most, facts relay a partial view of
the world as is; facts cannot imagine the world as it might be. This is another

 106

Anthropocene Childhoods

of the reasons why I think the speculative is so important. Speculative worlds
test out “different possibilities for creating more just and equitable societies”
(Benjamin, 2018, para. 31), even when, as in the case of “Ferguson is the
Future,” they are not yet sustainable.
Positioned by a different set of concerns, Latour (2004) also challenges the
standing of matters of fact. Latour argues that social constructionism and its
accompanying critique have gone too far. In showing the constructedness of all
facts, neither knowledge nor politics has any stability anymore. “The mistake
we made, the mistake I made,” Latour (2004) laments, “was to believe that
there was no efficient way to criticize matters of fact except by moving away
from them and directing one’s attention toward the conditions that made them
possible” (p. 231). In pointing out the subjective relations of compositional
practices, facts were labelled by detractors as made-up fictions. As an effect
of this, for example, climate change deniers are able to claim that global
warming is one interpretation of the evidence rather than a materialized truth.
Nevertheless, Latour (2004) argues for a move away from the “very partial . . .
very polemical, very political” refutation of matters of fact toward matters of
concern (p. 232). As critical academics, Latour argues, our goal should be no
“longer debunk but to protect and care” (p. 232). Both Latour and Benjamin
problematize facts, but where and how else they move when it comes to care
is quite different.
With reference to Latour’s (2004) critique of critique, Puig de la Bellacasa
(2011) suggests a framework of matters of care as an additive to Latour’s
matters of fact and matters of concern. Puig de la Bellacasa (2017) is not
looking to cancel out these other matters but supplement their limits with a
more robust notion of relationality. Latour’s move to matters of concern was
important because it recognized the liveliness of things and how researchers are
affectively entangled with technologies and the knowledges produced within
relations. Matters of concern could not be as easily dismissed as matters of fact
as attachment was already embedded into the figuration. However, Puig de la
Bellacasa (2011) hesitates when it comes to Latour’s dismissal of critique for an
alternative of a “balanced articulation of the involved concerns” (p. 91; emphasis
added). Martin was walking home from the store; his murderer claims he was
scared. Aiyana was sleeping on the couch; her murderer claims he was startled.
There is no balance here. I am in agreement with Puig de la Bellacasa that “in

 Monstrous Love for Regenerative Cyborgs

107

a deeply troubled and strongly stratified world . . . we still need approaches that
reveal power and oppressive relations in the assembling of concerns” (p. 39).
These matters of care and concern can be applied in analysis of Latour’s (2011)
appeal to love monsters as if they are children/technology.

How to Care
Puig de la Bellacasa builds her understanding of care from the work of feminist
theorists.9 In particular, she grounds her work in a “generic” conception of
care offered by Joan Tronto and Berenice Fisher: care is “everything that we
do to maintain, continue and repair our world so that we can live in it as
well as possible” (Tronto, 1993, p. 103). Extricable from this definition is the
importance of maintenance and repair work. This is significant because it values
the everydayness of women’s and often racialized women’s labor. However, it
can also be misused. In “Ferguson is the Future,” technoscience innovations
of stem cell regeneration “repaired” the child victims and made their cyborg
second lives possible. The scientific advancements appeared to overhaul police
violence but also created a new form of surveillance. In this way, promises
of a #BrightFuture through improved health, safety, and well-being can cover
over innovative forms of control. Similarly, global and individual well-being
are strategic tenants of the ecomodernist platform. In their take-up of Latour’s
article, Shellenberger and Nordhaus (2011) argue that technologies “will go
wrong” and that “we must . . . care for and improve them” with even more
technologies (para. 11). This sort of maintenance and repair work seeks to
rationalize continued consumption because new technologies will be invented
to fix any future harm. This is a vision of the future as a promissory of technoprogress. However, the BTI message ignores the lesson advanced by feminist
materialisms that humans are not fully in charge.
For me, I fail to see how Latour’s demand not to abandon necessarily
translates into practices of care. Physical presence—the sort of non-leaving,
non-abandonment Latour invokes—does not necessarily equate to care in any
affective sense. Latour tells us to stick with our monsters-children-technologies
as if proximity is enough. A more generous take recognizes Latour’s demand
for love as obliging that “we must take care of things in order to remain
responsible for their becomings” (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2017, p. 43). I have no

 108

Anthropocene Childhoods

qualms with this interpretation so much as responsibility and response-ability
is carefully outlined and practiced (Haraway, 2016). This is why the question
of “How to care?” must be addressed in each situated encounter (p. 67). Care
work is not easy or innocent; it is messy and complex. Care work must involve
reciprocity and consent.
In “Love Your Monsters,” care and love are a one-sided relation extended
from creator to technology; they are not reciprocal practices in Latour’s
worlding. The actual qualities of care are not much discussed by Latour, we
are only told that love must be unconditional. However, practices of love and
care “are always shot through with asymmetrical power relations: who has
the power to care. Who has the power to define what counts as care and how
it should be administered” (Martin et al., 2015, p. 3)? Who can refuse care?
The child-cyborgs of Ferguson never consented to a second life—to receiving
state-based technoscience care. Remember Eric’s thoughts: “Murdered by the
hands of police, born again by the hands of scientists . . . both without asking”
(Benjamin, 2016, p. 18). Though unremarked upon by Latour, consent was
refused to Dr. Frankenstein’s monster also.10 Without their agreement, Aiyana
and her team become a modified form of what prematurely ended their lives in
the first place. I think we are meant to be uncomfortable affiliating the names
of children murdered by police with an innovative figuration of enforcement
called Risers in the story. Technologies in Benjamin’s speculative world are
not strictly machines, tools, computers, and other forms of nonlife either, but
include tactics, strategies, and procedures for not only governing others but
caring for selves.
With respect to imbalances of power in the Anthropocene, Puig de la
Bellacasa (2017) advises that an ethics of care be “capable of challenging
dominant technoscientific productionist ways of thinking and acting” (p. 42).
The most quoted phrase from Latour’s (2011) article is that we must not “stop
innovating, inventing, creating, and intervening” (p. 21). So long as care is
attached in principle, Latour is taken-up as advocating for innovation as
a good in and of itself. In a sense, this is repair work without political and
ethical obligation. Latour and the BTI fail to seriously consider how “emerging
technologies reinforce interlocking forms of discrimination,” whether
intentional or not (Benjamin, 2019a, p. 3). Benjamin’s story reveals how
technoscience innovation in the name of reparations (arguably a form of care)

 Monstrous Love for Regenerative Cyborgs

109

is not an end in itself but a means to an end of securing finitude—of defeating
geontology—life wins . . . forever. I read Puig de la Bellacasa’s (2017) matters
of care as challenging both the Immortocracy and ecomodernist standpoints.
Much of what Puig de la Bellacasa’s (2017) writes about productionism
problematizes the BTI’s modernization doctrine.
Ecomodernists tout a form of productionism that promises to solve
environmental problems through a “commercial logic of intensification and
accumulation characteristic of capitalist economies” (p. 184). It is more,
more, more. Productionism overdetermines and “colonizes all other relations:
everyday life, relations with other species, and politics (e.g., farmers’ subjection
to the industry-agribusiness complex),” including care (p. 184). Ecomodernists
emphasize quantitatively measurable crop yields, for example, and promote the
efficiency of GMOs and monocrops. The livelihoods and desires of small-scale
farmers or Indigenous peoples reclaiming traditional cultivating practices are
not respectable alternatives according to the BTI, but instead are representative
of people left behind by modernization. Technoscience innovation is good,
their argument goes, because it makes possible agricultural amplification and
maximizes resource extraction. The simplistic conclusion they draw is that
if there was just more food than less people would be hungry; however, this
way of thinking assumes an equal distribution that has never happened. This
rhetoric also perpetuates the historical devaluation of care labors that are not
quantifiable—such as childcare. In these ways, ecomodernism and the logic of
productionism “not only reduces what counts as care . . . but also inhibits the
possibility of developing other relations of care that fall out of its constricted
targets” (p. 186). The ability to imagine an outside of this targeted constriction,
however, is another attribute of the speculative.
As taken up by ecomodernists, the circulation of care through the figure of
the child in “Love Your Monsters” becomes a means to suture technological
development to productionism. Instead of racing full force ahead with Latour’s
“innovating, inventing, creating, and intervening,” however, perhaps it is best
to consider Benjamin’s (2019a) advice, perfectly suitable for the Anthropocene
moment:
It starts with questioning breathless claims of techno-utopianism, rethinking
what counts as innovation, remaining alert to the ways that race and other

 110

Anthropocene Childhoods

hierarchies of difference get embedded in the creation of new designs, and
ultimately refashioning the relationship between technology and society by
prioritizing justice and equity.
(p. 11)

Furthermore, in noting the impossibility of non-innocent caring, Puig de la
Bellacasa (2017) supposes that an ethics of care resides in the entanglement
of critical and speculative becomings. The critical side of care comprises
questions like Benjamin’s and also includes concerns about who cares, who
receives care, and what forms of care are available. The speculative dimension
of care marks a “commitment to seek what other worlds could be in the making
through caring while staying with the trouble of our own complicities and
implications” (p. 204). Speculative care has deep connections with speculative
fiction. Speculative care in Puig de la Bellacasa’s (2017) theorizing also extends
to more-than-human relations, which could include cyborg-figures. The final
sections of this chapter bring cyborgs back into the racialized, technoscience
fold to consider how forms of care justice in the Anthropocene might
be devised.

Care for Regenerative Cyborgs
The most famous cyborg in the scholarly world is Donna Haraway’s creation.
This cyborg is a mix of machine and organism that hyphenates—instead of
slashes (/) apart—constructed dualisms like reality-fiction, life-death, fleshmatter, human-animal, technoscience-science fiction (Haraway, 2004, p. 8).
The connective dash acts as a contact zone, which is a non-innocent relational
spacing. In Haraway’s “Cyborg Manifesto,” like in my own writing, not all
contact zones are given equal analytical weight. Ziyad (2017a) reads Haraway’s
cyborg as an important feminist intervention in thinking beyond the human,
but that by not engaging anti-blackness directly her worlding ultimately falls
short of its liberatory potential. Ziyad does not entirely discount the cyborg
figure and appreciates the Black rebel cyborg as “a truer challenge to the human
and its essential violence against blackness under whiteness” (p. 157). This is to
suggest that the futurity Haraway’s cyborg puts into motion is not necessarily

 Monstrous Love for Regenerative Cyborgs

111

commensurable with Black lives, although they are not always mutually
exclusive either. The speculative figures of Aiyana and her cyborg-kin carry
the scars not just of regeneration but of anti-Black racism. They are doubly
birthed and doubly monstrous: they are attached to blackness in divisions of
humanness that make them monsters anyway, and they wear regenerated parts
in their re- and co-composition as hybrid (non)beings.
An area where these cyborg worldings come together is in a move away
from bionormative birth toward regeneration. With the cyborg, Haraway
(1991) interrupts how political imaginaries depend on metaphors of birth,
growth, and natural development (which calls to mind Povinelli’s geontologies
also). Haraway writes that “unlike the hopes of Frankenstein’s monster, the
cyborg does not expect its father to save it through a restoration of the garden”
(p. 151). This is particularly interesting in light of Benjamin’s and Latour’s texts.
Although Haraway’s cyborg does not have “an origin story in the Western sense,”
they are “the illegitimate offspring of militarism and patriarchal capitalism,
not to mention state socialism” (p. 151). Aiyana’s cyborg emergence is tied to
similar structures, and, with perhaps less of a socialist bend, the rebranding
of Frankenstein fits this template also. I see the coming together of Black rebel
cyborgs at the end of “Ferguson is the Future” as hinting toward resistance and
rebellion—I imagine this as “illegitimate offspring” becoming “exceedingly
unfaithful to their origins” (p. 151). This is the gesture emboldened by Eric’s
impossible closing question. Dr. Frankenstein’s monster, on the other hand,
builds himself a funeral pyre upon which to float out to sea and die alone,
which is an act almost too faithful to the wishes of his father-figure.
The Out of the Woods Collective (Collective, 2015b) proposes the figure of
the regenerative cyborg as a provocation for grappling with the Anthropocene.
Against dominant discourses of reproductive futurism that think climate
futures through invocations of the innocent child, the Collective argues that
reproduction is too tethered to “heteronormative and survival-based notions
of human life” (para. 18). The Collective reads the figure of the child in climate
discourse as a tactic to disguise conservative, neoliberal, and settler colonial
practices through “upholding the naturalness and desirability of birthing and
reproduction as a beacon” of hope amidst ecological destruction (Collective,
2015b, para. 4). A politics of regeneration, on the other hand, marks out an
effort “to go beyond the political limits, both of centering reproduction, and

 112

Anthropocene Childhoods

of thinking futurity through reproduction” (para. 12). It is a challenge to
biocentricity; it is a challenge to life as only human. A regenerative cyborg
ethics does not disavow reproduction in ways that are anti-child or anti-natal
but refigures it to include “a complex network composed of machines and
organisms, an entanglement of the living and the non-living, a cyborg Earth”
(para. 16). A regenerative politics must act in solidarity with reproductive justice
movements that intertwine critiques of anti-blackness, settler colonialism, and
environmental racism. Perhaps it should not be beholden to divisions of life
from nonlife and enact a “kinship of the infertile” (Klein, 2014).
Near the conclusion of Klein’s (2014) bestseller is a chapter titled “The Right
to Regenerate.” In it, Klein parallels her difficultly conceiving a child with the
damage being done to the earth and other more-than-human creatures. “If the
Earth is indeed our mother,” Klein expresses, “then she is a mother facing a
great many fertility challenges of her own” (p. 424). To tease out the analogy,
Klein takes readers back in time to the deck of a chartered boat where she and
some colleagues witnessed and documented evidence of the 2010 Deepwater
Horizon oil spill off the coast of Louisiana. Their boat guide explained that
what troubled him most “was not what we were all seeing—fish jumping in
fouled water, Roseau cane coated in oil—but something much harder to detect
without a microscope and sample jars” (p. 426). He was referring to the tiny
zooplankton attempting to attach to “the marsh grass [that] acts as an aquatic
incubator, providing nutrients and protection from predators” (p. 426). The
grass was coated in oil which meant that the newly hatched shrimp, oysters,
and crabs who normally merge with the plankton in their first days of life for
protection would die, if they had not already. Remember Aiyana’s words when
confronting the monumentalization of her death: “Why, in fact, did we need to
see to believe?” (Benjamin, 2016, p. 12). Human eyes cannot see the minutiae
of life (and its loss) described by the boat captain without technological
assistance and local knowledge. Unbeknownst to Klein at the time, her body
was in the early stages of a miscarriage—her third in five years. When she
finds out, and despite what the doctors told her about their non-relation, she
cannot help wondering if the contaminated water she waded in or the toxic air
she inhaled contributed to her ectopic pregnancy. Remembering rocking on
the deck of the boat, Klein renders a haunting image of being suspended “not
in water but amniotic fluid, immersed in a massive multi-species miscarriage”

 Monstrous Love for Regenerative Cyborgs

113

which turned out to be her “miscarriage inside a miscarriage” (p. 427). Amidst
this doubling of double death (Rose, 2012), Klein (2014) “began to feel what
[she] can only describe as a kinship of the infertile” (p. 427).
This provocation for an Anthropocene ethical and political praxis of care
does not get much follow-up in Klein’s text, nor in the academic literature and
popular press that follows it. I think part of the fear of taking-up something like
a kinship of the infertile is that it can be swallowed up by a logic of extinction
that has been heightened by the Anthropocene. However, I receive the kinship
of the infertile as a call to enact a regenerative-cyborg praxis. A kinship of
the infertile invites a “solidarity with non-reproductive lifeforms” (Collective,
2015a, para. 20), with nonlife, that requires acts of speculation to bring it into
being. Another reason for the dangling kinship provocation is that Klein’s
story moves on to the happy birth of her son—again, not something I am
faulting her for by any means. I do however wonder if perhaps a kinship of
the infertile is the sort of trouble we should stay with (Haraway, 2016). I agree
with the Collective that a regenerative cyborg care is needed for these times.
The question then becomes about the conditions required to capacitate such
a praxis. These necessary conditions are in large part material but also are
imaginative. I believe one requisite is speculative fiction, in order “to expand
our own visions of what is possible” (Benjamin, 2018, para. 8).
In the next chapter, the ideas of “Love Your Monsters” reappear in the
context of parental love in order to further grapple with the possibility that
non-abandonment might not be enough in the Anthropocene. Furthermore,
intimate and planetary relations are brought together in supportive and
divergent ways in order to think though how care for the planet and care for
the child are linked through a fear of the infertile. The racial politics of care
and complicity are also given more page space in asking what care might look
like on a broken earth.

 114

 ­6

Parental Stewardship
Bionormative Care as Environmental Surrogate

It is not unusual for a post-apocalyptic text to end with a child-figure as
ultimate survivor. Their weathered, cherub face fills the screen as the fade out
begins, the music surges, and the credits roll. Or there is an epilogue of sorts
which does not quite manage to tie up all the loose ends, but in a few extra
lines of print sets up the child-figure to experience a #BrightFuture. Instead of
attributing the child-figure’s survival to a bildungsromanish move of innocence
to experience, I wonder if it is because they have proven themselves capable of
loving our monsters. But have the adults of Anthropocene-related speculative
stories loved their creations? How have they cared for their worlds? As
outlined in the last chapter, Bruno Latour (2011) demands that we “care for our
technologies as we do our children,” and, through parabolizing Frankenstein,
introduces abandonment and attachment into the discussion as well (p. 19).
The parental figures in Hulu’s television adaptation of The Handmaid’s Tale
(Miller, 2017-ongoing) refuse to abandon their offspring and this insistence
comes at a price. They make all else secondary.
It may seem that this kind of intense parental love is a refusal of Rebekah
Sheldon’s (2016) swing from the child in need of saving to the one who does
the protecting, but, while these texts put this relation in tension, I do not think
they void the movement. In The Handmaid’s Tale, the endurance of the childfigures becomes a metonym for species survival and parental love becomes
analogue to “planetary stewardship” (Steffen et al., 2011). What happens to
care when planetary stewardship takes the form of what I am calling parental
stewardship? How does a “heteronormative family romance” demarcate post-

 Anthropocene Childhoods

116

apocalyptic stories of the end of the world (Sturgeon, 2010, p. 126)? In this
chapter I analyze some “profound drawbacks to reading parental love as the
antithesis and antidote to environmental destruction” (Johns-Putra, 2016,
p. 521). How does survival of the child become surrogate for the “anxieties
surrounding the demise of white supremacy” at the end of the world (Joo,
2018, p. 4)? These are the guiding questions I grapple with in this chapter.
Adapted from Margaret Atwood’s (1986) novel of the same name, The
Handmaid’s Tale television series stories the dystopic world of a small group of
fertile women called Handmaids who are forced into reproductive servitude by
the totalitarian, puritanical, patriarchal, and theocratic government of Gilead.
The world of The Handmaid’s Tale experiences an unknown environmental
catastrophe whose effects have made lands and bodies toxic. With postapocalyptic ecologies like this as background, Alexis Lothian (2018) traces
how the end of the world stands as a conventional plot device that can be
overcome “through the resolution of a heterosexual family plot” where
“children, and the possibility of children, allow a future for humanity in its
current form to be salvaged from the world’s end” (p. 182; emphasis added).
Where I depart slightly from Lothian (2018), and align with Claire Colebrook
(2017), is that I do not believe it is humanity in its present form that is the
object of redemption but humanity as it “should be”: an eco-attuned humanity
not “guilty of the Anthropocene scar” (p. 84). The Handmaid’s Tale allows for a
case study of these workings.

Anthropocene Stewardship
Planetary Stewardship
Will Steffen and colleagues (2007) sort the Anthropocene into three stages:
the Industrial Era (1800–1945) evidenced by fossil fuel expansion; the Great
Acceleration (1945–2015) marked by economic globalization; and “Stewards
of the Earth System?” (2015–onwards), a speculative period differentiated
from the others both by human’s awareness of their destructive impact on the
environment and that the end date is unknown. The scientists point out that
people today are the “first generation with the knowledge of how our activities

 Parental Stewardship

117

influence the Earth System, and thus the first generation with the power and
the responsibility to change our relationship with the planet” (Steffen et al.,
2011, p. 748). There are a multitude of ways that change might take place, but
most proposals center on technological innovation; for example, mitigating
practices of biofuels or geo-engineering feats of atmospheric aerosol injections.
However, these scientists also recognize that technology, no matter how
inventive, will “not be enough on its own . . . . Changes in societal values and
individual behaviour will likely be necessary” (p. 619). In short, they argue that
humans need to become planetary stewards and fast.
Steffen et al. (2011) confirm that “the need to achieve effective planetary
stewardship is urgent . . . . we risk driving the Earth System onto a trajectory
toward more hostile states from which we cannot easily return” (p. 739).
I see this perspective as a counterpoint to the ecomodernists’ growth and
development vision of the last chapter. For these Earth system scientists,
planetary stewardship is the necessary relation humans must have to the earth
and to the future. Without such caretaking, “the Anthropocene threatens to
become for humanity a one-way trip to an uncertain future,” and this journey
is all but certain to be increasingly “hostile” (p. 739). These promotors of
planetary stewardship do not always appear to be tuned in to the antagonisms
already waged against lives made disposable in the here and now, let alone the
past or future.
My main hesitation with the concept of planetary stewardship is its apparent
human exceptionalism. As summarized thus far planetary stewardship is
primarily a matter of care, concern, and agency for humans. Stewardship
originates in the individual and directs outwards from there. For example,
Steffen et al. (2011) write: “Responsible stewardship entails emulating nature
in terms of resource use and waste transformation and recycling” (p. 756;
emphasis added). I interpret this as a call for humans to copy nature or at
least match it in hopes of returning to a Holocene-like equilibrium. Emulate
also has more antagonistic connotations, especially when considered in the
context of other statements to the effect of, in the Anthropocene, “human
activities now rival global geophysical processes” (Steffen et al., 2011, p. 739;
emphasis added). It is hard not to read this figuration of planetary stewardship
as divisive. Such sentiments “unwittingly rehearse the division of cultural and
natural worlds, not their inseparability” (Taylor, 2017, p. 1453).

 118

Anthropocene Childhoods

Affrica Taylor (2017) notes that what often happens in the field of
environmental education is that the interdependence of social, political, and
environmental systems is mentioned before moving on to a reconfirmation
of “humanist understandings of agency” that “position learners as potential
environmental stewards” (p. 1449). In addition to environmental education,
Taylor’s noticing is visible in Steffen and colleagues’ work. The scientists evoke
the planetary to get at the interactivity of social and ecological systems, but
ultimately make planetary stewardship a human endeavor alone. Who can
be a planetary steward? For Steffen et al. (2007) this falls in part to those
humans whose behaviors will have to change. Moreover, the real human
power to be planetary agents comes via technoscience development and
human “creative invention through discovery” (Steffen et al., 2011, p. 755).
Planetary stewardship, despite what might be its proponents’ best multi-system
intentions, “reiterates human-exceptionalism through its renewed emphasis
upon the transformative powers of collective (and individual) human agency”
and ingenuity (Taylor, 2017, p. 1451).
There is an important difference between the “human inclusive Earth System”
of scientists and the multispecies “collective ecology” that Taylor spotlights in
her challenge to the anthropocentrism of stewardship pedagogies. The first
type “assumes that humans need to band together to take collective action
on behalf of the environment” (Taylor, 2017, p. 1451), whereas the second,
which Taylor attributes to childhood ethnographer Karen Malone (2017),
is an ongoing ethical praxis of human and nonhuman relational encounter
and entanglement. This is collective action with the environment rather than
solely on behalf of it. Collective ecologies strive to build common worlds,
which include grappling with environmental, settler colonial, multispecies,
and anti-Black inheritances on a damaged planet (Common Worlds Research
Collective, n.d.; Nxumalo, 2019; Taylor & Pacini-Ketchabaw, 2018). Common
worlds are neither innocent nor conflict free in this framework and are deeply
engaged in supporting ethical relations with more-than-human existents. Part
of my argument in this chapter is that the humanist stewardship pedagogy
that Taylor challenges with her reconstructive model of common worlds
finds form in the idealized parental figure of the next section. Figures of the
planetary steward and parental steward both operate “from the premise that
humans have exceptional capacities, not only to alter, damage or destroy, but

 Parental Stewardship

119

also to manage, protect and save” (Taylor, 2017, p. 1453), whether it be saving
the child and/or saving the planet.

­Parental Stewardship
The challenge of planetary stewardship, as described mainly by Steffen at al.
(2011), is for “humanity to become active stewards of our own life support
system” (p. 748). I want to propose that what counts as a life support system
in speculative texts are intimacies of parental care that come to stand in for
humanity facing ecological peril. The climate crisis becomes about “whether
we have cared enough, not just about and for each other and the planet but
about and for the future” (Johns-Putra, 2016, p. 520). The Anthropocene
predicament provides one answer—humans have not cared nearly enough,
or, at least, the kind of care provided has been fundamentally of the wrong
sort. An important figure that emerges in care discussions, in both planetary
and familial ones, is the child. This is at least partly because of the twinning
of the child-figure with/as/to the future, and how the child has long been
in metonymic relation with the planet. As Haraway (1997) expresses, the
planet and child are “sibling seed worlds” that “concentrate the elixir of life
as a complex system” (p. 174). Within this relation, the child’s “figuration . . .
stands in the place of the complex systems at work in ecological materiality”
(Sheldon, 2016, p. 5). In this way, the child-figure is “a kind of torsion” between
planetary systems and intimate relations (p. 5).
Thinking-with the child-figure in the Anthropocene means that in addition
to the normal unknowns of childhood a host of hyperobject concerns are
added to the mix (e.g. climate change, geological temporality, deep time). In
other words, the child-figure “can be a flashpoint of what are otherwise more
abstract, and deferrable, concerns” (Clark, 2017, p. 4). Earth system functioning
is perceived as complex while the child is assumed as something simpler. By
distilling intricacies of planetary change into a smaller, manageable, and more
familiar entity, “the figure of the child embodies climate-change concerns”
(Johns-Putra, 2016, p. 523). As such, the child-figure captures “contemporary
anxieties about whether we are doing enough to protect, shelter, and safeguard
that for which we are responsible” (Johns-Petra, 2016, p. 520). I think that in
the space of responsibility is the back-and-forth slippage of the figures of the

 120

Anthropocene Childhoods

child and planetary. What does it do to implicate childhood “in the geological
formations and dynamics of our planet” and of the future (Clark, 2017, p. 4)?
The affective resonances of climate change are one reason for the growing
popularity of cli-fi and other post-apocalyptic speculative genres (Colebrook,
2018). Hee-Jung Joo (2018) reads blockbuster disaster films of this type as
disclosing a race-futurity bind that mirrors the problematics of much wider
Anthropocene discourse. These overlays find shared form in an anxiety and
concern for the future of humanity, which are made more accessible and
affectable through cinematic plot lines of the bionormative family. After
an ecological disaster threatens mass extinction—films like The Day After
Tomorrow and 2012 are but two examples—the absent fathers-scientistspatriarchs-Man heroically redeem themselves and protect the planet by saving
their sons and re-romancing their wives. A trope of many disaster films is that
“the unpredictability of climate change” is averted by recomposing “the white,
biological, nuclear family” (Joo, 2018, p. 4). Nuclear families are not observed
intact in The Handmaid’s Tale, but the desire for the heteronormative family
structure is an active absent-presence. Its loss is felt, mourned, and motivating
in such a pronounced way that alternative kin assemblages are what is leftover
rather than what might be a valued formation of care relations. In these texts,
regaining the heteronormative bio-family is the potential means of rendering
stable an ecologically insecure future.
Often in speculative post-apocalyptic texts, planetary precarity takes
shape as a failure to maintain the hegemonic family form and is rectified by a
fierce commitment to bio-kin survival. The parental bond—focused on care
from the adult toward the child—acts as a concentrated unit to think climate
change. Care for the planet and care for the future are performed by way of
care for the child. Familial relations serve as “a psychological and emotional
touchstone” where planetary stewardship is reframed “as a question of one’s
responsibility for one’s children” (Johns-Putra, 2016, p. 524). This cherished
relationship allows for a more familiar and “manageable sphere in which
to contemplate the uncontemplatable”—the end of the world (p. 525). The
Handmaid’s Tale lends itself to a reading where if the bio-bond is strong
enough, care-full (full of care) enough, ardent enough, and durable enough
then just maybe there is a possibility of survival among the Anthropoceneinduced ruins of climate catastrophe. There might even be some form of hope

 Parental Stewardship

121

possible through the heteronormative promise of a new generation and thus
a sustained human species (Sheldon, 2016). My argument is that when care
for the child becomes a proxy for care for the environment then planetary
stewardship becomes a form of paternal stewardship. This raises important
questions: what might be the “profound drawbacks to reading parental love as
the antithesis and antidote to environmental destruction” (Johns-Putra, 2016,
p. 521)? What is the relation of parental love to ecological care? What if care in
one domain means destruction for the other? What if abandoning one means
saving the other?

Re-Reading The Handmaid’s Tale in the Anthropocene
My fascination with Hulu’s adaptation of The Handmaid’s Tale relates mainly
to the coexistence of repressive reproductive politics with progressive policies
of climate action. It terrifies me that the televised world of Gilead appears to
be less polluted, less racist, and less consumptive than this one. In this section,
I want to grapple with how care and desire for the child-figure smooths over the
coming together of violent governance with environmental stewardship. The
Handmaid’s Tale largely accomplishes this connexion by elevating the childfigure to a position of indisputable good. To paraphrase Edelman (2004) again,
what would it mean not to fight for children—is there even another side? What
if both sides think they are protecting children? Everyone and everything
in Gilead turns on the child—both totalitarian and resistance movements.
The Handmaid’s Tale showrunner Bruce Miller characterizes Gilead in this
manner: “in a world where birth rates have fallen so precipitously, fertility
would trump everything” (Dockterman, 2017, para. 14). In a world dominated
by a fertility crisis, where one in four babies are born with serious birth defects
as a direct consequence of environmental toxins, how could the healthy child
not be precious, protected, and desired? What does privileging the figure of
the child in this way do? What gets displaced? Sheldon (2013) offers a complex
provocation:
Although never foregrounded in the novel, the conjunction of toxic
pollution, infertility, and mutation suggests that Gilead’s militarized
reproductive futurism responds as much to the uncontainable liveliness of

 122

Anthropocene Childhoods

biological and ecological forces—including those extra-diegetic reproductive
technologies whose absence the novel so conspicuously underscores—as to
the threatening break up of hetero-patriarchy in pre-coup America.
(para. 17)

How does the uncontainable liveliness of ecology get embedded in and
embodied by the child-figure? How does the child provide justification for
what Sheldon calls militarized reproductive futurism? It is also within these
complexities that The Handmaid’s Tale is able to smuggle in a compassionate,
conservative sanctioning of naturalized parenthood, specifically bionormative
motherhood. While not fronted in the television adaptation either, which
post-dates Sheldon’s (2013) observations of the novel, there are a few pivotal
scenes that allow for a grappling with the intersections of ecological toxicity,
post-racial futurism, and bionormative care.
Atwood wrote The Handmaid’s Tale the midst of the 1980s pro-choice/prolife abortion debates in the United States and before the fall of the Berlin Wall.
The Hulu adaption began airing in 2017 in the midst of renewed political efforts
to restrict abortion rights, the global rise of right-wing populism, and just before
the nightmare election of Trump and the child border separation polices that
the series so aptly foreshadows.1 The speculative world of Gilead occupies a
large part of the eastern United States, and its temporality is presented as a near
dystopic future. Given the political context of both the novel’s and television
series’ emergence, the world of Gilead does not feel especially futuristic or
fictitious. As a popular hashtag captures: #MakeMargaretAtwoodFictionAgain.
The television series largely follows Atwood’s plotline for its first season, but
currently in production for its fifth season, the series has moved well beyond
its source material.
The Handmaid’s Tale is a work of speculative fiction, described as such by
Atwood (2012) in an article in The Guardian. She also describes, “a rule for
myself: I would not include anything that human beings had not already done
in some other place or time, or for which the technology did not already exist”
(para. 11; emphasis added). I am particularly interested in Atwood’s take on
speculative fiction because of its connections with Latour’s and Benjamin’s
thoughts on technology explored in Chapter 4. Technology does not sit still; a
future with the technology of today is anachronic. As such, Benjamin’s (2019b)

 Parental Stewardship

123

work on “race as a technology” seems to offer a rejoinder to Atwood. Race as
a technology captures how technology modifies its form to shapeshift social
divisions into the future; race is a technology “designed to separate, stratify,
and sanctify the many forms of . . . social injustice in the architecture of
everyday life” (p. 17). As a technology, race is “innovative and future-oriented,”
so speculative fiction has an essential function to play in “anticipat[ing] and
interven[ing] in new racial formations” (Benjamin, 2016, p. 1). If it can be
imagined then maybe it can be prevented, or, in other cases, created. Unlike
Benjamin’s “Ferguson is the Future,” The Handmaid’s Tale uses science and
technology very sparingly. It is not only that there are no new technological
inventions, it is that there is almost no technology at all. Both the novel and
the television show build a world where technology is one of humanity’s most
corruptive sins. In Gilead it is not about innovating and developing new
technologies, as Latour (2011) suggests, but about getting rid of old ones.
Gilead’s technophobia is evident in how its representatives explain the fertility
crises. The Handmaid’s custodial-figure at the re-education Red Center, Aunt
Lydia, lectures in an indoctrination class: “They filled the air with chemicals
and radiation and poison, so God whipped up a special plague: the plague of
infertility. . . . As birthrates fell, they made things worse—birth control pills,
morning after pills . . . their Tinder” (Miller & Morano, 2017, 16:25). While the
referent of the “they” bounces between women and all humans, technology
also seems a fair substitute—in this case, technologies of reproductive health,
sexuality, and environmental destruction. In other words, fossil fuels and
Plan B are simultaneously culpable. Additionally, despite Gilead’s fertility
crises, all assisted reproductive technologies are banned. There is no in-vitro
fertilization, cryopreservation, or intracytoplasmic sperm injections. The only
baby-making allowed is a forced heterosexual transaction between man and
Handmaid. Television, computers, money, smartphones, and books all seem
to be banned too. Exiled from Gilead to the Colonies, Unwomen work with
broken spades to dig up polluted earth. Trucks and machines that could do the
work more efficiently (but with more environmental pollution) are nowhere
to be found. The Handmaids have even been stripped of their names, which is
a different sort of technology. For example, June, who is never named as such
the novel, is known as Offred (i.e., Of Fred) to mark her as property to her
master Commander Fred Waterford.

 124

Anthropocene Childhoods

According to Gilead doctrine, in the world before the crises—this
world—technologies were loved too much. They promoted immorality and
contributed to the environmental disaster. The only kind of love allowed in
Gilead is for the child and God—almost interchangeable entities. “Think of
yourselves as seeds,” Aunt Lydia eerily tells the Handmaids, “the future is
in your hands” (Atwood, 1986, p. 19). “It is not her hands,” Sheldon (2013)
retorts, “that bear the future” (para. 14). A lone technology still cherished in
Gilead therefore is the fertile women’s womb. Handmaids are “two-legged
wombs, that’s all: sacred vessels ambulatory chalices” (Atwood, 1986, p. 176).
Handmaids are a technology of childbirth. After one of the Handmaids,
Janine, has her eye gouged out as a punishment for disobedience, June’s
best friend Moira reflects: “We’re breeding stock, you don’t need eyes
for that” (Miller & Morano, 2017, 22:10). The Handmaid’s Tale is Lauren
Berlant’s (1997) infantile citizenship to an nth degree: the fetus trumps the
Handmaid—the child trumps everything else.

Born Pre-Polluted2
As mentioned above, the world of Gilead experiences an unspecified ecological
catastrophe which induces a fertility crisis. The crisis provides the pretext for a
puritanical, elitist male covenant to usurp governmental power. Women’s rights
are quickly curtailed, and women’s bodies are strictly governed, monitored,
used, and regulated by the state. Gilead stands as a totalitarian-theocratic
regime maintained by threat, surveillance, indoctrination, and violence. Fertile
women are rounded up, re-educated, and re-distributed to high-ranking men
and their wives to reproduce. A monthly procreation ceremony is held in the
family house—the ritualized theatrics of which would be comical if they did
not center on rape. The Handmaids have the opportunity to reproduce with
three different families before they are exiled to the toxic wastelands of the
Colonies. Given this, Heather Latimer (2009) reads the novel as “a picture
of what the world might look like if a woman’s only reproductive ‘choice’ is
pregnancy or death” (p. 213). While this has much truth to it, Sheldon (2013)
extends a third possibility “that splits open the opposition of pregnancy and
death” (para. 16). This possibility is the “unbabies and the mutagens responsible
for their deformities” (para. 16), which shakes the geontological boundary of

 Parental Stewardship

125

life and nonlife. Unbabies, or Shredders as they are also called, are babies born
with severe birth deformities and a small chance at survival.
In her work on natality, Arendt (1958) notes that the “the force of life is
fertility” (p. 108). Sheldon (2013) performs an Anthropocene twist on natality
to consider how radiation, chemical spills, toxic soils, and other mutagens
make it so “biological reproduction is hardly the only source of liveliness”
anymore (para. 18). Perhaps Arendt (1958) gestures toward such an awareness
with her idea of the “surplus” of life in “its potential multiplication” (p. 108),
but, for the most part, natality remains within a biopolitical frame. However,
in the Anthropocene, the “force of life” is not only or mainly fertility but toxic
liveliness. Gilead’s babies are born pre-polluted (MacKendrick & Cairns, 2019),
and so are babies in this world. How does mutational liveliness challenge a
concept of reproductive futurism that relies on an idealized and bionormative
figure of the child? What futurity does a toxic-child figure forth?
I am most drawn to speculative texts of climate catastrophe that put the
promise and premise of bionormative reproductive futurism under pressure.
The challenge these texts must engage entails how “to consolidate the
explosion of other-than-human liveliness under the figure of the child at the
same time that it suggests an accelerating horizon of unrecuperable vitality”
(Sheldon, 2013, para. 18). In other words, the “other-than-human-liveliness”
in The Handmaid’s Tale consists of all the toxic pollutants and toxic bodies
linked to the environmental disaster but for which each new child offers a
chance at overcoming and therefore shifting the course of the future. However,
what each Unbaby does is reconfirm an inability to fully contain and control
toxicity, or, as Sheldon (2013) names it above, the horizon of unrecuperable
vitality. Unbabies are figures of Anthropocene Child.
The Unbabies and the Unwomen of the Colonies—those who do not die
even though their liveliness and lifetimes are severely reduced—are a form of
existence as toxic ongoingness. Toxicity in Gilead is not distributed equally
nor entirely controllable, and its unrestrained appearance interrupts the purity
narrative of the totalitarian regime. With the figure of the Shredder baby, “The
Handmaid’s Tale shows us the reproductive future behind the sacred child of
reproductive futurism” (para. 19). Unlike Edelman’s (2004) conceptualization,
the reproductive futures of Anthropocene Child are pre-polluted in both their
symbolic and material existences. As pointed out by Sheldon (2013), the only

 126

Anthropocene Childhoods

baby born in the space of Atwood’s novel is an Unbaby, and, as such, represents
a failure of militarized reproductive futurism and totalitarian patriarchy to
control the environment. Related to the last chapter, the Unbabies of Gilead
could have been a lesson in “loving our monsters” or a “kinship of the infertile,”
yet, in the revisioning of The Handmaid’s Tale for television, the Shredderchild is not for a visualized world. The novel’s baby is reborn onscreen as a
healthy, white, perfectly able-bodied baby. And the maternal relation—the
baby and her mother Janine—leads into a pivotal scene from which to consider
the idolizing of bionormative care, but first a closer look at the text’s primary
maternal protagonist Offred/June.

Bionormative Motherhood
In the novel, Offred is a passive protagonist. As the book’s narrator, readers
are privy to her inner thoughts and they are not those of a rebel feminist
hero. Nevertheless, we are given enough insight to develop some empathy. In
the pre-Gilead world of the novel, Offred has trouble accepting her mother’s
feminist activism, hesitates to embrace her best friend’s queer sexuality, and
only notices the world changing when it is too late. As a captive Handmaid,
she never really desires to join the resistance and seems to give up and accept
her position in the latter half of the novel. The book ends with Offred pregnant
and presented with a possible escape. When a black van arrives to transport
her, readers are not sure if an ally has arranged her getaway or if she is being
arrested. As the star of a television series, this ambiguousness and passiveness
will not do. Audiences are much less-likely to rally behind a woman who does
not stand up against Gilead and fight. Television series need heroes; patriarchal
worlds need feminist de(con)structors. I desire June, not Offred.
Compassion for television’s June is immediately built as the audience bears
witness to the monthly rape ritual in the first episode (and in the second episode
and again and again after that). Support is fully secured with a flashback of
her family’s failed escape attempt to Canada. Near the border, June and her
daughter, Hannah, separate from her husband and run through the woods.
A mother gripping her child tight and running, hiding, stumbling, and falling
before having her child ripped from her arms by ICE lookalikes plays out
like a Law & Order ripped from the headlines’ episode. Despite the trauma

 Parental Stewardship

127

of having her child stolen away, June is witty, smart, and always plotting her
escape. Escape, though, might not be the right word because the moment June
is assured safe passage to Canada late in season two, she turns it down, turns
around, and heads back to Gilead. Why? Hannah is still there. June’s goal is
reunion not escape (or reunion AND escape). June’s entire motivation is to
get her child back, and any thoughts of ending Gilead’s oppressive policies and
practices are secondary. Especially in the second season of Hulu’s adaptation,
The Handmaid’s Tale plays into the post-apocalyptic trope that places “the
reunification of the heteronormative white family at the center of the drama”
(Fojas, 2017, p. 11). The identification of white here does not quite fit, as June’s
daughter and husband are identified as Black. However, as will be examined, the
bionormative whiteness of the hegemonic maternal bond persists nonetheless.
The Handmaid’s Tale television series has been a huge critical and popular
success. Women dressed in the Handmaid’s crimson robes and white bonnets
fill state legislature buildings to protest against laws that will further discipline
their bodies; tattoos of “Nolite te bastardes carborundorum” [Don’t let the
bastards grind you down] imprint on bodies and get lots of likes on Instagram;
countless posts warning #HandmaidsTaleIsNotAnInstructionManual follow
each episode and/or problematic government policy announcement. Amidst
this popularity, Jennifer Maher (2018) troubles how the series assembles its
critical response, and I would like to extend her provocation to consider how
it affectively shifts planetary stewardship toward parental stewardship. Maher
(2018) asks:
In order to most effectively “warn” us against repressive reproductive futurity,
does The Handmaid’s Tale marshal its own kind of neoliberal reproductive
fantasies of the substance (if not the sanctity) of the nuclear family, with
its roots in romantic love and melodramatic maternity? According the
narrative’s emotional logic, Gilead is the most horrifying of places not only
for its cruel gender tyranny but for its distortion of the most “primary” of
human relationships: heterosexual love that produces biological children.
(p. 209)

I­ would add, as Maher entertains later in her article, that the main relationship
The Handmaid’s Tale uplifts is not the heterosexual couple but the maternal
bond. The emotional horror of June and Hannah’s separation happens not once

 128

Anthropocene Childhoods

but multiple times. On one occasion, Commander Waterford’s wife, Serena
Joy, arranges for her and June to go on a long drive outside the city. After a few
hours, Serena gets out of the car, locks June inside, and knocks on the front
door of a house. Hannah emerges and Serena puts her arm around the child as
they engage in a brief conversation. June is left screaming and trashing around
in the car. This glimpse of her child is not given out of kindness but as an
assertion of Serena’s control and a threat to June to stay in line. Serena knows
the power of the bio-bond is more effective than any physical punishment
she could inflict. It is not ultimately the sexual violence or queer killings but
the separation of mother and child that hits home most affectively in The
Handmaid’s Tale. A powerful example of this involves Janine and her newborn
baby in an episode called “The Bridge” (Tuchman & Dennis, 2017).
Handmaids typically remain in their Commander’s household for a few
months after the birth of their child to breastfeed. After their babies are weaned,
they are relocated to another home so they can get to work reproducing again.
Janine was moved earlier than usual, and viewers find out the reason why
before “The Bridge” concludes. In the pivotal scene, June is awakened by a
panicked Serena who tells her Janine is threatening to jump of a bridge with
her baby. Earlier that night, Janine had abducted her baby from the Putman’s
house. When June arrives at the blocked-off bridge there are guards, guns,
Aunt Lydia, and the Waterford and Putman families. Commander Putman
attempts to talk Janine off the ledge which prompts her to scream out details of
their illegal sexual affair and his broken promises for them to form their own
happy nuclear family. The Putman wife tries to appease Janine by inviting her
back into the household, but Janine does not believe her. As Janine gets closer
to the edge, June comes forward to appeal to her maternal side: does she really
want to hurt her baby? Is this how to best protect and care for her innocent
child? June convinces Janine to hand her the baby, and, as soon as she does,
Janine leaps off the bridge before the guards can reach her. Janine’s rebellion
ends with her in a coma from which she later physically recovers enough to be
banished to the Colonies, only to return again when her maternal savourism is
desperately needed.3 Maher (2018) writes about how she watched with bated
breath as Janine crept closer to the edge, and that she was relieved when Janine
handed her baby over before she jumped. But then Maher catches herself and
offers a description that equally captures my reaction:

 Parental Stewardship

129

I was relieved when it was just her. The emotional stakes of The Handmaid’s
Tale are amped up to such an extreme degree that the attempted suicide of an
innocent woman who has already had her eye gouged out for disobedience
elicits relief from its (feminist) audience because at least the baby didn’t
die . . . in siding ourselves against Gilead, we can also find ourselves, albeit
unconsciously, emotionally complicit with it . . . . It wasn’t so long ago that
feminism insisted on a deconstruction of biological essentialism in the face
of such calls via a rigorous analysis of the repression inherent in heterosexist
assumptions of the meaning of mothers, fathers, romantic love, and family.
(p. 210)

It is important to be clear that this is not about criticizing those who live and
love within this family form, but about the heterosexism implicit in prioritizing
a naturalized form of sacrificial love to be waged at the “shrine of the sacred
Child” (Edelman, 2004, p. 24). Maher’s (2018) concern, one that I share, is
if The Handmaid Tale’s “dramatization of woman-as-womb might reinforce a
neoliberal version of the very same claim” (p. 210). Remember June’s transition
from the passive Offred of the book (who never saw her child again after their
initial separation) to the brave resister whose primary motivation is to get
Hannah back. The figure of “June will rebel not because she has been forced
into maternity but because it has been denied her” (p. 210).
The undertones of sacrificial love and bionormative motherhood are
important to flesh out. The Handmaid Tale promotes a maternal form of
sacrificial love which justifies rather than juxtaposes violence and survival as
moral values. Povinelli (2009) asks how “discourses of sacrifice and sacrificial
love coordinate violence and redemption in such a way that suffering and
dying, the mortification of bodies, are read from the perspective of the
redeemed end of a horizontal time” (p. 77). Janine has one functioning eye,
long-term psychological damage from abuse pre- and current Gilead, has
her child ripped from her arms, and is condemned to die a slow death in the
Colonies—but at least her child is “safe.” Safe to be raised by the leaders of a
repressive regime? Safe to be subservient? Safe to never learn to read or write
or think for herself? Safe to grow up in a privileged household before being
forced to become a Handmaid herself? Furthermore, Janine’s redemption
passes in a moment—it begins at the same time as it ends—when she hands
June her baby and jumps. Through June, though, the potential for redemption

 130

Anthropocene Childhoods

is kept alive. June has transformed from passive (Offred) to active (June),
victim to hero, ignorant to knowing, and so she will be rewarded by getting
Hannah back. All the violence June suffers will ultimately be worth it, or so
the sacrificial story goes; violent oppression does not deter her from her goal
but makes her stronger and more focused, a dangerous lesson in real life. I feel
confident wagering almost anything that June and Hannah will be together
again before the series ends. That is what happens when you act the hero and
when bionormative motherhood is the superpower. And it is not only the
speculative world of Gilead that is supporting a narrowed valuation of what
counts as maternal care.
Stepping outside speculative texts for a moment, I turn to Kate Cairns,
Josée Johnston, and Norah MacKendrick’s (2013) work on the organic child
and how this idealized figure embodies “expectations about childhood and
maternal social and environmental responsibility by emphasizing mothers’
individual responsibility for securing children’s futures” (p. 97). Behind the
figure of the organic child lies a hegemonic understanding of motherhood
delimited by care and protection narrowly and traditionally defined. How
does this link with The Handmaid’s Tale? These care-efforts are lived out at
an emotional level that can be both empowering and guilt producing. Taking
care of the organic child entails “practices and ideals [that] rest upon maternal
values of love, care, and responsibility” that are intensified in and by the toxic
potential of the Anthropocene (p. 113). Like Puig de la Bellacasa’s (2017)
three-layered care formulation, the organic child receives care that is labor
intensive, affective, and reflective of an eco-sensitive ethics, yet it stays at the
level of the individual as a false synecdoche for the planetary. This is a form
planetary stewardship individually enacted by buying and feeding the right
foods from the right places to the right kind of child from the right sort of
mother. Planetary stewardship slips into parental stewardship as the primary
maternal responsibility becomes “producing a healthy child and a healthy
planet” (p. 98), as if they are one and the same. The figure of the organic child
updates the trope of the child as the future. To have a future—to save the
future—to be the future—the organic child must be a “pure child,” kept away
from “harmful impurities of an industrialized food system” (p. 98).
The Handmaid’s Tale makes clear that impurities are not limited to
agriculture and/or consumerism but are cumulative and co-occurring over

 Parental Stewardship

131

many infrastructures. To make a bad pass at a cliché: purity is not only food
deep. What Gilead promises is religious purity, sexual purity, racial purity, and
environmental purity. While Cairns and colleagues critically link the organic
child to neoliberalized, individualized consumption practices, this same kind
of connection is not exactly transferable to the speculative economies of Gilead.
In Gilead there is no money and all food is organic. In the next section, I look
at how organic food is mandated for the Handmaids, especially expectant
mothers, in order to safely feed the child/future. My guiding matter of care
and concern is how The Handmaid’s Tale performs the environmentalization
of care.

The Environmentalization of Care
The environmental aspects of The Handmaid’s Tale have not received much
attention in scholarly or popular circles. Most critical work has focused on a
feminist critique of gendered violence. Such work is important, and my intent
is not to diminish it, but to suggest that a feminist plus ecological lens might
add something significant to the discussion. The most detailed depiction of
Gilead’s environmental stewardship occurs in an episode midway through
season one titled “A Women’s Place” (Hauser & Sigismondi, 2017). In this
episode a Mexican trade delegation visits Gilead and the proverbial red carpet
is rolled out including a formal banquet. Up until this point, by reading
between the lines, viewers assume that chemical pollution and radioactive
waste are at least partial causes of the fertility crises. We learn in this episode
that Gilead’s corrective environmental measures have resulted in fertility rates
for its Handmaids well above the global average. For their part, Mexico has not
had baby born alive in more than six years.
In the world of Gilead, environmental stewardship is a key component of
what Serena, once a successful “domestic feminist” activist and author herself,
calls a “healthy and moral way to life” (15:10). In a flashback reveal, we learn
that it was Serena who first suggested the doctrine of “fertility as a national
resource, reproduction as a moral imperative” (18:30). Stewardship tactics of
reducing carbon emissions, restoring healthy soils, limiting fossil fuel usage,
and making sure the Handmaids only eat organic foods are all steps toward
achieving this goal. In this way, a clean environment goes hand-in-hand with

 132

Anthropocene Childhoods

what counts as morality in Gilead, and it is a by-all-means-necessary kind of
go(o)dliness. “Gilead’s leaders would have people believe that it’s the marriage
of moral righteousness and a clean environment,” Corey Plante (2017) points
out, “that inspires fertility in its Handmaids . . . . By their logic, God blesses
Handmaids with fertility because of their green initiatives” (para. 3). It is this
equivocation I want to dig into more.
Some key moments of dialogue in the episode are worth repeating. “We’ve
transitioned to a completely organic agricultural model,” Commander
Waterford tells the Mexican Ambassador (13:40). Serena follows-up later with
a statement that Gilead has “reduced its carbon emissions by seventy-eight
percent in three years” (15:45). Overhead in passing is how the citrus orchards
are progressing “really well,” even enduring the “new weather patterns” (14:03).
At the evening banquet, Serena brags of Gilead’s “great strides cleaning the
environment and restoring a healthy and moral way of life” (34:30). Again, the
environment, morality, and fertility are interwoven. Serena insists that oranges
feature in the banquet presentation, but the true highlight of the evening
festivities is the parade of healthy young children born to the Handmaids. The
episode makes clear that fertility has replaced money as valuable commodity,
and, as it turns out, it is the Handmaids that are up for trade with the Mexican
government. Demonstrating naiveté more expected of the novel’s Offred,
June assumes the delegation is after oranges: “Gilead only has one thing that
anyone wants,” another Handmaid whispers in a corrective fashion to June
at the dinner (37:25). The next morning, June summons her courage and
dangerously steals away a private moment of time with the Ambassador. June
tells her of the horrors for women in Gilead, but the potential ally turns her
back—the procreation potential is too much.
Outside the urban center of Gilead are the Colonies, which are vast
radioactive wastelands. This is where those who break with Gilead’s rigid
theocratic code are expelled. They are wastelands because the soils are full of
chemical pollutants but also because this is where disposable bodies are sent
to labor and die. The inhabitants are mainly Unwomen—women who are too
old, too infertile, too rebellious, and too queer. In a season two episode called
“Unwomen” (Miller & Barker, 2018), viewers are transported to the Colonies
for the first time. All previous mentions were verbal hints only. Unwomen are
shown toiling all day in the fields where they shovel toxic soil into bags for

 Parental Stewardship

133

removal to who knows where. They are performing a version of “soil care”
that appears trapped within a productionist logic: their labor “is aimed at
increasing soil’s efficiency to produce for [some] humans at the expense of
all other relations” (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2015, p. 700), including their own
health. Their nails fall out along with their teeth; their skin is raw and broken;
their bones protrude from lack of food. The Aunts that guard the workers have
breathing masks, but I wager these are more of a status reminder than any real
protection from the radioactivity.
Despite the dreariness and deathliness of the Colonies, what comes
through the darkness of this episode is the Unwomen’s relational, reciprocal
care for each other. They are shown practicing love for each other’s monstrous
degradations. The Unwomen find moments of kindness, friendship, and love
within the monotony of enforced labor and gradual poisoning. They create
“care time” that is “irreducible to productionist time” (Puig de la Bellacasa,
2015, p. 707). They bandage each other’s cracking hands; exchange gentle
looks, words, and touches; share what little medicine has been smuggled in;
and brew mint tea for one another. In the episode, there is even a low-key
commitment ceremony and celebration. The Unwomen form a “kinship of the
infertile” on multiple scales (Klein, 2014). Reproductively, they are infertile;
agriculturally, they labor in toxic fields; futuristically, they die a gendered, slow
violence together. I am not trying to romanticize their queer-kin care: this care
is an ephemeral means of survival against the backdrop of inevitable death.
Nevertheless, there is a sort of inarticulable beauty in their refusal to abandon
one another and practice a toxic common worlding.
On the one hand, Gilead’s extreme misogynistic reproductive policies
are violent and should be condemned. FULL STOP. On the other, their
environmental policies and practices appear to be quite advanced—progressive
even—though not many details are ever revealed. But can Gilead’s regenerative
stewardship practices, such as organic farming and the curtailing of emissions,
be recognized as some form of environmental justice? Can environmental
stewardship be separated out from the political, physical, and religious violence
of the regime? I argue that it cannot, or, at least, I desire that such a separation
is not possible. I also think that this concurrence (evil political regime plus
good environmental policy) is where speculative texts are especially valuable.
I mean this in the sense that Benjamin (2016) refers to as speculative stories

 134

Anthropocene Childhoods

providing anticipatory assistance for imagining and intervening in futures.
What political programs will be introduced as this world becomes warmer
and more toxic?
My refusal to unlink violent practices from environmental stewardship in
The Handmaid’s Tale connects to what Anna Reser and Leila McNeill (2017)
have named the text’s “logic of cultivation” (para. 1). This logic revolves around
the primacy of reproduction and its intra-affectivity with the sacredness of
the child. For example, Reser and McNeil summarize Gilead’s governmental
rationale as: “A clean environment promotes health and decreases infant
mortality. Organic farming reduces concentrations of pesticides that are
believed to be a contributing factor in the fertility crisis” (para. 3). The
common devotional refrain among members of Gilead is “Blessed be the fruit.”
This reminds the Handmaids of the child-bodies they must bear, the organic
food they must eat, and also that their bodies are a valuable commodity to be
traded like produce. In this way, “the Handmaids are transformed into the
image of nature itself, the ultimate erasure of their humanity” (para. 7). In
work on planetary stewardship outlined earlier, Steffen et al. (2011) approach
the Anthropocene as a call “to fundamentally alter our relationship with the
planet we inhabit” (p. 739). Despite the organic food, reduced CO2 emissions,
and regenerating soils, The Handmaid’s Tale is definitely not the kind of
alteration needed. A conversation between June and Commander Waterford
catches some of this dilemma: “We only wanted to make the world better,”
says the Commander. “Better?” June questions. He continues, “Better never
means better for everyone. It always means worse for some” (Fortenberry &
Barker, 2017, 34:08). This is a massive impasse that planetary stewardship
must grapple with. Another is how planetary and parental stewardship can
perpetuate racialized oppressions.

­Post-Racial Parenthood
The Handmaid’s Tale allows for a serious problematizing of misogynistic
totalitarianism and religious fundamentalism, but how this censure is achieved
matters. Does critique lose some of its force when racialization is not taken
into account? Ben Merriman (2009) points out that Atwood’s novel offers “an
archetypal account of female exploitation, but the stand-in for this universal

 Parental Stewardship

135

experience is Offred, a White, college-educated American” (p. 43). I do not
know the statistics but I wager this same demographic makes up the largest
share of the show’s viewing audience. In this way, the novel’s affective horror
is “basically a nightmare vision in which white, college-educated women
like Atwood [and June and myself] are forced to undergo the experiences of
women of color” (Berlastsky, 2015, para. 4). Noah Berlastsky (2017) notices
that fiction developed in, by, and for the Global North has a horrible habit
of framing “dystopic stories” as a thought-experiment about “what if this
atrocity had happened to white people instead?” (para. 1). It is hard not to read
Atwood’s novel in this light, especially with the recognition that one of the
“terrible things about being a handmaid is that you cease to be white” (para. 6).
By this Berlastsky is referring to the privileges granted by whiteness—freedom
of movement, freedom to read, freedom to work, freedom to leisure, freedom
to travel, freedom to not conceive—that blur lines between the institutional
and the personal and the fictional and the real. As a middle-class, educated,
attractive, employed, white-settler married women, June is a figure of the leastlikely victim given the way power is typically distributed in this world. More
generously, perhaps this is Atwood’s point: it could happen to anyone; your
privilege will not protect you forever; pay attention. Where The Handmaid’s Tale
hits a big limit is that there is little indication that oppression is intersectional,
particularly when fertility is threatened.
Rather than engage how violence works across sociopolitical categories,
Atwood’s (1986) novel worlds an all-white world. So, while Gilead is both sexist,
homophobic, and racist, Atwood spends no time explicitly acknowledging
their connection. In the novel, white Handmaids are forced to breed for elite
white men in what can reasonably be assumed as a technique not only to
propagate the human species but the white race. Everyone else, including those
who identify as queer, are exiled to the Colonies. In Wayward Reproductions,
Alys Eve Weinbaum (2004) proposes a “race/reproduction bind” to capture
the “inextricability of the connection . . . the fact that these phenomena ought
not to be thought of as distinct” (p. 5). As noted, the novelized Gilead is an
all-white enclave. Black people are erased in just two lines, cloaked in an Old
Testament euphemism: “Resettlement of the Children of Ham is continuing
on schedule . . . Three thousand have arrived this week in National Homeland
One, with another two thousand in transit” (Atwood, 1986, p. 83). The point

 136

Anthropocene Childhoods

I am getting at is that the oppression depicted in The Handmaid’s Tale is most
recognizable to audiences as that inflicted on Black women during slavery and
its afterlife.4 With a quick act of literary banishment, however, Atwood “didn’t
have to interact with characters of color while capitalizing from implementing
systems of oppression that about were first used in the U.S. on enslaved
Africans” (Abraham, 2017, para. 6). Angelica Jade Bastién (2017) finds that
the expulsion “feels like the mark of a writer unable to reckon with how race
would compound the horrors of a hyper-Evangelical-ruled culture” (para. 5).
In the novel, readers never learn what happens in National Homeland One
let alone in Homeland Two or Three or Ten.
Recall Atwood’s speculative fiction mantra cited earlier that she does not put
anything in her stories that has not happened somewhere at some time before.
This deserves a second look because of the important critiques raised about
The Handmaid’s Tale’s treatment of blackness. Much of this critical scholarship
is produced on blogs, social media, and magazine websites rather than
academic journals, including the sources cited above (e.g., Abraham, 2017;
Bastién, 2017; Berlatsky, 2017; Phoenix, 2018; Priya, 2017). Atwood, along with
many who study her in more traditional scholarly circles, have traced many
historical precedents for Gilead’s oppressive regime.5 However, I join with the
pop culture critics in arguing that anti-Black slavery is the strongest historical
context for the story’s horrors. The list is long: stolen children, enforced
labor, banned literacy, master’s names, involuntary procreation, people as
property, public hangings, restricted movement, and constant surveillance.
Atwood (1986) even names the escape route to Canada the “Underground
Femaleroad” (pp. 303, 309), an all too obvious referent. While not necessarily
intentional, Atwood may have relied heavily on these historical practices “to
bring realism to the speculative. The suffering of the Black people in her world
is, however, rendered invisible” (Phoenix, 2018, p. 206). Atwood has admitted,
when pressed hard about her reliance on tropes of anti-Black slavery, that
“it’s not just African Americans; it’s slavery in general. Or, say, oppression in
general” (Dodson, 1997, p. 101). Priya’s (2017) critique, however, drives the
point home: “By taking the specific oppression of enslaved Black women and
applying them uncritically to white women, The Handmaid’s Tale ignores the
historical realities of an American dystopia founded on anti-Black violence”

 Parental Stewardship

137

(para. 2). As such, The Handmaid’s Tale “remains silent on the central feature
of American history: anti-Blackness” (para. 2).
Fast forward thirty-years from the novel’s publication and Hulu
showrunner Miller flips the script on racial exclusion for a racially diverse
cast. Miller positions Black actors in the major supporting roles of June’s best
friend, husband, and child. Nothing in my discussion is meant to discount
the talent of these actors—particularly the brilliant Samira Wiley who plays
Moira—or to repudiate the good intentions behind Miller’s wish to diversify
Gilead. In an interview, Miller mentions long conversations he has had with
Atwood about the differently racialized Gilead. The point he pushes is that
there is a big difference between reading that “there are no people of color in
this world,” and seeing it visually on screen. He asks, “What’s the difference
between making a TV show about racists and making a racist TV show where
you don’t hire any actors of color?” (para. 11). What is the difference? This is
a really important question. I am not sure exactly how to respond. At first,
Atwood was hesitant about the multicultural update. Miller recalls her saying,
“Well that would change everything” (para. 12). Thinking of Klein’s (2014)
work in the last chapter: what is the everything that is changed? Did adding
actors of color actually alter anything? What is happening to the people of
Gilead is not new, as Atwood herself confirms in many interviews, but because
it is happening to a white, middle-class, educated, affluent, working-mother
June, there remains an air of natalistic invention.
This is all to say that the inclusion of Black actors in key roles does not mean
The Handmaid’s Tale has moved beyond its source text’s racial shortcomings.
Instead, it has transitioned from expulsion to multiculturalism. The result of
Miller’s update is a colorblind sort of equality of risk “that ultimately supports
white erasure” of the violence experienced by Black, Indigenous, and other
people of color (Abraham, 2017, para. 8). Both the novel and series, in my
opinion, are still valuable given the political present, including that both
versions allow for serious questions about fetishizing the child, governing
women’s bodies, unjust family separation practices, bionormative parenthood,
nationalistic pride and populism (e.g., Make American Great Again could be a
Gilead slogan), and, even, environmental destruction. Like much of this world,
however, Gilead is a white supremacist state, and even in June’s moments
of resistance and in her fierce color-blind maternal love it is still that. In an

 138

Anthropocene Childhoods

awful, regrettable, needs-to-be-changed-now kind of way, Atwood’s worlding
is almost more believable than Miller’s world where racialized difference no
longer matters. Soraya Nadia McDonald (2017) caricatures my point and
brings an Anthropocene-related concept of extinction into play: “So Gilead
is post-racial because the human race is facing extinction, and that prompted
Americans to get over several hundred years’ worth of racist education and
social conditioning that depicted Black people as inferior and less than
human?” (para. 19). This ecoanxiety over extinction knots the whiteness of
Gilead’s puritanism, environmentalism, and reproductive futurism together.
The Handmaid’s Tale encourages me to reconsider the environmental
a/effects of being in non-bionormative relations on a broken earth and also
the dangers of elevating parental bonds above other forms of relation. How
do planetary stewardship and parental stewardship offer care for some forms
of existence (i.e., human) while outcasting and abandoning others (i.e.,
Shredders)? Unbabies are not the kind of life that warrants care in Gilead—that
world requires organic existence (Sheldon, 2016). Nevertheless, the Shredderchild challenges the habit of seeing birth, growth, and survival as holding the
promise of futurity for bionormative babies alone. The Shredder-child shows
how toxicity is not something that can be easily exiled to National Homeland
One. It underlies everything and is in everyone. Meanwhile, the Unwomen
demonstrate care for the polluted—for the infertile. More than the parental
figures in The Handmaid’s Tale, the Unwomen put into existence the kind of
care necessary in the Anthropocene.

 ­7

Educational Imaginaries for
Child-Climate Futures

In the conclusion, I consider the relationship of child-figures in speculative
texts and children in this world. Lee Edelman (2004) is adamant that the
figure of the child not “be confused with the lived experiences of any actual . . .
children” (p. 11). I do not think the lines of separation are so clear cut. Instead,
they are entangled. It is not a 1:1 correspondence, but it is a relationship.
Another way to frame this concern are the (im)commensurabilities between
figures of Anthropocene Child and Children of the Anthropocene that were
briefly mentioned in Chapter 1. The latter is used by both Karen Malone
(2017) and Margaret Somerville (2017) to collectively name their young coresearchers who are making their way amidst the climate crisis in relation
with others—human and more-than-human. The geostories in this book
largely depict an eventalization of crisis (e.g., zombie apocalypse, planetary
earthquake, torrential flood), and the child-figures emerge from creative adult
endeavors, whereas Children of the Anthropocene live and remark upon the
mundane, everyday small moments that nevertheless scale up to big questions
of “planetary ethics posed by the Anthropocene” (Taylor & Pacini-Ketchabaw,
2015, p. 508). What I take from this is the necessity of keeping Elizabeth
Povinelli’s (2013) cautionary words in mind when working with child-figures:
“Why don’t we ever ask what it is like to be this figure?” Some related questions
that move between worlds include: What is it to be a toxic-child? What is it
to be “born pre-polluted” (MacKendrick & Cairns, 2019)? What is it to be the
one who is supposed to save? Can thinking-with child-figures at the end of the
world actually grapple with the kinds of conditions, resources, and institutions

 140

Anthropocene Childhoods

required to capacitate lives capable of flourishing? With these concerns in
mind, I bring figures of Anthropocene Child from previous chapters together
with provocations for educational futures.

­Gatherings of Anthropocene Child
In her book, Willful Subjects, Sara Ahmed (2014) describes her methodological
strategy as following a figure around to see what collects. Applied in this
way, Anthropocene Child instigates a kind of archive that is composed of
literary works, multidisciplinary theory, newspaper headlines, commercial
advertisements, blockbuster and indie films, critically acclaimed television
shows, and photographs.1 Spotlighted in this book have been speculative
works (of theory, of fiction, of fact) that act as a catalyst for analytical
grapplings with the Anthropocene through geos-imaginaries of the end of
the world. I have aimed to show that not all ends are equal. For example,
Aiyana in “Ferguson is the Future” has her life literally ended by racialized
police violence to then regenerate and protect an imaginary cyborg-world;
Melanie in The Girl with All the Gifts ends the human exceptional world in
order to begin a multispecies-oriented one; and the young people in The
Marrow Thieves rebuild in the ongoing post-apocalypse through community,
ceremony, and language. Because the end of the world entails multiple
arrangements it allows for child-figures to stay on the move, as was evidenced
by the continuum of Black cyborgs in Chapter 5 (James, 2013; Vargas &
James, 2013).
A danger in following particular child-figures around is that the field of
vision is narrowed. Focusing intently on specific figures can cut them off “from
the histories of [their] determination . . . the social and material relations which
overdetermine their existence, and the consequent perception that such figures
have a ‘life of their own’” (Ahmed, 2000, p. 5). The slippage into a fetishism
of figures is easy and it is something I am learning (and failing and trying
again) to pay attention to and not enact. This is why the connection of the
zombie and slavery was important to draw out in a discussion of Melanie, and
why the doubling inhuman geography of the Anthropocene—the inhuman
as matter and the inhuman as race (Yusoff, 2018)—was necessary to the

 Educational Imaginaries

141

geostorying of Nassun. This is also why symbiotic entanglement is important
to foreground. Nassun does not exhibit autonomous agency because she intraacts with the earth: together they are a geos-force. Melanie seems to commit
a solitary act of heroism when she sets the seed pod tower ablaze but each
movement and thought depends on an intradependent relation with the
fungal pathogen. These child-figures help me appreciate “that no one stands or
acts alone” (Taylor, 2013, p. 117). Brought together under the broad category
Anthropocene Child, speculative child-figures are able to embody distinct
histories and enact conflicting ideas and imaginaries. The goal is cumulative—a
gathering, a collecting—rather than comparative; it is an additive rather than
subtractive practice. Bringing figures together is an act of assemblage that is
never innocent. With the collection of child-figures here, I have aimed to show
the asymmetrical slide in the image of the child from protected and protector
along racialized lines (Sheldon, 2016). It is a punitive position for some and
transformative for others, even as they share challenges of surviving the
climate crisis.
“Following the child” is frequently invoked in early childhood education
and other child-studies related fields as a catchphrase for child-centered
pedagogy. It supposes an intentional process on behalf of both educator and
child in that the teacher steps back and the student leads (perhaps another
indicator of Sheldon’s shift?). This pedagogical instructive has been challenged
for positioning the child as individualistic and anthropocentrically elevated in
a hierarchical and non-dependent relationship to others, including existents
of more-than-human worlds (Common Worlds Research Collective, n.d.;
Nxumalo, 2019; Taylor & Pacini-Ketchabaw, 2018). Similar dangers haunt
my analytic practices. In focusing intently on child-figures, even in trying to
highlight their geos-entanglements, what is missed? Instead of turning “away
from dominant discourses that reproduce grand narratives of transcendent
heroic solutions . . . and, that represent children as the ‘solution’ for the future”
(Nxumalo, 2018, p. 2), how might turning toward child-figures reaffirm those
same discourses and positionalities? The researchers I cite above engage with
children and more-than-human worlds in situated encounters and places.
Their work aims to “eschew the heroic tales of major individuals on the big
stage and seek out alternative, minor, but powerful polyphonic stories of
multiple small players, quietly changing worlds together on the margins”

 142

Anthropocene Childhoods

(Taylor & Pacini-Ketchabaw, 2018, p. 7). I cannot claim the same.2
Nevertheless, I share with these scholars a concern about children inhabiting
and inheriting ecologically and colonially damaged worlds.

­Ontological Demands
Povinelli (2013) questions how much contemporary critical theory has thought
about what happens when figure meets ground—when theories of potentiality
go live. Given that many of the speculative child-figures I think-with are Black
and Indigenous characters, I refuse to stay solely within Edelman’s symbolic
realm and instead connect issues of speculative worlds to pressing problems in
this one. That said, I do not intend a seamless correspondence of child-figures
with children in this world. This is not to deny connections, but to insist
that some differences are incommensurable. For example, thinking-with the
generativity of Unbabies and the Colonies in The Handmaid’s Tale is not the
same thing as living-with Aamjiwnaang First Nation children who experience
the everyday chemical exposures of survival in sacrifice zones (Wiebe, 2017).
As Malone (2017) insists, “We are not all in the Anthropocene together—the
poor and the dispossessed, the children are far more in it than others” (p. 249).
Yet, toxicity brings these worlds into conversation: these child-figures and
children are born(e) pre-polluted. At times I have not articulated the lines of
difference because it can be useful to think them together. However, I do not
want to discount that it matters where analytic cuts are made (Barad, 2007).
This leads me into another unresolved question: why do why theorists, myself
included, keep turning to child-figures to think through and with/in worlds
under threat? By distilling intricacies of the climate crisis into a supposed
smaller, manageable, and more familiar entity, “the figure of the child embodies
climate-change concerns” (Johns-Putra, 2016, p. 523). As such, the child-figure
becomes a concentrated unit to locate contemporary eco-anxieties about
the future. This is not something I am uncritically endorsing. The slippage
between the figures of the child and planetary can be dangerous—they are not
the same in terms of scale, temporality, or ontology—but they can bring into
view shared concerns about response-ability, history, desire, and futurity.
I want to bring one last figure of Anthropocene Child into the fold as
they bring to the fore these concerns. They are on this book’s cover and I

 Educational Imaginaries

143

affectionately call them Elephant Annie. They are named Annie because their
red hair and dress resembles orphan Annie from the movie-musical of the same
name (Huston, 1982). At first glance though, it is probably not the musical
allusion that captures your attention but the gas mask. They are wearing
a vintage GP-5 gas mask, a Soviet era relic from the Cold War. The mask is
nicknamed elephant because of the crinkled hose that joins the face piece to
the filter—Elephant Annie’s mask is missing this latter life-saving component.
I understand Elephant Annie as a geontological figure of Anthropocene Child:
they are both Virus and Animist (Povinelli, 2016). Their mask signals chemical
radiation and pollution that long outlasts human lifespans; it also hints at a
sort of becoming-animal at the end of the world (Deleuze & Guattari, 1987).
The Desert is also evoked in the cover image, as there are signs of struggling
vegetation. The layered planters that frame the scene indicate that maybe plant
life is ongoing, although the overwhelming brown hues put that reading in
question. A stronger sign of life is far in the background: green tree tops. It is
in the horizon, much like the future the figure of the child typically symbolizes.
Still, much in the frame seems at risk, even with Elephant Annie’s defiant
power stance, so my takeaway is that this is a dying earth. When I think of the
figure of the Desert in connection with this picture, however, I keep coming
back to the masks.
The elephant masks are the iconography of life abandoned after the
Chernobyl disaster. The Exclusion Zone was set up after the 1986 nuclear
meltdown and covers a thousand-mile square radius around the Chernobyl
Nuclear Power Plant. Humans were evacuated following the disaster, but
many not quickly enough. Those who lived in its vicinity or that worked
for the Plant have faced an assortment of health problems: around 4000
people who worked at the Plant have died from “Chernobyl-related cancers”
(Nolan, 2019). Additionally, in the days following the explosion, cows ate
contaminated grass and passed radiated iodine to children who drank their
milk. Since 2011, tourists, artists, and photographers have been allowed back
into areas of the Exclusion Zone under strict conditions. One thing emerging
from these visitations are thousands of photographs, and the dominant
image has been the elephant gas masks. Many photos depict rooms inside
Middle School Number 3 in Pripyat, Ukraine, a city of 50,000 people before
the explosion. The school had boxes of gas masks stored in the basement

 144

Anthropocene Childhoods

pre-explosion, protective leftovers from the Cold War scare of potential
chemical and biological warfare (Chernobyl Gallery, n.d.). These masks have
since been scattered about the classrooms—some think by looters who snuck
into the Exclusion Zone to remove tiny amounts of sliver from the masks’
filters (Chernobyl Gallery, n.d.). Redditt users who have visited the site share
that their guides told them the masks were strewn about for tourists in order
to make the scene even more eerie and unnerving. Regardless of how they got
there, they are the focal point of thousands of photos about the ongoingness
of nuclear disaster. Particularly haunting are the photos of abandoned dolls
wearing the same gas masks as Elephant Annie (see Figure 5): the gas masks as
iconography of nuclear disaster and the doll as iconography of childhood meet
to generate geos-imaginaries of the end of the world in which toxic liveliness
outlasts human occupation and abandonment.
Pripyat was mentioned in passing in Chapter 3 as the real location of
the overhead drone shots that close out The Girl with All the Gifts. These
images challenge the idea of the end of the world in toto and cause me to
restate it as the end of the human world. My takeaway is without humans—

Figure 5 Iconography of Abandonment. Photo by Cristian Fischer/EyeEm @ Getty
Images.

 Educational Imaginaries

145

and even after nuclear disaster—forms of life and nonlife continue: grass
will poke up through pavement, vines will cover skyscrapers, isotopes will
remain radioactive, fungus will flourish, forests will replenish, and plastic
dolls will survive. In Alliances in the Anthropocene, Christine Eriksen and
Susan Ballard (2020) map interrelations of people, plants, and fire in the
Red Forest in the Exclusion Zone. The Red Forest is one of the world’s
most contaminated areas and humans have long abandoned the place. The
bulk of radioactivity is concentrated in the soil and pine forests have been
planted to absorb the nuclear chemicals. The thirty-kilometer square area
is now over 70 percent forest (Wendle, 2016). Radiation contamination has
made adaptation and mutation normal course for the plants and animals
that still live there: certain plants grow differently, some birds grow tumors,
and several species of small animals no longer grow babies. However, many
larger animals have found refuge in the Exclusion Zone, including moose,
deer, beavers, and wolves. Without humans around to hunt, build, or clearcut, the Przewalski horse has come back from near extinction and much
flora and fauna has flourished (Wendle, 2016). Humans have little place in
this radioactive wasteland and the result has been booming density rates for
many nonhuman species.
Life and nonlife are all mixed up in Chernobyl and its afterlife, and engaging
with Elephant Annie’s entanglements allow me to unearth these connections.
As a figure of Anthropocene Child, Elephant Annie is a projection, a symptom,
an indication, and an opening into discussions of nuclear power as a solution to
fossil fuel extraction in the Anthropocene. Elephant Annie points me toward
a concern for children who drank the poison cow milk after the disaster,
and for those who still ingest it today. Up to 140 miles from the disaster site
are radioactivity readings in cow milk twelve times the recommended limit
for children (Pérez-Peña, 2018). Recounting interviews with the families,
researchers from the University of Exeter recall: “These people know that
the milk is unsafe, but they tell us, ‘We don’t have a choice, we have to feed
our families.’ These are rural communities and the people are poor” (para. 5).
Elephant Annie can open up a critique of the unequal distribution of wealth
and healthcare access in the world. They also want me to care about the cows
that produce the milk and graze the contaminated grass, in what I receive as a
gesture toward more-than-human kin making and caretaking. These various

 146

Anthropocene Childhoods

“matters of care and concern” co-emerge from thinking-with figures of
Anthropocene Child (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2017).
One last connection Elephant Annie brings up for me is to Edelman’s (2004)
No Future. Specifically, a passage in which Edelman polemically fumes:
Fuck the social order and the Child in whose name we’re collectively
terrorized; fuck Annie; fuck the waif from Les Mis; fuck the poor, innocent
kid on the Net; fuck Laws both with capital ls and small; fuck the whole
network of Symbolic relations and the future that serves as its prop.
(p. 29)

I understand the theoretical move: Edelman is calling for queer jouissance
and the death drive to topple the heteronormative reproductive futurism
embodied by the figure of the Child, including Annie. The rage is directed
against Annie’s assurance that “the sun’ll come out tomorrow,” a form
of optimism as futural promise secured by a spunky red-headed child.
However, while orphan Annie seems to embody a brighter tomorrow, her
“hard knock life” was not a sentimental form of childhood. Her tomorrow
may be brighter but it might also be childhood’s end. Another line from
the song goes: “Tomorrow, tomorrow, I love ya tomorrow/You’re always
a day away.” There is a sense of hope conveyed that attests to reproductive
futurism as perpetual horizon. But there is also something at risk and
ungraspable—it is always a day away—I interpret Annie’s mantra not so
much as a taken-for-granted assurance of futurity but as a survival statement
of cruel optimism.

Cruel Optimism of Speculative Futures
As proposed by Lauren Berlant (2011), “a relation of cruel optimism exists
when something you desire is actually an obstacle to your flourishing” (p. 1).
An attachment to tomorrow, for example, becomes cruel when its potential
impedes you from living fully today. Or, when tomorrow marks a future
that under severe conditions of climate change is no longer guaranteed. As
Berlant asks, “What happens to optimism when futurity splinters as a prop
for getting through life?” (p. 18). What happens when the figure of the child

 Educational Imaginaries

147

is no longer futurity’s guarantee? Reproductive futurism is cruel optimism
if the unremitting deferment embodied by the child-figure justifies a lack
of pro-climate and pro-family policies now for pledges of techno-fixes and
living wages someday. If Melanie, Aiyana, Nassun, Unbabies, and Frenchie
were to desire inclusion in this world as is—a white supremist world that does
not recognize them as human—that would be a relation of cruel optimism.
Cruel optimism often emerges under conditions of “extended crisis, with one
happening piling on another” where “extensive threats to survival are said to
dominate the reproduction of life” (p. 7). As we saw with Hushpuppy, antiblackness piles on poverty piles on abandonment piles on climate change. It
is exhausting. Yet, simultaneously, “the genre of crisis can distort something
structural and ongoing within ordinariness into something that seems
shocking and exceptional” (p. 7). Here we can see the limits of both resignation
to the climate crisis and the eventfulness of disaster in speculative texts of the
end of the world.
There seems to be a widespread rule to not overstate the seriousness of the
climate crisis, or at least to follow up severe predictions with declarations of
hope. Alarmist is a designation thrown about for having gone too far too fast
too severely, even when scientific modelling is the source of concern. Leading
climate scientists have warned that there are only twelve years left for steps to be
taken to keep global warming below a 1.5C rise compared with pre-Industrial
levels (IPCC, 2018). If that goal is missed then existing inequalities will continue
to amplify: more fire, more floods, more pandemics, more poverty, more
climate refugees. There is even an emergent vocabulary to capture extreme
weather novelties: heat domes, atmospheric rivers, thundersnows, and bomb
cyclones. A new report by Save the Children International (2021) compares
the frequency of extreme weather events for a child born in 2020 with a person
born in 1960 if the Paris Agreement targets are met. The projections reveal
that children “born into the climate crisis” will experience 2 times as many
wildfires, 2.8 times the number of crop failures, 2.6 times as many droughts, 2.8
times as many floods, and 6.8 times more heatwaves across their lifetimes, and
that children in low-income counties will continue bear the worst of this. This
kind of scientific modelling is speculative, but not in the way I am drawn to it.
The report is about not this and a kind of not yet but the what if of otherwise
speculation is missing. The authors are also careful to balance dire predictions

 148

Anthropocene Childhoods

with positivity. They ask us to “recognise that this crisis is an opportunity for
hope and positive change” (p. 40). This is cruel optimism at work.
As much as I can recognize these limits, I also get the desire. It would be
easy to accede defeat given the momentous challenges. Changing personal
habits are not enough to shift anything substantially so why bother—why
care? Knowing the entanglements of greenhouse gas emissions and racial
capitalism does not generate much confidence in system change either.
Dreams of geo-engineering techno-fixes also seem futile and dangerous:
“hoping that science will provide a solution is its own kind of surrender,
relieving the pressure of confronting the ways of life that have given rise to
climate change in the first place” (Lynch, 2017, para. 5). Still, while I find it
difficult to articulate the logic, it is important to not give in or give up. I am
comforted that “resignation and hope aren’t our only options” though, and
perhaps “global warming discussions need apocalyptic thinking” (para. 5).
I find this statement provocative and would add the caveat: apocalyptic
thinking needs speculative fiction.
Speculative fiction that engages with the climate crisis is often critiqued
because it is future-orientated so it encourages passiveness now. It can be
escapist instead of realist—entertainment rather than activism. Other noted
issues revolve around the prototypical heroics and endings: the world is
saved by a solitary hero, and/or the apocalypse is diverted by a techno-fix
invented by heroic genius. These tropes tie in again to cruel optimism wherein
the “something you desire”—heroes, techno-fixes, and happy endings—
are “actually an obstacle to your flourishing” (p. 1), as in real systemic
transformation. These tropes and hopes pass over the sorts of multispecies
alliances that are necessary for future survival. Author Kim Stanley Robinson
waivers on whether he has contributed to the cruel optimism of speculative
fiction: “Maybe my positive science-fiction stories are part of a cruel optimism,
and we’re heading towards a disaster so black, so bad, that I’m just part of a
false consciousness, part of the zombies walking to the edge of the cliff type
of thing” (Robinson & de Vicente, 2017, para. 56). Robinson then reverses
and marks out a difference between “cruel optimism and angry optimism,”
because “after the disaster comes the next world” (para. 56). I believe this
sort of speculative fiction and affective response is necessary and urgent; it
acknowledges that only transformative change will do, change akin to the

 Educational Imaginaries

149

end of the world as we know it. Speculative fiction can “produce meaning
and material with which to build (and destroy) what we call ‘the real world’”
(Benjamin, 2018, para. 21).
Amidst the turmoil of these times, speculative fiction apportions “windows
into alternative realities, even if it is just a glimpse, to challenge ever-present
narratives of inevitability” (Benjamin, 2016, p. 19). Inevitability is different
than cruel optimism. It demands action. It demands change. Speculative
formations of Black and Indigenous futurities are particularly important as
they refuse to accede the inevitability of anti-blackness, settler colonialism,
white supremacy, and climate devastation. For the most part, speculative
stories are not about the end of the planet or even the end of life but the
refiguration of the world as it is currently constituted: “whenever we envision
a world without war, without prisons, without capitalism, we are producing
speculative fiction” (Imarisha, 2015, p. 10). Daniel Heath Justice (Cherokee)
advises: “Indigenous peoples know what it is to face the end of the world
many, many times. And I think our stories give us a lot of guidance, and also
speak to a life beyond the despair of the now. . . . Imagine otherwise” (Tennant,
2020, paras. 9–10). To play on a refrain from queer feminist poet Adrienne
Rich (1993), the speculative addresses “the first revolutionary question—
what if ?” (p. 242).
In the conceptualization forwarded in this book, the speculative extends
from the realm of fiction to contemporary scholarship in Childhood
Studies. Recent work by the Common Worlds Research Collective (2020)
demonstrates how the speculative can be used to fashion visionary
declarations for a pluriversal, multispecies education for ecological justice
in the year 2050. Fikile Nxumalo and kihana miraya ross (2019) challenge
the white supremacy of mainstream environmental education and offer
their own speculative revisioning of early childhood education for Black
children and communities (p. 502). Brought together, these scholars enact
what Ruha Benjamin (2018) finds most generative about speculative fiction:
a capacity to “experiment with different scenarios, trajectories, and reversals,
elaborating new values and testing different possibilities for creating more
just and equitable societies” (para. 31). These are recuperative pedagogies for
educational futures. They generatively enact the not this, not yet, and what if
of speculative otherwises.

 150

Anthropocene Childhoods

Educational Futures for the Anthropocene
Nxumalo (2019) forwards a call to “unsettle whiteness: toward a Black
Anthropocene” in her ethnographic work with children, waterways, bees,
worms, tree stumps, and mountains (p. 117). Another practice of worlding
Black Anthropocenes entails speculative stories and pedagogies (Nxumalo
& ross, 2019). Collectively, they offer necessary experiments in developing
“a decolonizing, anti-racist, and situated ethics in environmental and placeattuned early childhood studies” that resists the romanticization of nature and
refuses deficit constructions of Black children in nature (Nxumalo & Cedillo,
2019, p. 108). In particular, the critical and creative work by Nxumalo and ross
(2019) exemplifies this sort of experimentation. They enact “Black speculative
fiction as a creative and generative mode of imagining fugitive educational
spaces for young Black children” (p. 502). Not only do the authors highlight
important works by Black feminist writers like Octavia Butler, they make a
speculative offering themselves. They geostory what Black childhoods in
environmental education might look and feel like once blackness and nature
are unhinged from “assumed natural couplings of pure and innocent children
with pure, romantic nature” (p. 502).
Nxumalo and ross begin with not this. This includes how Western ways
of knowing and relating to place, plants, people, and animals are insufficient
given ongoing ecological destruction. They also refuse police presence in
schools and curriculum that continues the erasure of Black people from
history and thus the future. They reject forms of nature schooling that have
“been reserved for ‘innocent’ white children whose parents could afford to
provide them with a ‘proper’ education,” or that only admitted Black children
as “a way to rescue them from their culture of poverty” and improve their
grades (p. 513). Nxumalo and ross next perform a not yet in a near-future
mass movement walk-out of Black people from traditional schooling where
their children were always perceived as a risk and put at risk of violence. In
playing out the collective de-institutionalization of school, they conceive of
what will come in its place: Yoruba cadres where students focus “on spiritual
studies” and learn “other subjects through a Yoruba lens” (p. 514). Nxumalo
and ross end with a series of what ifs fleshed out in story form. What if
education was about children building “on what they intuitively know about

 Educational Imaginaries

151

the significance of their relationship to the more than human world” (p. 514)?
What if the hyperempathy of Lauren in the Parable of the Sower was passed
to a teacher named Nyawela who then shared her gift with the children of the
Wild Seed cadre? These children can then viscerally experience past-presentfutures of both harm, resistance, and revolution “through the environment”
(p. 515). What if environmental education for children unsettled racialized
child-nature innocence through pedagogies of “play, embodied encounters
with the outdoors, humor, activism, environmental science, environmental
racism, history, Black and Indigenous geographies, and more” (p. 520)?
Nxumalo and ross write into possibility educational futures for ecological
justice by “imagining what kinds of early childhood pedagogy might be
possible within an ethics of radical relationality” (p. 509). They give it texture,
feeling, and force.
The Common Worlds Research Collective (2020) co-authored a background
paper for UNESCO’s Futures of Education initiative that also moves the
speculative and the geontological into educational worlds. The co-authors
insist that education needs “to be reimagined and reconfigured around the
future survival of the planet,” and propose seven speculative declarations of
what education might look like in 2050 if we make a paradigm shift from
“learning about the world in order to act upon it, to learning to become with
the world around us” (p. 2). Immediately, I am struck by the timeframe of their
address. Without stating it explicitly, a program of this sort for 2050 assumes
that any climate targets currently proposed were not only met but exceeded.
The ominous headline that opened this book and evokes the IPCC timeline
discussed earlier—“Climate Change: 12 Years to Save the Planet? Make that 18
Months” (McGrath, 2019)—has been proven wrong. There is time and space
for flourishing in the futuristic temporality of the Collective’s proposals. The
authors credit the children and youth climate activists for the actualization
of climate pledges. It was them who demanded action from governments on
climate and capitalism. These students fulfilled Sheldon’s (2016) proposition of
a shift in the image of the child from protected to protector that co-emerged
with the Anthropocene.
Due to the students’ resolve for change and the intersectional planetary
ethics that guided them, what counts as education also transformed. The
Cartesian divides—“for example, mind/body, nature/culture, subject/

 152

Anthropocene Childhoods

object”—that structure education’s “established humanist knowledge traditions
and pedagogies” were dissolved into a not this (p. 10). I think the bios/geos
divide also fits into the dualistic listings. In this speculative future perhaps
the adversarial boundaries between life and nonlife have been recomposed
into geontological relations of respect and reciprocity. The Collective further
marks out a not yet move of social justice to ecological justice as one of their
“visionary declarations,” which I also receive in geontological terms: a shift
from bio-social justice for humans alone to geos-justice that exceeds the
human and recognizes entanglements of life and nonlife existents.
By 2050, education for human exceptionalism has been completely refigured
to recognize the intradependence of humans and more-than-humans. Human
exceptionalism has been brought back down to earth and agency is appreciated
as “relational, collectively distributed, and more-than-human” (p. 5). This
makes room for pedagogies that “no longer position the world ‘out-there’ as the
object we are learning about. Learning to become with the world is a situated
practice and a more-than-human pedagogical collaboration” (p. 7). This can
also be framed as a kind of geontological learning. Geontological learning is
a very different kind of learning than the sort of learning-about that many of
us in early childhood education and Childhood Studies know so well (Ashton,
2015). Learning-about is the kind of learning that happens when we go to a
book or website to learn about the animals, plants, places, and other inhuman
existents that already exist in our communities. Learning-about consists
of those existing truths out there in nature that children set out to discover.
Learning-about questions are those we ask children when we already know the
answer. There is little that is speculative in learning-about; there are not many
what ifs. As captured by Affrica Taylor (2013), what is needed is “a pedagogical
shift—away from knowing about nature, or even in nature and towards
learning with those others with whom we are already entangled” (p. 120).
As the Collective (2020) asserts repeatedly in their speculative visioning of
educational futures for 2050, our very survival depends on making this shift.
While this may come across as hyperbolic, I do not think it is an exaggeration.
It is the urgency the climate crisis requires.
The with in “learning to become with the world” asserts a different kind
of relationship to the world than the extractive and accumulative one that
brought the Anthropocene into being. It is one that I have tried to highlight

 Educational Imaginaries

153

with the speculative child-figures in this book who are intimately attached to
bones, pathogens, earth, machines, and masks in ways that are not cruel but
sustaining. The Collective’s emphasis on survival also brings me back around
to one of the main figurations in this book: the end of the world. To play on
a refrain from Ashon Crawley (2015), the end of the world can be otherwise
than apocalypse and otherwise than extinction—worlds can be “otherwise
than this.” The Collective (2020) proposes a form of otherwise survival that
requires “the mutual flourishing of all—human and more than human—and
on recuperating our damaged common words together, even if only partial
recuperation is possible” (p. 9). Recuperation has much in common with
rebuilding. Anishinaabe writer Waubgeshig Rice (2020) advises something
similar:
Many communities around the world have already endured apocalypse and
they’ve rebuilt. They’ve found ways to start over and I think it’s comforting
as well, and maybe a little hopeful, to think about what is possible on the
other side . . . . So it is possible to rebuild. That’s why we need to look to
Indigenous people and their stories about the end of the world.
(Yohannes, 2020, paras. 21 & 27)

To rebuild is to move beyond mere survival. To rebuild is to generate otherwises
in the ruins of anti-blackness, settler colonialism, and climate crisis. I think
that speculative fiction and speculative figures can offer a glimpse of what
otherwise might feel, look, and be like. To think-with Aiyana, Unbabies,
the Boy with the Bones, #BrightFuture Child, Melanie, Nassun, Frenchie
and friends, and the Wild Seed cadre is to be attuned to not this but also to
imagine not yet and what if. Donna Haraway (2016) repeats that “It matters
what stories we tell to tell other stories with” (p. 4). Telling a story of the
Anthropocene with speculative child-figures gestures toward geos-futurities.
It is a speculative praxis of the otherwise.

 Notes

Chapter 1
1

I first became aware of this advertising campaign in Clark (2017).

2

In this book, I occasionally use the pronoun “we.” I recognize that power
relations, positional privilege, and constitutive exclusions can be obscured in
this performance. For the most part, I use “we” in follow-up to a theorist and
quotation that sets the terms for belonging. Other times, I employ “we” in the
sense of making space for a shared readership and viewership of speculative
texts. While “we” may interpret these texts differently, I want to gesture toward
collaborative meaning making that nonetheless maintains space for refusal.
I understand “we” as an ephemeral invitation to think-with contemporary
problems that gather us together—not in sameness—but as differently situated
beings inhabiting this ecologically damaged planet. As much as I do attempt to
qualify my “we” in the pages that follow, I acknowledge that there are slippages
that reflect my privileged position as a white settler scholar.

3

For example, on not one but two occasions in recent years, Ugandan activist
Vanessa Nakate has been cropped out—virtually, figuratively, and literally
erased—from internationally circulated photographs that feature her with other
white youth climate activists. The first was an Associated Press photo from
Davos, Switzerland, after a youth climate science event in January 2000. Nakate
was together with Luisa Neubauer, Greta Thunberg, Isabelle Axelsson, and
Loukina Tille, but in the published photo only her jacket arm was visible. The
second occasion was a meeting between Thunberg, Nakate, and Nicola Sturgeon
at COP26 in November 2021. Many news headlines named Thunberg and left
out Nakate, and Nakate was cropped out of a photo, published by Sky News on
their social media account, where all three sat together at a socially distanced
table. Both photos were reformatted after social media uproar.

4

Some of the more critically attuned alternative names are: Anglocene (Bonneuil
& Fressoz, 2016), Anthrobscene (Parikka, 2015), Anthropo-not-seen (de la
Cadena, 2015), Anthropo-scene (Lorimer, 2017), a/Anthropocene (Revkin,

 Notes

155

2016), Anthropomeme (Macfarlane, 2016), Capitalocene (Moore, 2016),
Chthulucene (Haraway, 2016), Ecocene (Armstrong, 2015), Manthropocene
(Raworth, 2014), Planthropocene (Myers, 2016), Plantationocene (Haraway,
2015; Haraway et al., 2015; Haraway & Tsing, 2019), and white-supremacy-scene
(Mirzoeff, 2018). Much of this alter-terminology foregrounds power relations
and localized inequalities in questions of global change and climate justice, often
centering more-than-human relations as well.
5

At a conference outside Mexico City on Earth system science in late 1999,
Nobel-prize winning atmospheric chemist Paul Crutzen announced in a session,
“We’re not in the Holocene anymore. We’re in the . . . the Anthropocene!” The
exactly wording varies depending on who is telling the tale, but the story is most
remarkable, in my opinion, for how much it is retold, especially as the narrative
hook into writings about the Anthropocene (e.g., Davies, 2016; Kolbert, 2011;
Macfarlane, 2016; Revkin, 2016). Why is there such widespread interest in this
moment? What is it about the birth of a concept—and the Anthropocene idea in
particular—that invites so many retellings? Other noted moments for the birth
of the Anthropocene idea include, firstly, a two-page newsletter submission by
Crutzen and freshwater biologist Eugene Stoermer in 2000 (Crutzen & Stoermer,
2000). Stoermer had been using the term informally for almost twenty years but
had never published it until Crutzen contacted him (Kolbert, 2011). Secondly,
two years later, Crutzen (2002) repurposed the earlier co-authored piece in the
more widely read Nature journal, therein marking “the emergence of the concept
into widespread scientific awareness” (Davies, 2018, p. 44).

6

To this suggestion I take the position, regardless of where the italics are put,
that “rather than touting togetherness, we fight best by embracing our nottogetherness. The fact that there are sides . . . . So we start with the non-totality
of the ‘we’” (Miéville, 2015, para. 39). It is to those who theorize the non-totality
of “we” that I turn to in order to build my understanding of the Anthropocene,
which includes important works by Métis/otipemisiw scholar Zoe Todd (2015;
Davis & Todd, 2017; Mitchell & Todd, 2016) and Potawatomi scholar Kyle Whyte
(2017, 2018).

7

For theoretical overviews of Indigenous Futurisms see Anishinaabe scholar
Grace Dillon (2012), Cherokee scholar Sean Teuton (2018), and AnishinaabeNehiyaw scholar Lindsay Nixon (2016). For creative arts approaches see
Elizabeth LePensee (Anishinaabe, Métis), Rebecca Roanhorse (Ohkay Owingeh/
Black), Christi Belcourt (Métis), Sonny Assu (Ligwilda’xw Kwakwaka’wakw),
Daniel Heath Justice (Cherokee), and so, so many others. For Afro-futurism

 156

Notes
see the founding work of Alondra Nelson (2002) and Ytahsa Womack (2013),
the critique of the African American centrism in much Afrofuturism (Mashigo,
2018; Okorafor, 2017; Ryman, 2017), and creative works by Octavia Butler,
Wangechi Mutu, Janelle Monae, Wanuri Kahiu, and N. K. Jemisin. These few
names and citations do not do justice to the vast amount of critical and creative
works by Indigenous and Black artists and scholars, but it is a start.

8

While not commonly cited in Childhood Studies, Giorgio Agamben’s bios offers
an alternative framework for expanding the scope of the biological. For Agamben
(1998), zoe is akin to the biological facts of life (much like what I reference as
the first wave of Childhood Studies’ mantra) and bios is a way of life—life as it is
lived. In this way, bios (political life) gives meaning to zoe (biological substance).
While a full discussion of Agamben’s work is outside my scope here, this brief
mention signals that biological and bios are not fixed substances or meanings,
but are used creatively by many—including critiques of Agamben, whether
that be his deracialization of bare life (Weheliye, 2014) or a celebration and
complication of zoe as posthuman, vital force (Braidotti, 2013).

9

Elizabeth Ellsworth and Jamie Kruse (2011) explain how it is becoming
“increasing difficult for geologists and biologists to hold to categorical
distinctions between the brute materiality of geology’s external world (rocks,
minerals, mountains) and the soft, inner worlds of biology’s living things”
(“Zuihitsu 2”). They propose “geo-bio-socio assemblages” as an indication of
how “the geologic passes through our time as the materials and forces that
compose us, and that we take up and transform to compose our world.” I think
their material-discursive assemblage (Deleuze & Guattari, 1987) has much to
offer a refiguring of childhoods in the Anthropocene.

­10 Karen Barad (2007) proposes intra-action, rather than the usual interaction, to
get at “the mutual constitution of entangled agencies” (p. 33). What the “intra”
foregrounds is that figures do not preexist their relating but “emerge through
their intra-action” (p. 33). When I use the prefix “intra” in this dissertation, I am
gesturing toward this understanding of relationality.

Chapter 2
1

I want to be careful to not gather all biology under the same rubric. I am taken
by Puig de la Bellacasa’s (2012) description of the varied meanings biology takes,
for example as “a knot of relationships between living matters and social modes

 Notes

157

of existence, crafts, practices and love stories; a range of situated ‘epistemological,
semiotic, technical, political and material’ connections; an omnipresent
discourse . . . a metaphor too, but also much ‘more than a metaphor’” (p. 199).
This is to say that when I write of the figure of the bionormative child, this sort of
expansive field of biology is not my reference point, but instead the narrow and
reductive conceptualizations of positivistic child developmentalism that maintain
a large influence on early childhood education today. Additionally, Povinelli’s
(2016) “biocentric subject of late liberalism,” a figure who shared much with
Wynter’s (2003) Man2 (aka “colonial man”), inform my (re)figuration.
2

Anishinaabe author Gerald Vizenor (2008) offers the term survivance—a
combination of survival and endurance—to capture the ongoingness and
ongoing resistance of Indigenous peoples in settler colonial states.

3

While this phrase is often attributed to Duncan Campbell Scott, and aptly
captures the rationale of the assimilative schools while he was in command, it
was actually spoken by an American militantly officer (Abley, 2013, para. 2).
Additionally, Dr. Peter Bryce’s censored reports documented the maltreatment
and alarming death rates in Canadian residential schools as early as 1907.

Chapter 3
1

For Povinelli (2016), the metabolic imaginary and its key biological processes
(birth, growth, reproduction) “transpose” onto theoretical concepts of event,
conatus, affect, and finitude (p. 16). The meeting place for these biological and
ontological concepts is the “Carbon Imaginary,” a term most evocative of the
Anthropocene. In this book, I show how the eventalization of climate change
occurs through the dramatization of world-destructing events (like a zombie
pandemic or tsunami wave) instead of the slow violence of environmental racism
(Nixon, 2011), for example, the erosion of coastal communities in Beasts of the
Southern Wild in the last chapter. Finitude is an analytic focus in Chapter 6
with the re-enlivening of child victims of police and a secret society of the
Immortocracy (Benjamin, 2016). Conatus and affect, while I do not employ
those terms, nevertheless are spectral presences in some of the geostories I
feature. In Chapter 4, conatus—as in continued efforts of perseverance via
Spinoza—haunts discussions of survival in worlds without end, and, Chapters 5
and 6 look at care as an affective ethics that takes different forms under
conditions of climate crisis.

 Notes

158
2

There are numerous contemporary examples of this attribution of insensateness,
including systemically giving Black children less pain medicine when injured
(Cheney-Rice, 2015). The disproportionate composition of prisons, school
suspensions, social service removals of children from homes, and the poisoned
drinking water in Flint are further examples. Another is the desire to prove
Trayvon Martin a “child” in the spectacle surrounding the miscarriage of
justice that was his killer’s trial where Martin was villainized, animalized, and
adultized, which is addressed in Chapter 5 (Vargas & James, 2013). In Canada,
the medical atrocities inflicted on Indigenous children at residential schools,
specifically the ruse of nutrition research at six schools from 1942 to 1952
(Mosby, 2013), is a potential point of connection among others between Black
and Indigenous lives.

3

The zombie traces back to West Africa before developing more fully in AfroCaribbean communities, most specifically Haiti (Davis, 1988). In Haiti in the
seventeenth century, known then as Saint-Domingue under colonial French rule,
enslaved Africans were trafficked to perform grueling physical labor on sugar
plantations. The original zombie was not the familiar Hollywood figure who eats
human brains, bodies, and flesh, but a person robbed of their language, family,
community, culture, and continent. In early incarnations, the walking dead
were a zombified form of the working dead. Therefore, the zombie’s genealogy is
undeniably racialized, structured as it is by slavery. It was only in death that the
enslaved thought they might obtain some semblance of freedom (Cohen, 1972).
For many stolen away from their homelands, death meant a spiritual return to
Africa, “a passage to a second life of the soul . . . finally being set free” (Timofeeva,
2018, para. 3). This is why “the fear in Haiti is not of zombies, but rather of
becoming a zombie,” in that enslavement was considered “a fate worse than death”
(Davis, 1988, p. 9). The original zombie was a real live physical human reduced
to conditions of the living dead.

4

Drawing on Fanon’s work, Samira Kawash (1999) complicates the monsterfigure as quintessential abject subject. Picking up on the figure of the vampire
that haunts one of Fanon’s (1963) clinical patients in The Wretched of the
Earth, Kawash rewrites decolonization as a form of terrorism. Kawash rejects
a simplified substitution of the vampire for the colonizer who consumes the
oppressed in an excising of otherness. The contagion of colonialism might be
threatened by the vampire’s bite, “such that to be bitten by a vampire is to become
a vampire, [but] the colonized does not unequivocally take up the position of
the vampire” (p. 238). Instead, “the vampire is simultaneously the force that

 Notes

159

threatens to drain the life from the colonized, and the condition of the colonized
as living dead” (p. 249). In Kawash’s worlding, the vampire is in-between and inexcess of the opposition between the living (the colonizer as vampire nourished
by native blood) and dead (colonized bodies emptied of liveliness) in ways that
connect with the Anthropocene-related instability of the geontological division
of life versus nonlife (Povinelli, 2016).
5

While the pathogen in Gifts is a fungal rather than viral, that detail is not
impactful to the analytical import of my argument that follows. What could
be called into question is that the fungus is a living organism and the virus is
indeterminate in this way of thinking (e.g., need a host to replicate), but that is
an argument for another time.

6

Without a cure or scientist hero, the outbreak narrative pulls on racialized and
sexualized imaginaries not based on scientific fact. Wald (2008) gives an example
from the early days of HIV/AIDS diagnosis when a persistent rumor circulated,
with no scientific basis but big anti-Black racist appeal, that the species barrier
was broken when African men raped monkeys (p. 260). When scientific success
is not forthcoming, the outbreak narrative names and shames particular figures
as Patient Zeros or “superspreaders” (p. 4). The history of HIV/AIDS again
provides a representative case. Gaëtan Dugas, a Canadian flight attendant, was
wrongly assumed to be Patient Zero for many years. In the 1980s the Centers
for Disease Control (CDC) in California tracked the sexual partners of gay and
bisexual men diagnosed with HIV. Along the way Dugas’s medical chart was
misread—the letter-O for “Out-of-California” was mistaken for the number
zero—Patient Zero was born.

­7

A key thinker for Haraway is Lynn Margulis whose multi-layered, multispecies
work in and understanding of biology is worlds away from the narrowed notion
of child development science I storied in the Chapter 1. Margulis also used the
term autopoiesis/autopoietic. Haraway (2016) responds as such: “Perhaps she
would have chosen the term sympoietic, but the word and concept had not
yet surfaced. As long as autopoiesis does not mean self-sufficient ‘self making,’
autopoiesis and sympoiesis, foregrounding and backgrounding different aspects
of systemic complexity, are in generative friction, or generative enfolding, rather
than opposition” (p. 61).

8

When considering Arendt’s natality, I always have Orlando Paterson’s (1982)
formation of natal alienation at the back of my mind. I am, of course, not the
first to think natal alienation and natality together. Ewa Ziarek (2012) concludes
that the “spectral character of social death . . . destroys the principle of natality,

 Notes

160

understood in the most broad terms, not only as the biological birth, but also as
the claims of genealogy, the principle of a new beginning” (p. 153). For Arendt,
the child’s entrance into a “web of human relationships” indicates respect for
plurality, community belonging, and the possibility of freedom itself (p. 54).
I have much suspicion about natality in that I fear it overlooks the structures,
institutions, and histories that insist on the ongoingness of anti-blackness and
makes these natal features inaccessible for many. In many ways, natal alienation
makes the genealogical inheritance impossible.
9

There are natality-overlaps with how the Anthropocene is being conceptualized.
Leading scientists argue that the Anthropocene is “a new and unique phase of
our planet’s geological history, and one that will inevitably now send history (and
geology) on a new trajectory” (Zalasiewicz et al., 2018, p. 177). “A no-analogue
state” is perhaps the most succinct and repeated natalistic refrain (e.g., Angus,
2015a; Crutzen & Steffen, 2003; Kammer, 2017; O’Farrell, 2018).

Chapter 5
1

Latour’s “we” is unspecified throughout “Love Your Monsters,” even as it
occupies a pronounced placement in his subtitle: “Why We Must Care for Our
Technologies as We Do Our Children.” This appears to be a habit of Latour’s that
is evident in his most cited work titled We Have Never Been Modern (1993). In
the present case, I am interpreting the “we” as including all those concerned for
both technological and child development. However, I also caution that this “we”
has exclusions already built in.

2

Latour’s (2011) article is an abridged version of ideas developed elsewhere,
particularly in We Have Never Been Modern (1991), where he refuses a natureculture split, and Armamis, or Love of Technology (1996), where he first rereads
Frankenstein as a modern environmental parable. The “Love Your Monsters”
(2011) article was published in the Breakthrough Journal and the quoted text is
attributed to the article unless otherwise stated. Latour’s piece was also included
as a chapter in an edited e-book from Breakthrough Institute called Love
Your Monsters: Postenvironmentalism and the Anthropocene (Shellenberger &
Nordhaus, 2011). Latour’s contribution was a shortened version of a piece called
“‘It’s Development, Stupid!’ or: ‘How to Modernize Modernization’” (Latour,
2007), which is unpublished but archived on his personal website: http://www.
bruno-latour.fr/node/153.html.

 Notes
3

161

I am not calling for hetero-reproductive purity here either. Mary Shelley’s
biographer Anne Mellor writes in the preface to a 2017 special edition of
Frankenstein, which was “annotated for scientists, engineers, and creators of
all kinds,” that the text “portrays the penalties of violating Nature . . . Nature
prevents Victor from constructing a normal human being: His unnatural method
of reproduction spawns an unnatural being, a freak” (Ball, 2017, paras. 1–2).
This assumes both a biologically delimited role for women, undesirability of an
atypical child, and romanticizing of an innocent state of nature to be recovered.
Inspired by Alexis Shotwell (2016), I am “against purity” of this sort.

4

I use first names when referring to characters in the speculative story (e.g.,
Aiyana, Reika, Tamir, Freddie, Eric) and last names when recounting events that
have already happened in this world (e.g., Jones, Boyd, Rice, Gray, Garner).

5

Relatedly, a University of British Columbia research project recently received
more than $10 million in funding to “bridge Canada’s gap in medical care for
Indigenous communities” through genome sequencing and the development of
precision medicine techniques (CBC News, 2018). The benefits of more accurate
diagnoses are not my concern here. What raises flags for me is the possibility
that DNA maps will become property of a settler state institution via supposedly
neutral technologies of science. This gene databank may well become another
means in a long, deadly line of claims of ownership over what Kim TallBear
(2019) critically problematizes as Canada’s other “natural resources”—not only
lakes and trees but Indigenous peoples.

­6

Originally published in 2004 and revised in 2015, The Great Acceleration
graphs plot data from 1750 to 2010 and track twelve features of Earth system
functioning and twelve “human enterprise” factors (Steffen et al., 2004, 2015).
The Earth system indicators include, for example, measurements of methane
concentration, carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide, and surface temperatures. The
“human enterprise” indicators include population, GDP, energy use, and
urbanization, among other factors. Presently, the graphs are used to establish
the Great Acceleration as the top candidate for the Anthropocene start date.
Advocates maintain that only “beyond the mid-twentieth century is there clear
evidence for fundamental shifts in the state and functioning of the Earth system
that are beyond the range of variability of the Holocene and driven by human
activities” (Steffen et al., 2015, p. 81).

7

I mean this to invoke Saidiya Hartman’s (2006) afterlife of slavery, which
captures the ongoing condition of slavery in the present so much as “the critical
components of both are fungibility and accumulation, or the ability to be

 162

Notes
commodified and treated as an object” (Ziyad, 2017a, p. 145). Fungible bodies
make ideal experimental subjects; fungible bodies can also become cyborg
bodies. For the People’s Science Council, Black child-bodies enact the otherwise
abstract “interchangeability and replaceability” of the commodity (Hartman,
1997, p. 21). Their lives as well as their limbs and organs are interchanged and
replaced. Tiffany King (2016) describes “Black fungibility [as] the treatment of
the Black enslaved body as an open sign that can be arranged and rearranged for
infinite kinds of use” (p. 1025). The subjects for cyborg experimentation were
not accidentally or innocently chosen but cultivated and procured systematically.
“Arranged and rearranged” in a hospital, the commodified, experimental,
vulnerable Black child-body is another story of the afterlife of slavery (p. 1025).
This theme appears earlier in the discussion of Melanie in Chapter 3.

8

Not all public protests and campaigns invoked the sentimental image of an
innocent child to mark their support of Martin and their resistance to anti-Black
racism. For example, the Hoodie-movement and #WeAreAllTrayvonMartin
made incontrovertible in a different imagery the link of blackness, boyhood,
premature death, community, and the impossibility of innocence-redemption for
the Black child in the United States (see Dumas & Nelson, 2016).

9

The danger of engaging care at a chapter’s end is that the rich feminist histories
of care ethics are not given enough space. For introductory genealogies see
Martin et al. (2015), Murphy (2015), Sevenhuijsen (1998, Chap. 3), and Puig de
la Bellacasa (2017, Chap. 2); foundational works by Held (2006), Mol (2008),
Nodding (1984), Ruddick (1989), and Tronto (1993). Care research has been
dominated by European and white-settler feminists so texts by Collins (1990),
Combahee River Collective (1983), Crenshaw (1991), hooks (1992), and Sharpe
(2016) provide necessarily perspectives. In early childhood education, see
Dahlberg and Moss (2005), Hodgins (2019), and Langford (2019).

10 The epilogue of Frankenstein contains a passage from Milton’s Paradise Lost. It
reads: “Did I request thee, Make, from my clay/ To mould me Man, did I solicit
thee/ From darkness to promote me?” While Latour inquires into the failed duty
of care of Dr. Frankenstein, he glides past the questions of consent raised here.

Chapter 6
1

Several mentions are made in this chapter to the ongoing child separation
policy of political asylum seekers entering the United States. Child-parent

 Notes

163

separation has long been a technology of settler colonialism on Turtle Island.
Métis artist Christi Belcourt shares, “One Indigenous newborn a day is
apprehended from the arms of their mothers in Winnipeg hospitals by the
province of Manitoba.” A tweet by ndnviewpoint (2018) cites a documentary
called “Stolen Childhoods,” which points out, “by the 1960s, about 1 in
4 Native children in the US were living apart from their families.” Any
condemning of American policy without also considering what is happening
in Indigenous communities is akin to a “settler move to innocence” (Tuck &
Yang, 2012).
2

I first encountered the phrase “born pre-polluted” in a WRISK project guest
blog post by Norah MacKendrick and Kate Cairns (2019) entitled, “Born prepolluted: Mothers and environmental risk,” in which they hyperlink to a report
by Suzanne Reuben (2010) for the US President’s Cancer Panel which used the
phrase at an earlier point. A Canadian report by the Environmental Defence
(2013) organization also uses the phrase in their title.

3

In Season 2, Episode 5, called “Seeds,” the Putnam’s baby has fallen ill and no
doctors can figure out what is wrong. The baby appears near death when Serena
suggests that Janine, the baby’s real mother, come see the baby. After more tests
fail to reveal the ailment, everyone seems resigned to the fact that the baby will
die overnight. June suggests that they let Janine hold the baby before she dies and
the day ends with Janine rocking the baby. In the morning, the baby is cooing
and has pinked up—saved by a true mother’s love.

­4

While perhaps most familiar to the history of American slavery, racialized
practices of stolen children, enforced labor, banned literacy, restricted movement,
constant surveillance, rape, and family refiguration are also dominant practices
of settler colonialism. The lack of identifiable Indigenous characters in the
television show and the absence of any mention of Indigenous peoples in the
novel suggests the “elimination of the Native” has been accomplished in the
post-apocalyptic landscape of Gilead (Wolfe, 2006). Gilead and the Colonies still
exist on stolen land.

5

There are many historical sources for the violent practices and ideologies of The
Handmaid’s Tale. For example, for the Biblical practice of sexual surrogates and
the Nazi’s Lebensborn eugenic program to reproduce blonde, blue-eyed children.
Atwood has also noted that the “National Homelands” find their correlate in the
apartheid practices of South Africa’s white governments (Dodson, 1997). For
a detailed look at some of these antecedents, minus an emphasis on racialized
slavery, see Evans (1994).

 164

Notes

Chapter 7
1

Perhaps archive is too conventional and institutional an image, a carrier bag
might better express the sort of collecting going on here (Le Guin, 1988;
Haraway, 2004; Taylor et al., 2012). A carrier bag would not only include the
speculative texts, but the human and non-humans of the stories. Technologies,
stem cells, pathogens, bones, minerals, and all sorts of other nonhuman existents
that compose the geos-child figures are in and out of this porous receptacle: it
is a gathering up and a letting go instead of an archival form of entrapment as
permanent inventory and repository.

2

While Taylor (2013) does not dismiss textually based work, she does note
differences between discursive analyses and reconstructive methods (pp. 61–6;
87–9). For Taylor, deconstructive methods are effective in exposing how and
why particular images of the child are “enduring and seductive idea[s],” but they
can be limited in their capacity to create “alternative conceptualizations” (p. 62).
In other words, deconstructive methods tend to rehearse and trace arguments
while reconstructive methods “neither jettison nor valorize . . . but queer” (p. 62).
This is not to say that there is something inherently liberating in ethnographic
practices but that they can enable an “irreverent and political” playfulness that
extends well beyond a text—it is an active practice of co-constituting worlds.

 R
­ eferences

Abley, M. (2013, November 8). The man wrongly attributed with uttering “kill
the Indian in the child.” Maclean’s. https://www.macleans.ca/culture/books/
conversations-with-a-dead-man-the-legacy-of-duncan-campbell-scott/
Abraham, S. (2017, May 2). What’s not being said about The handmaid’s tale. Ms.
http://msmagazine.com/blog/2017/05/02/whats–not–said–handmaids–tale/
Agamben, G. (1998). Homo sacer: Sovereign power and bare life (D. Heller-Roazen,
Trans.). Stanford University Press.
Ahmed, S. (2000). Strange encounters: Embodied others in post–coloniality. Routledge.
Ahmed, S. (2014). Willful subjects. Duke University Press.
Alagraa, B. (2021, January 22). The third event: Bedour Alagraa on Sylvia Wynter
and Black radical thought [Podcast]. Millennials Are Killing Capitalism. https://
millennialsarekillingcapitalism.libsyn.com/the-third-event-bedoura-alagraa-onsylvia-wynter-and-black-radical-thought
Alibar, L. (2013). Juicy and delicious [Play]. https://www.dramatists.com/
previews/4739.pdf
Alkebulan, P. (2012). Survival pending revolution: The history of the Black Panther
Party. University of Alabama Press.
Andreotti, V. de Oliveira (2012). Education, knowledge and the rightings of wrongs.
Other Education: The Journal of Educational Alternatives, 1(1), 19–31.
Arendt, H. (1958). The human condition. University of Chicago Press.
Aries, P. (1962). Centuries of childhood. Vintage Books.
Armstrong, R. (2015, June 18). Ecocene [Keynote]. Urban ecologies. OCAD.
Asafu-Adjaye, J., Blomqvist, L., Brand, S., Brook, B., DeFries, R., Ellis, E., Foreman,
C., Keith, D., Lewis, M., Lynas, M., Nordhaus, T., Pielke, R., Pritzker, R., Roy, J.,
Sagoff, M., Shellenberger, M., Stone, R., & Teague, P. (2015). An ecomodernist
manifesto. http://www.ecomodernism.org/manifesto
Ashton, E. (2015). Possibilities for geontological learning in Common Worlds.
Journal of Childhood Studies, 40(2), 9–21.
Atwood, M. (1986). The handmaid’s tale. Virago.
Atwood, M. (2012, January 20). Haunted by The handmaid’s tale. The Guardian. https://
www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/20/handmaids-tale-margaret-atwood

 166

­Reference

Baker, K. (2008). Bionormativity and the construction of parenthood. Georgia Law
Review, 649. https://ssrn.com/abstract=996160
Baldwin, A. (2016). Premediation and white affect: Climate change and migration in
critical perspective. Transactions, 41, 78–90.
­Ball, P. (2017, April 20). Frankenstein reflects the hopes and fears of every scientific
era. The Atlantic. https://www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2017/04/franken–
science/523560
Bandura, A. (1971). Social learning theory. General Learning Press.
Barad, K. (2007). Meeting the universe halfway: Quantum physics and the
entanglement of matter and meaning. Duke University Press.
Barnsley, V. (2010). The child/the future. Feminist Theory, 11(3), 323–30.
Bastién, A. J. (2017, June 14). In its first season, The handmaid’s tale’s greatest failing
is how it handles race. Vulture. http://www.vulture.com/2017/06/the–handmaids–
tale–greatest–failing–is–how–it–handles–race.html
BBC. (2020, January 7). Australia fire: Almost 2,000 homes destroyed in marathon
crisis. BBC News. https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-australia-51015536
Benjamin, R. (2016). Racial fictions, biological facts: Expanding the sociological
imagination through speculative methods. Catalyst, 2(2), 1–28.
Benjamin, R. (2018, July 16). Black afterlives matter: Cultivating kinfulness as
reproductive justice. Boston Review. http://bostonreview.net/race/ruha–benjamin–
black–afterlives–matter
Benjamin, R. (Ed.). (2019a). Captivating technology: Race, carceral technoscience, and
liberatory imagination in everyday life. Duke University Press.
Benjamin, R. (2019b). Race after technology: Abolitionist tools for the New Jim Code.
Polity.
Berlant, L. (1997). The queen of America goes to Washington: Essays on sex and
citizenship. Duke University Press.
Berlant, L. (2011). Cruel optimism. Duke University Press.
Berlatsky, N. (2015, January 4). The handmaid’s tale and bad slavery comparisons.
http://www.hoodedutilitarian.com/2015/01/the–handmaids–tale–and–bad–
slavery–comparisons/
Berlatsky, N. (2017, June 15). Both versions of The handmaid’s tale have a problem
with racial erasure. The Verge. https://www.theverge.com/2017/6/15/15808530/
handmaids–tale–hulu–margaret–atwood–black–history–racial–erasure/
Bernstein, R. (2011). Racial innocence: Performing American childhood from slavery to
civil rights. New York University Press.
Bey, M. (2016). Between blackness and monstrosity: Gendered blackness in the
cyborg comics. Gender Forum, 58, 41–58.

 ­Reference

167

Bignell, J. (2005). Familiar aliens: Teletubbies and postmodern childhood. Screen,
46(3), 373–88.
Blaise, M. (2005). Playing it straight. Routledge.
­Bliss, J. (2015). Hope against hope: Queer negativity, black feminist theorizing, and
reproduction without futurity. Mosaic: A Journal for the Interdisciplinary Study of
Literature, 48(1), 83–98.
BLM. (2016, November 15). Black Lives Matter Global Network’s statement of the
election of Donald Trump. https://www.mic.com/articles/159496/exclusive-blacklives-matter-issues-a-statement-on-trump-s-election#.5zuNat29p
Bonneuil, C., & Fressoz, J-B. (2016). Shock of the Anthropocene: The earth, history and
us (D. Fernbach, Trans.). Verso.
Braidotti, R. (2013). The posthuman. Polity.
Brown, J. (2013, September 27). Beasts of the southern wild—the romance of precarity
II. Social Text. https://socialtextjournal.org/beasts-of-the-southern-wild-theromance-of-precarity-ii/
Brown, S. (2017, July 25). The girl with all the gifts is a nightmare for white supremacy.
RaceBaitR. https://racebaitr.com/2017/07/25/girl-gifts-nightmare-whitesupremacy/
Burman, E. (2017). Deconstructing developmental psychology. (3rd ed.). Routledge.
Cairns, K., Johnston, J., & MacKendrick, N. (2013). Feeding the “organic child”:
Mothering through ethical consumption. Journal of Consumer Culture, 13(2),
97–118.
Cannella, G. S. (1997). Deconstructing early childhood education. Peter Lang.
Cannella, G., & Radhika, V. (2004). Childhood and postcolonialism: Power, education,
and contemporary practice. RoutlegeFalmer.
Carey, M. R. (2014). The girl with all the gifts [ePUB]. Orbit.
Castañeda, C. (2002). Figurations: Child, bodies, worlds. Duke University Press.
Cecire, N. (2015). Environmental innocence and slow violence. WSQ: Women’s
Studies Quarterly, 43(1&2), 164–80.
Cheney-Rice, Z. (2015, April 24). 7 times we decided people of color don’t feel pain
like white people do. The MIC. https://www.mic.com/articles/116304/7-times-wedecided-people-of-color-don-t-feel-pain-like-white-people-do
Chernobyl Gallery. (n.d.). Middle school number 3. Galleries. http://www.
chernobylgallery.com/galleries/pripyat-middle-school-3/
Clark, N. (2017). Anthropocene bodies, geological time and the crisis of natality.
Body & Society, 23(3), 156–80.
Clark, N., & Yusoff, K. (2017). Geosocial formations and the Anthropocene. Theory,
Culture & Society, 34(2–3), 3–23.

 168

­Reference

Cohen, D. (1972). Voodoo, devils, and the invisible world. Dodd, Mead &
Company.
­Colebrook, C. (2014). The death of the posthuman: Essays on extinction, volume one.
Open Humanities Press.
Colebrook, C. (2017). We have always been post-anthropocene. In R. Grusin (Ed.),
Anthropocene feminism (pp. 1–20). University of Minnesota Press.
Colebrook, C. (2018). The future in the Anthropocene: Extinction and the
imagination. In A. Johns-Putra (Ed.), Climate and literature (pp. 263–80).
Cambridge University Press.
Colebrook, C. (2019). A cut in relationality: Art at the end of the world. Angelaki,
24(3), 175–95.
Collins, P. H. (1990). Black feminist thought: Knowledge, consciousness and the politics
of empowerment. Unwin Hyman.
Combahee River Collective. (2002). A Black feminist statement. In C. Moraga & G.
Anzaldúa (Eds.), This bridge called my back: Writings by radical women of color
(3rd ed., pp. 234–44). Kitchen Table & Women of Color Press.
Common Worlds Research Collective. (n.d.). Common Worlds Research Collective.
https://commonworlds.net/
Common Worlds Research Collective. (2020). Learning to become with the world:
Education for future survival. Background paper for UNESCO Futures of
Education initiative. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000374032
Crawley, A. (2015). Otherwise, Ferguson. Interfictions Online: A Journal of Interstitial
Arts. 5. http://interfictions.com/otherwise-fergusonashon-crawley/
Crenshaw, K. (1991). Mapping the margins: Intersectionality, identity politics, and
violence against Women of Color. Stanford Law Review, 43(6), 1241–99.
Crist, E. (2013). On the poverty of our nomenclature. Environmental Humanities, 3,
129–47.
Crutzen, P. (2002). Geology of mankind—the Anthropocene. Nature, 415, 23.
Crutzen, P., & Stoermer, E. (2000). The “Anthropocene.” IGBP Newsletter, 41,
17–18.
Cunningham, H. (2006). The invention of childhood. BBC Books.
Cutter-Mackenzie-Knowles, A., Malone, K., & Hacking, E. B. (2020). Research
handbook of childhoodnature: Assemblages of childhood and nature research.
Springer.
Dahlberg, G., & Moss, P. (2005). Ethics and politics in early childhood education.
Routledge.
Dahlberg, G., Pence, A., & Moss, P. (2006). Beyond quality in early childhood
education and care: Postmodern perspectives. (2nd ed.). RoutledgeFalmer.

 ­Reference

169

Dancy, T. E. (2014). The adultification of Black boys. In K. J. Fasching-Varner, R. E.
Reynolds, K. A. Albert, & L. Martin (Eds.), Trayvon Martin, race, and American
justice: Teaching race and ethnicity (pp. 49–55). Sense Publishers.
­Danowski, D., & Viveiros de Castro, E. (2015, July 7). Is there any world to come?
e–flux. http://supercommunity.e–flux.com/texts/is–there–any–world–to–come/
Danowski, D., & Viveiros de Castro, E. (2016). The ends of the world. Polity.
Davies, B. (1990). The problem of desire. Social problems, 37(4), 501–16.
Davies, J. (2016, October 16). Birth of the Anthropocene: Summary. Made Ground:
Notes of the Anthropocene Epoch. https://madeground.com/2016/10/16/five–
maxims/#more–1506
Davies, J. (2018). The birth of the Anthropocene. University of California.
Davis, H., & Todd, Z. (2017). On the importance of a date, or decolonizing the
Anthropocene. ACME: An International Journal for Critical Geographies, 16(4),
761–80.
Davis, W. (1988). Passage of darkness: The ethnobiology of the Haitian zombie.
University of North Carolina.
de la Cadena, M. (2014). Runa: Human but not only. Hau: Journal of Ethnographic
Theory, 4(2), 253–9.
de la Cadena, M. (2015). Uncommoning nature: Stories from the Anthropo-NotSeen. In P. Harvey, C. Krohn-Hansen & K. Nustad (Eds.), Anthropos and the
material (pp. 35–58). Duke University Press.
Deleuze, G., & Guattari, F. (1987). A thousand plateaus: Capitalism and schizophrenia.
University of Minnesota Press.
Demos, T. J. (2018). To save a world: Geoengineering, conflictual futurisms, and the
unthinkable. e–flux, 94. https://www.e–flux.com/journal/94/221148/to–save–a–
world–geoengineering–conflictual–futurisms–and–the–unthinkable/
Diaz-Diaz, C., & Semenec, P. (Eds.). (2020). Posthumanist and new materialist
methodologies: Research after the child. Springer.
Dillon, G. (Ed.). (2012). Walking the clouds: An anthology of Indigenous science fiction.
The University of Arizona Press.
Dimaline, C. (2017). The marrow thieves. Cormorant Books.
Dockterman, E. (2017, April 25). The handmaid’s tale showrunner on why he
made some major changes from the book. Time. http://time.com/4754200/the–
handmaids–tale–showrunner–changes–from–book/
Dodson, D. (1997). An interview with Margaret Atwood. Critique: Studies in
Contemporary Fiction, 38(2), 96–104.
Dowdall, L. (2020). Black futures matter: Afrofuturism and geontology in N.
K. Jemisin’s Broken Earth trilogy. In I. Lavender & L Yaszek (Eds.), Literary
Afrofuturism in the twenty-first century (pp. 149–67). Ohio State University Press.

 170

­Reference

Dumas, M. (2016). Against the dark: Antiblackness in education policy and
discourse. Theory into Practice, 55(1), 11–19.
­Dumas, M., & Nelson, J. (2016). (Re)imagining Black boyhood: Toward a critical
framework for educational research. Harvard Educational Review, 86, 27–47.
Edelman, L. (1998). The future is kid stuff: Queer theory, disidentification, and the
death drive. Narrative, 6(1), 18–30.
Edelman, L. (2004). No future: Queer theory and the death drive. Duke University Press.
Ellsworth, E., & Kruse, J. (Eds). (2011). Making the geologic now: Responses to
material conditions of contemporary life. Punctum Books. https://geologicnow.
punctumbooks.com/index.php
Environmental Defence. (2013). Born pre-polluted: A report of the toxic substances
in the umbilical cord blood of Canadian newborns. Environmental Defence
Canada. https://d36rd3gki5z3d3.cloudfront.net/wp–content/uploads/2016/01/
CordBloodReport_EnglishWEB.pdf?x17002
Erasmus, Z. (2020). Sylvia Wynter’s theory of the human: Counter-, not posthumanist. Theory, Culture & Society, 37(6), 47–65.
Eriksen, C., & Ballard, S. (2020). Alliances in the Anthropocene: Fire, plants, and
people. Springer Nature.
Evans, M. (1994). Versions of history: The handmaid’s tale and its dedicatees. In C.
Nicholson (Ed.), Margaret Atwood: Writing and subjectivity (pp. 177–88). Palgrave
Macmillan.
Falduit, A. (Producer) (2014). Why bring a child into the world? [Commercial].
DAVID, Buenos Aires, Argentina. Unilever: Project Sunlight. http://www.
welovead.com/en/works/details/eedwntuAk
Fanon, F. (1952 [1967]). Black skin, white masks (C. Markmann, Trans.). Pluto Press.
Fanon, F. (1963). The wretched of the earth (C. Farrington, Trans.). Grove Press.
Fendler, L. (2001). Educating flexible souls: The construction of subjectivity through
developmentality and interaction. In K. Hultqvist & G. Dahlberg (Eds.), Governing
the child in the new millennium (pp. 119–42). Taylor & Francis.
Ferguson, A. (2001). Bad boys: Public schools in the making of Black masculinity.
University of Chicago Press.
Fojas, C. (2017). Zombies, migrants, and queers: Race and crisis capitalism in pop
culture. University of Illinois Press.
Fortenberry, D. (Writer), & Barker, M. (Director). (2017, May 10). Faithful (Season 1,
Episode 5) [TV series episode]. In B. Miller (Producer), The handmaid’s tale. Hulu.
Foucault, M. (2003[1976]). Lecture 11, 17 March 1976. In A. Fontana, & D. Macey
(Eds.), Society must be defended: Lectures at the college de France (pp. 239–64).
Allen Lane.

 ­Reference

171

­Gergen, M., Smith, S., & Vasudevan, P. (2018). Earth beyond repair: Race and
apocalypse in collective imagination. Environment and Planning D: Society and
Space, 1–20. Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10.1177/0263775818756079
Gill-Peterson, J., Sheldon, R., & Stockton, K. (2016). Introduction: What is the now,
even of then. GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies, 22(4), 495–503.
Gilmore, R. W. (2007). Golden gulag: Prisons, surplus, crisis, and opposition in
globalizing California. University of California Press.
Ginn, F. (2015). When horses won’t eat: Apocalypse and the Anthropocene. Annals of
the Association of American Geographers, 105(2), 351–9.
Global Coordination Group of the Youth-Led Climate Strikes. (2019, March 1).
Climate crisis and a betrayed generation. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.
com/environment/2019/mar/01/youth-climate-change-strikers-open-letter-toworld-leaders
Goff, P. A., Eberhardt, J. L., Williams, M. J., & Jackson, M. C. (2008). Not yet human:
Implicit knowledge, historical dehumanization, and contemporary consequences.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94, 292–306.
Goff, P. A., Jackson, M. C., Di, L., Culotta, C. M., & DiTomasso, N. A. (2014). The
essence of innocence: Consequences of dehumanizing black children. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 106(4), 526–45.
Gordon, L. (2017, 17 June). The handmaid’s tale contains a chilling environmental
warning. https://lwlies.com/articles/the-handmaids-tale-environmentalwarning/
Gross, L. (2016). Postapocalypse stress syndrome and rebuilding American Indian
communities. Shifting Borders. http://www.shiftingborders.ku.edu/presentations/
gross.html#paper
Grosz, E., Yusoff, K., & Clark, N. (2017). An interview with Elizabeth Grosz:
Geopower, inhumanism and the biopolitical. Theory, Culture & Society, 34(2–3),
129–46.
Halberstam, J. (2011). The queer art of failure. Duke University Press.
Hamilton, J., & Neimanis, A. (2016, June 30). What was “Hacking the
Anthropocene”? (Or, why the Environmental Humanities needs more feminism).
The Seed Box. https://theseedboxblog.wordpress.com/2016/06/30/what-washacking-the-anthropocene-or-why-the-environmental-humanities-needs-morefeminism/
Hanifin, L., & Jemisin, N. K. (2015). Black Lives Matter inspired this chilling fantasy
novel. Wired Magazine. https://www.wired.com/2015/08/geeks–guide–nk–jemisin/
­Haraway, D. (1991). Simians, cyborgs and women: The reinvention of nature.
Routledge.

 172

­Reference

Haraway, D. (1997). modestwitness@second-millennium. Femaleman-meets-oncomouse:
Feminism and technoscience. Routledge.
Haraway, D. (2004). The Haraway reader. Routledge.
Haraway, D. (2008). When species meet. Routledge.
Haraway, D. (2015). Anthropocene, Capitalocene, Plantationocene, Chthulucene:
Making kin. Environmental Humanities, 6, 159–65.
Haraway, D. (2016). Staying with the trouble: Making kin in the Chthulucene. Duke
University Press.
Haraway, D., Ishikawa, N., Gilbert, S. F., Olwig, K., Tsing, A., & Bubandt, N. (2016).
Anthropologists are talking—about the Anthropocene. Ethnos, 81(3), 535–64.
Haraway, D., & Tsing, A. (2019, June 18). Reflections of the Plantationocene: A
conversation with Donna Haraway & Anna Tsing, moderated by Gregg Mitman.
Edge Effects magazine. https://edgeeffects.net/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/
PlantationoceneReflections_Haraway_Tsing.pdf
Hartman, S. (1997). Scenes of subjection: Terror, slavery and self-making in nineteenthcentury America. Oxford University Press.
Hartman, S. (2006). Lose your mother: A journey along the Atlantic slave route. Farrar,
Straus & Giroux.
Harvey, F. (2021, August 9). Global climate crisis: Inevitable, unprecedented and
irreversible. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/science/2021/aug/09/
humans-have-caused-unprecedented-and-irreversible-change-to-climatescientists-warn
Hauser, W. (Writer), & Sigismondi, F. (Director). (2017, May 17). A women’s place
(Season 1, Episode 6) [TV series episode]. In B. Miller (Producer), The handmaid’s
tale. Hulu.
Held, V. (2006). The ethics of care: Personal, political, and global. Oxford University
Press.
Hirsi, I [@israhirsi]. (2019, November 5). The climate crisis is everything. It’s health
care, it’s racial justice, it’s criminal justice—everything. It’s our lives on the line
[Tweet]. Twitter. https://twitter.com/justicedems/status/1191738512460173312
Hodgins, B. D. (2019). Gender and care with young children: A feminist material
approach. Routledge.
hooks, b. (1992). Black looks: Race and representation. South End Press.
hooks, b. (2012, September 5). No love in the wild. New Black Man. https://www.
newblackmaninexile.net/2012/09/bell-hooks-no-love-in-wild.html
­Hurley, J., & Jemisin, N. K. (2018). An apocalypse is a relative thing: An interview
with N. K. Jemisin. ASAP/Journal, 3(3), 467–77.
Huston, J. (Director). (1982). Annie [Film]. Columbia Pictures.

 ­Reference

173

Imarisha, W. (2015). Introduction. In W. Imarisha & B. A. Maree (Eds.), Octavia’s
brood: Science fiction stories from social justice movements (pp. 3–7). AK Press.
Imarisha, W., & Maree, B. A. (2015). Octavia’s brood: Science fiction stories from social
justice movements. AK Press.
The Independent. (2021, August 10). Code red for humanity. The Independent.
https://twitter.com/Independent/status/1424827114809929729?s=20
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2018). Global warming of
1.5°C. Geneva, Switzerland. IPCC https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/
Internet Movie Database (IMDb). (2016). The girl with all the gifts: Did you know?
IMDb. https://www.imdb.com/title/tt4547056/
James, A., & Prout, A. (1997). Constructing and reconstructing childhood:
Contemporary issues in the sociological study of childhood (2nd ed.). Polity Press.
James, J. (2013). “Concerning violence”: Frantz Fanon’s rebel intellectual in search of
a black cyborg. South Atlantic Quarterly, 112(1), 57–70.
Jemisin, N. K. (2015). The fifth season. Orbit.
Jemisin, N. K. (2016). The obelisk gate. Orbit.
Jemisin, N. K. (2017). The stone sky. Orbit.
Jenkins, H. (Ed.). (1998). The children’s culture reader. New York University Press.
Johns-Putra, A. (2016). “My job is to take care of you”: Climate change, humanity,
and Cormac McCarthy’s The road. MFS Modern Fiction Studies, 62(3), 519–40.
Joo, H-J. (2018). Race, disaster, and the waiting room of history. Environment and
Planning D: Society and Space, 38(1), 72–90.
Justice, D. H. (2018). Why Indigenous literatures matter. Wilfrid Laurier University
Press.
Katz, C. (2008). Childhood as spectacle: Relays of anxiety and the reconfiguration of
the child. Cultural Geographies, 15(1), 5–17.
Kawash, S. (1999). Terrorists and vampires: Fanon’s spectral violence of
decolonization. In A. Alessandrini (Ed.), Frantz Fanon: Critical perspectives
(pp. 235–57). Routledge.
Kincaid, J. (1998). Erotic innocence. Duke University Press.
King, T. L. (2019). The Black shoals: Offshore formations of Black and Native studies.
Duke University Press.
Klein, N. (2014). This changes everything: Capitalism vs. the climate. Simon &
Schuster.
Kolbert, E. (2011, March). Enter the Anthropocene—Age of man. National
Geographic. http://ngm.nationalgeographic.com/2011/03/age–of–man/kolbert–
text.
­Kolbert, E. (2014). The sixth extinction: An unnatural history. Henry Holt.

 174

­Reference

Kromidas, M. (2019). Towards the human, after the child of Man: Seeing the child
differently in teacher education. Curriculum Inquiry, 49(1), 65–89.
Kraftl, P. (2020). After childhood: Re-thinking environment, materiality, and media in
children’s lives. Taylor & Francis.
Ladson-Billings, G. (2011). Boyz to men? Teaching to restore Black boys’ childhood.
Race, Ethnicity, and Education, 14, 7–15.
Langford, R. (Ed.). (2019). Feminist ethics of care in early childhood practice:
Possibilities and dangers. Bloomsbury Academic.
Latimer, H. (2009). Popular culture and reproductive politics: Juno, Knocked up and
the enduring legacy of. The handmaid’s tale. Feminist Theory, 10(2), 209–24.
Latour, B. (1993). We have never been modern (C. Porter, Trans.). Harvard University
Press.
Latour, B. (1996). Armamis, or love of technology (C. Porter, Trans.). Harvard
University Press.
Latour, B. (2004). Why has critique run out of steam? From matters of fact to matters
of concern. Critical Inquiry, 30(2), 225–48.
Latour, B. (2007). It’s the development, stupid! Or how can we modernize modernization.
http://www.bruno-latour.fr/node/153
Latour, B. (2011). Love your monsters: Why we must care for our technologies as we
do our children. Breakthrough Journal, 2, 19–26.
Latour, B. (2014). Agency at the time of the Anthropocene. New Literary History,
45(1), 1–18.
Latour, B. (2015). Fifty shades of green. Environmental Humanities, 7, 219–25.
LeDuff, C. (2010). What killed Aiyana Stanley-Jones? Mother Jones. https://www.
motherjones.com/politics/2010/09/aiyana-stanley-jones-detroit/
Le Guin, U. (1988). The carrier bag theory of fiction. In D. DuPont (Ed.), Women of
vision: Essays by women writing science fiction (pp. 1–9). St. Martin’s Press.
Lee, N. (2013). Childhood and biopolitics: Climate change, life processes and human
futures. Palgrave Macmillan.
Lee, N., & Motzkau, J. (2011). Navigating the bio-politics of childhood. Childhood: A
Global Journal for Childhood Studies, 18(1), 7–19.
Lemire, C. (2013, January 11). Beautiful Beasts is one of the year’s best. SiFy. https://
www.sify.com/movies/beautiful-ibeastsi-is-one-of-years-best-review-hollywoodpcmaFhiaaefaf.html
Lenz Taguchi, H. (2010). Going beyond the theory/practice divide in early childhood
education: Introducing an intra-active pedagogy. Routledge, Taylor & Francis group.
­Leong, D. (2016). The mattering of Black lives: Octavia Butler’s hyperempathy and the
promise of the new materialisms. Catalyst: Feminism, Theory, Technoscience, 2(2),
1–35.

 ­Reference

175

Lewis, T. (2012). King of the wild things: Children and the passionate attachments of
the anthropological machine. In P. Costello (Ed.), Philosophy in children’s literature
(pp. 285–300). Lexington Books.
Livingston, J., & Puar, J. (2011). Interspecies. Social Text, 29(1), 3–14.
Lorimer, J. (2017). The Anthropo–scene: A guide for the perplexed. Social Studies of
Science, 47(1), 117–42.
Lothian, A. (2018). Old futures: Speculative fiction and queer possibility. NYU Press.
Lury, K. (2010). Children in an open world: Mobility as ontology in New Iranian and
Turkish cinema. Feminist Theory, 11(3), 283–94.
Lynas, M. (2011). The god species: How the planet can survive the age of humans.
National Geographic.
Lynch, T. (2017, July 25). Why hope is dangerous when it comes to climate change:
Global warming dicussions need apocalyptic thinking. Slate. https://slate.com/
technology/2017/07/why-climate-change-discussions-need-apocalyptic-thinking.
html
Macdonald, S. N. (2017, April 26). In Handmaid’s tale, a postracial, patriarchal
hellscape. The Undefeated. https://theundefeated.com/features/hulu-handmaidstale/
Macfarlane, R. (2016, April 1). Generation Anthropocene: How humans have altered
the planet for ever. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/
apr/01/generation–anthropocene–altered–planet–for–ever
MacKendrick, N., & Cairns, K. (2019, February 27). Born pre-polluted: Mothers and
environmental risk. WRISK. https://www.wrisk.org/uncategorized/born–pre–
polluted–mothers–and–environmental–risk/
Maher, J. (2018). Torture born: Babies, bloodshed and the feminist gaze in Hulu’s The
handmaid’s tale. Communication, Culture & Critique, 11(1), 209–11.
Malkki, L. (2010). Children, humanity, and the infantilization of peace. In I. Feldman
(Ed.), In the name of humanity (pp. 58–85). Duke University Press.
Malm, A., & Hornborg, A. (2014). The geology of mankind? A critique of the
Anthropocene narrative. The Anthropocene Review, 1, 62–9.
Malone, K. (2017). Children in the Anthropocene: Rethinking sustainability and child
friendliness in cities. Palgrave Macmillan.
Martin, A., Myers, N., & Viseu, A. (2015). The politics of care in technoscience. Social
Studies of Science, 45(5), 625–41.
­Martinez, X [@xiuhtezcatl]. (2019, September 24). There have always been,
and will always be indigenous, black and brown youth at the forefront of
creating systemic change [Tweet]. Twitter. https://twitter.com/xiuhtezcatl/
status/1176642441920811008

 176

­Reference

Mashigo, M. (2018). Intruders. Picador Africa.
Mayall, B. (2013). A history of the sociology of childhood. IOE Press.
Maynard, R. (2018). Reading Black resistance through Afrofuturism: Notes on
post–apocalyptic blackness and Black rebel cyborgs in Canada. TOPIA: Canadian
Journal of Cultural Studies, 39, 29–47.
McCarthy, C. (Producer), & Carey, M. (Writer). (2016). The girl with all the gifts
[Film]. BFI.
McGrath, M. (2019, July 24). Climate change: 12 years to save the planet? Make that
18 months. BBC. https://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-48964736
Merriman, B. (2009). White–washing oppression in Atwood’s The handmaid’s tale.
Notes on Contemporary Literature, 39(1), 8. http://link.galegroup.com.ezproxy.
library.uvic.ca/apps/doc/A206534450/LitRC?u=uvictoria&sid=LitRC&xid=53660
ce2
Miéville, C. (2015, August 1). The limits of utopia. Salvage Zone. http://salvage.zone/
in-print/the-limits-of-utopia
Miller, B. (Executive producer). (2017-ongoing). The handmaid’s tale [TV series].
Hulu.
Miller, B. (Writer), & Barker, M. (Director). (2018, April 25). Unwomen (Season 2,
Episode 2) [TV series episode]. In B. Miller (Producer), The handmaid’s tale. Hulu.
Miller, B. (Writer), & Morano, R. (Director). (2017, April 26). Offred (Season 1,
Episode 1) [TV series episode]. In B. Miller (Producer), The handmaid’s tale. Hulu.
Mirzoeff, N. (2018). It’s not the anthropocene, it’s the white supremacy scene; or, the
geological color line. In R. Grusin (Ed.), After extinction (pp. 123–49). University
of Minnesota Press.
Mitchell, A., & Todd, Z. (2016). Earth violence: Indigeneity and the Anthropocene.
Presentation at Landbody: Indigeneity’s Radical Commitments, Center for 21st
Century Studies, University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee. https://worldlyir.files.
wordpress.com/2016/04/earth-violence-text-mitchell-and-todd.pdf
Mitchell, B. (2018, June 17). Harry Taylor plays with the bones of dead livestock
[Photo]. Getty Images News. https://www.gettyimages.ca/detail/news-photo/harrytaylor-plays-with-the-bones-of-dead-livestock-on-the-news-photo/1007071402?a
dppopup=true
Mol, A. (2008). The logic of care: Health and the problem of patient choice. Routledge.
­Monbiot, G. (2018, November 14). The earth is in a death spiral. The Guardian.
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2018/nov/14/earth–death–spiral–
radical–action–climate–breakdown
Moore, J. (2016). Name the system! Anthropocene & the Capitalocene alternative.
https://jasonwmoore.wordpress.com/tag/anthropocene/

 ­Reference

177

Mosby, I. (2013). Administering colonial science: Nutrition research and human
biomedical experimentation in Aboriginal communities and residential schools,
1942–1952. Social History, 46, 145–72.
Muñoz, J. E. (2009). Cruising the toilet: LeRoi Jones/Amiri Baraka, radical black
traditions, and queer futurity. GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies, 13(2–3),
353–67.
Murphy, M. (2015). Unsettling care: Troubling transnational itineraries of care in
feminist health practices. Social Studies of Science, 45(5), 717–37.
Murris, K. (2016). The posthuman child: Educational transformation through
philosophy with picturebooks. Routledge.
Myers, N. (2016). Natasha Myers talks plants and the Planthropocene with
Cymene Howe & Dominic Boyer. Cultures of Energy [Audio podcast]. http://
culturesofenergy.com/ep–12–natasha–myers/
Ndnviewpoint. [@mahtowin1]. (2018, February 17). By the 1960s, about 1 in 4 Native
children in the US were living apart from their families. [Tweet]. Twitter. https://
twitter.com/mahtowin1/status/965017646877069312
Nelson, A. (Ed.). (2002, June 3). Afrofuturism: A special issue of social text. Duke
University Press.
NIH. (2012). NIH human microbiome project defines normal bacterial makeup of
the body. News Releases. National Institutes of Health. https://www.nih.gov/newsevents/news-releases/nih-human-microbiome-project-defines-normal-bacterialmakeup-body
Nixon, L. (2016, May 20). sâkihito-maskihkiy acâhkosiwikamikohk [Visual Cultures
of Indigenous Futurisms]. GUTS, 6. http://gutsmagazine.ca/visual-cultures/
Nixon, R. (2011). Slow violence and the environmentalism of the poor. Harvard
University Press.
Noddings, N. (1984). Caring: A feminine approach to ethics and moral education.
University of California Press.
Nolan, M. (2019, January 28). An art opening at Chernobyl. The Outline.
https://theoutline.com/post/7017/an-art-opening-in-chernobylartefact?zd=1&zi=n5puxlqd
Nordhaus, T., & Shellenberger, M. (2009). Break through: From the death of
environmentalism to the politics of possibility. Houghton Mifflin.
­Nunn, W. (2018, December 2). We have 12 years left. Redbrick. https://www.redbrick.
me/we–have–12–years–left/
Nyong’o, T. (2015). Little monsters: Race, sovereignty, and queer inhumanism in
Beasts of the southern wild. GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies, 21(2–3),
249–72.

 178

­Reference

Nxumalo, F. (2017). Geotheorizing mountain–child relations within anthropogenic
inheritances. Children’s Geographies, 15(5), 558–69.
Nxumalo, F. (2018). Stories for living on a damaged planet: Environmental education
in a preschool classroom. Journal of Early Childhood Research, 16(2), 148–59.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1476718X17715499
Nxumalo, F. (2019). Decolonizing place in early childhood education. Routledge.
Nxumalo, F., & Cedillo, S. (2017). Decolonizing place in early childhood studies:
Thinking with Indigenous onto-epistemologies and Black feminist geographies.
Global Studies of Childhood, 7(2), 99–112.
Nxumalo, F., & ross, kihana miraya (2019). Envisioning Black space in environmental
education for young children. Race, Ethnicity and Education, 22(4), 502–24.
Okorafor, N. (2017, August). Sci-fi stories that imagine a future Africa
[Video]. TEDGlobal. https://www.ted.com/talks/nnedi_okorafor_sci_fi_
stories_that_imagine_a_future_africa?utm_campaign=tedspread&utm_
medium=referral&utm_source=tedcomshare
Oler, T. (2018, December 3). Changing the lore: N. K. Jemisin is reimagining other
worlds, and ours. Slate. https://slate.com/culture/2018/12/nk–jemisin–short–
stories–broken–earth–review.html
Out of the Woods Collective. (2015a, January 9). Klein vs Klein. Out of the Woods.
https://libcom.org/blog/klein–vs–klein–09012015
Out of the Woods Collective. (2015b, May 17). The future is kids’ stuff. Out of the
Woods. https://libcom.org/blog/future–kids–stuff–17052015
Pacini-Ketchabaw, V. (2011). Developmental theories and child and youth care. In A.
Pence & J. White (Eds.), New perspectives in child and youth care (pp. 19–32). UBC
Press.
Palsson, G., & Swanson, H. (2016). Down to earth: Geosocialities and geopolitics.
Environmental Humanities, 8(2), 149–71.
Palsson, G., Szerszynski, B., Sörlin, S., Marks, J., Avril, B., Crumley, C., Hackmann,
H., Holm, P., Ingram, J., Kirman, A., Buendia, M., & Weehuizen, R. (2013).
Reconceptualizing the “Anthropos” in the Anthropocene: Integrating the social
sciences and humanities in global environmental change research. Environmental
Science & Policy, 28, 3–13.
Parikka, J. (2015). The anthrobscene. University of Minnesota Press.
­Penn, H. (2007). Unequal childhoods: Young children’s lives in poor countries. Routledge.
Peppers, C. (1995). Dialogic origins and alien identities in Butler’s Xenogenesis.
Science Fiction Studies, 22(1), 47–62.
Pérez-Peña, R. (2018, June 8). Decades later and far away, Chernobyl disaster still
contaminates milk. The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/08/
world/europe/chernobyl-nuclear-disaster-radiation-milk.html

 ­Reference

179

Phoenix, A. (2018). From text to screen: Raising racialized difference in The handmaid’s
tale. Communication, Culture and Critique, 11(1), 206–8.
Plante, C. (2017, May 19). What caused infertility in The handmaid’s tale?
https://www.inverse.com/article/31832–what–caused–infertility–in–the–
handmaids–tale
Povinelli, E. (1995). Do rocks listen? The cultural politics of apprehending Australian
Aboriginal labor. American Anthropologist, 97(3), 505–18.
Povinelli, E. (2002). The cunning of recognition: Indigenous alterities and the making of
Australian multiculturalism. Duke University Press.
Povinelli, E. (2009). Beyond good and evil, whither liberal sacrificial love? Public
Culture, 21(1), 77–100.
Povinelli, E. (2011). Economies of abandonment: Social belonging and endurance in
late liberalism. Duke University Press.
Povinelli, E. (2013, January 14). Potentiation and extinguishment [Presentation].
London School of Economics and Political Science, London, UK. http://www.
lse.ac.uk/newsAndMedia/videoAndAudio/channels/publicLecturesAndEvents/
player.aspx?id=1701
Povinelli, E. (2016). Geontologies: A requiem for late liberalism. Duke University Press.
Povinelli, E., Coleman, M., & Yusoff, K. (2014, March 6). An interview with
Elizabeth Povinelli: On biopolitics and the Anthropocene. Space & Society.
http://societyandspace.org/2014/03/06/on–biopolitics–the–anthropocene–and–
neoliberalism/
Priya. (2017, April 14). Get out of Gilead: Anti–blackness in The handmaid’s tale.
Bitch Media. https://www.bitchmedia.org/article/anti–blackness–
handmaids–tale
Prout, A. (2005). The future of childhood. Routledge.
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2011). Matters of care in technoscience: Assembling
neglected things. Social Studies of Science, 41(1), 85–106.
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2012). “Nothing comes without its world”: Thinking with
care. The Sociological Review, 60(2), 197–216.
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2015). Making time for soil: Technoscientific futurity and
the pace of care. Social Studies of Science, 45(5), 691–716.
­Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2017). Matters of care: Speculative ethics in more than human
worlds. University of Minnesota Press.
Qvortrup, J. (2009). Sociological studies of children and youth, vol. 12: Structural,
historical and comparative perspectives. Emerald.
Racebending.com. (2011, February 23). What is “racebending”? Racebending.com:
Media consumers for entrainment equity. http://www.racebending.com/v4/about/
what–is–racebending/

 180

­Reference

Raworth, K. (2014, October 24). Must the Anthropocene be a manthropocene?
The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/20/
anthropocene–working–group–science–gender–bias
Renner, K. (2016). Evil children in the popular imagination. Palgrave Macmillan.
Reser, A., & McNeill, L. (2017, May 23). The logic of cultivation in The handmaid’s
tale. Lady Science. https://www.ladyscience.com/commentary/handmaidstalelogic
ofcultivation?rq=handmaid%27s%20tale
Reuben, S. (2010). Reducing environmental cancer risk: What we can do now. US
Department of Health and Human Services and the National Cancer Institute,
President’s Cancer Panel. https://deainfo.nci.nih.gov/advisory/pcp/annualReports/
pcp08–09rpt/PCP_Report_08–09_508.pdf
Revkin, A. (2016, October). An Anthropocene journey. Anthropocene magazine,
1. A publication Future Earth. http://www.anthropocenemagazine.org/
anthropocenejourney/
Roanhorse, R. (2018). Postcards from the apocalypse. Uncanny: A Magazine of
Science Fiction and Fantasy, 20. https://uncannymagazine.com/article/postcardsfrom-the-apocalypse/
Robinson, K. H. (2008). In the name of “childhood innocence”: A discursive
exploration of the moral panic associated with childhood and sexuality. Cultural
Studies Review, 14(2), 113–29.
Robinson, K. S., & Luis de Vicente, J. (2017, October 31). Angry optimism in a
drowned world: A conversation with Kim Stanley Robinson. https://lab.cccb.org/en/
angry-optimism-in-a-drowned-world-a-conversation-with-kim-stanley-robinson/
Rose, D. B. (2012). Multispecies knots of ethical time. Environmental Philosophy, 9(1),
127–40.
Ruddick, S. (1990). Maternal thinking: Toward a politics of peace. Ballantine Books.
Ryan, B. (2011). The new wave of childhood studies: Breaking the grip of bio-social
dualism? Childhood, 19(4), 439–52.
­Ryman, G. (2017). Geoff Ryman and 100 African writers of SFF [Audio podcast]. The
Coode Street Podcast, 306. http://www.jonathanstrahan.com.au/wp/2017/04/29/
episode–306–geoff–ryman–and–100–african–writers–of–sff/
Saldanha, A., & Stark, H. (2016). A new earth: Deleuze and Guattari in the
Anthropocene. Deleuze and Guattari Studies, 10(4), 427–39.
Save the Children International. (2021). Born into the climate crisis. https://
resourcecentre.savethechildren.net/document/born-climate-crisis-why-we-mustact-now-secure-childrens-rights/
Scott, A. O. (2012, June 26). She’s the man of this swamp. The New York Times. https://
www.nytimes.com/2012/06/27/movies/beasts-of-the-southern-wild-directed-bybenh-zeitlin.html

 ­Reference

181

Sellers, M. (2013). Young children becoming curriculum: Deleuze, Te Whāriki and
curricular understandings. Routledge.
Sevenhuijsen, S. (1998). Citizenship and the ethics of care: Feminist considerations on
justice, morality, and politics. Routledge.
Sevenhuijsen, S. (2013). Interview in June 2013. Ethics of Care. http://ethicsofcare.
org/interviews/selma-sevenhuijsen/
Shapiro, A., & Jemisin, N. K. (2018, December 26). At the end of the year, N.K.
Jemisin ponders the end of the world. All Things Considered. NPR. https://www.
npr.org/2018/12/26/680201486/at–the–end–of–the–year–n–k–jemisin–ponders–
the–end–of–the–world
Sharpe, C. (2013, September 27). Beasts of the southern wild—the romance of
precarity I. Social Text. http://socialtextjournal.org/beasts–of–the–southern–wild–
theromance–of–precarity–i/
Sharpe, C. (2016). In the wake: On blackness and being. Duke University Press.
Sharpe, C. (2018). And to survive. Small Axe, 22(3), 171–80.
Sheldon, R. (2013). Somatic capitalism: Reproduction, futurity, and feminist
science fiction. Ada: A Journal of Gender, New Media, and Technology, 3. https://
adanewmedia.org/2013/11/issue3–sheldon/
Sheldon, R. (2016). The child to come: Life after the human catastrophe. University of
Minnesota.
Shellenberger, M., & Nordhaus, T. (2011). Love your monsters: Postenvironmentalism
and the Anthropocene. Breakthrough Institute. https://thebreakthrough.org/issues/
conservation/love–your–monsters–ebook
Shelly, M. (1818). Frankenstein; or, the modern Prometheus. Lackington, Hughes,
Harding, Mavor & Jones.
Shotwell, A. (2016). Against purity: Living ethically in compromised times. University
of Minnesota Press.
­Shotwell, A. (2020, March 25). Survival will always be insufficient but it’s a good
place to start. https://alexisshotwell.com/2020/03/25/survival-will-always-beinsufficient-but-its-a-good-place-to-start/
Simpson, L. (2011). Dancing on our turtle’s back: Stories of Nishnaabeg re-creation,
resurgence, and a new emergence. Arbeiter Ring.
Smith, A. (2010). Queer theory and native studies: The heteronormativity
of settler colonialism. GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies, 16(1–2),
42–68.
Somerville, M. (2017). Thinking critically with children of the Anthropocene: (Un)
learning the subject in qualitative and postqualitative inquiry. International Review
of Qualitative Research, 10(4), 395–410.
Strathern, M. (1991). Partial connections. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.

 182

­Reference

Steffen, W., Crutzen, P., & McNeill, J. (2007). The Anthropocene: Are humans now
overwhelming the great forces of nature? Ambio, 36, 614–21.
Steffen, W., Grinevald, J., Crutzen, P., & McNeill, J. (2011). The Anthropocene:
Conceptual and historical perspectives. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 369, 842–67.
Steffen, W., et al. (2015). Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a
changing planet. Science, 347(6223). DOI: 10.1126/science.1259855
Stockton, K. B. (2009). The queer child, or growing sideways in the twentieth century.
Duke University Press.
Sturgeon, N. (2010). Penguin family values: The nature of planetary environmental
reproductive justice. In C. Mortimer-Sandilands & B. Erickson (Eds.), Queer
ecologies: Sex, nature, politics, desire (pp. 102–34). Indiana University Press.
TallBear, K. (2019, February 19). Molecular death, desire, and redface reincarnation:
Indigenous appropriations in the USA and Canada [Presentation]. Columbia
University, New York. https://www.socialdifference.columbia.edu/
events–1/2019/2/19/talk–by–dr–kimberly–tallbear
Taylor, A. (2010). Troubling childhood innocence: Reframing the debate over the
media sexualisation of children. Australasian Journal of Early Childhood, 35(1),
48–57.
Taylor, A. (2013). Reconfiguring the natures of childhood. Routledge.
Taylor, A. (2017). Beyond stewardship: Common world pedagogies for the
Anthropocene. Environmental Education Research, 1–14. Advance online
publication. https://doi.org/10.1080/13504622.2017.1325452
Taylor, A., Blaise, M., & Giugni, M. (2013). Haraway’s “bag lady story-telling”:
Relocating childhood and learning within a “post-human landscape.” Discourse:
Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education, 34(1), 48–62.
­Taylor, A., & Pacini-Ketchabaw, V. (2015). Learning with children, ants, and worms
in the Anthropocene: Towards a common world pedagogy of multispecies
vulnerability. Pedagogy, Culture & Society, 23(4), 507–29.
Taylor, A., & Pacini-Ketchabaw, V. (2018). The common worlds of children and
animals: Relational ethics for entangled lives. Routledge.
Tennant, Z. (2020, April 9). “Our stories give us a lot of guidance”: Daniel Heath
Justice on why Indigenous literatures matter. Unreserved. CBC. https://www.
cbc.ca/radio/unreserved/why-stories-matter-now-more-than-ever-1.5526331/
our-stories-give-us-a-lot-of-guidance-daniel-heath-justice-on-why-indigenousliteratures-matter-1.5527999
Teuton, S. K. (2018). Native American literature: A very short introduction. Oxford.

 ­Reference

183

Thomas, E. E. (2018). Toward a theory of the dark fantastic: The role of racial
difference in young adult speculative fiction and media. Journal of Language and
Literacy Education, 14(1), 1–10.
Thomas, M. G., & Thomas, N. S. (2009). How to survive a zombie apocalypse. Sword
Works.
Thunberg, G. (2019). Our house if on fire [Video]. YouTube. World Economic Forum.
https://youtu.be/U72xkMz6Pxk
Timofeeva, O. (2018). Zombie. In R. Braidotti & M. Hlavajova (Eds.), Posthuman
glossary. Bloomsbury. https://monoskop.org/media/text/posthuman_
glossary_2018/#p150
Todd, Z. (2015). Indigenizing the Anthropocene. In H. Davis & E. Turpin (Eds.),
Art in the Anthropocene: Encounter among aesthetics, politics, environment and
epistemology (pp. 241–54). Open Humanities Press.
Tronto, J. C. (1993). Moral boundaries: A political argument for an ethic of care.
Routledge.
Truman, S. (2019). Inhuman literacies and affective refusals: Thinking with Sylvia
Wynter and secondary school English. Curriculum Inquiry, 1–20. https://doi.org/1
0.1080/03626784.2018.1549465
Tsing, A. (2015). The mushroom at the end of the world: On the possibility of life in
capitalistic ruins. Princeton University Press.
Tuchman, E. (Writer), & Dennis, K. (Director). (2017, June 7). The bridge (Season 1,
Episode 9) [TV series episode]. In B. Miller (Producer), The handmaid’s tale. Hulu.
Tuck, E, & Yang, W. (2012). Decolonization is not a metaphor. Decolonization:
Indigeneity, Education & Society, 1(1), 1–40.
­Vargas, J. C., & James, J. (2013). Refusing blackness-as-victimization: Trayvon
Martin and the Black cyborgs. In J. Jones & G. Yancy (Eds.), Pursuing Trayvon
Martin: Historical contexts and contemporary manifestations of racial dynamics
(pp. 193–205). Lexington Books.
Vizenor, G. (2008). Survivance: Narratives of Native presence. University of Nebraska
Press.
Wade, A. G. (2017). “New genres of being human”: World making through viral
blackness. The Black Scholar, 47(3), 33–44.
Wald, P. (2008). Contagious: Cultures, carriers, and the outbreak narrative. Duke
University Press.
Walkerdine, V. (1997). Daddy’s girl: Young girls and popular culture. Macmillan.
Watling, E. (2019, August 1). Drought in Australia turns farmland to barren
dustbowl: Heartbreaking photos. Newsweek. https://www.newsweek.com/droughtaustralia-turns-farmland-barren-dustbowl-heartbreaking-photos-1052170

 184

­Reference

Weheliye, A. (2014). Habeas viscus: Racializing assemblages, biopolitics, and Black
feminist theories of the human. Duke University Press.
Wei, K., & Jemisin, N. K. (2016). Hugo Winner N.K. Jemisin talks The fifth season
and the Obelisk gate. http://www.fantasyliterature.com/author–interviews/n–k–
jemisin/
Weinbaum, A. E. (2004). Wayward reproductions: Genealogies of race and nation in
transatlantic modern thought. Duke University Press.
Weinstein, J., & Colebrook, C. (2017). Posthumous life: Theorizing beyond the
posthuman. Columbia Press.
Weisberger, M. (2017, March 3). Meet a new kind of zombie in the film The girl with
all the gifts. Live Science. https://www.livescience.com/58096–zombie–science–
girl–with–all–the–gifts–movie.html
Weisman, A. (2007). The world without us. St. Martins.
Wendle, J. (2016, April 18). Animals rule Chernobyl three decades after
nuclear disaster. National Geographic. https://www.nationalgeographic.com/
news/2016/04/060418-chernobyl-wildlife-thirty-year-anniversary-science/
Whyte, K. P. (2017). Our ancestors’ dystopia now. Indigenous conservation and
the Anthropocene. In U. Heise, J. Christensen, & M. Niemann (Eds.), Routledge
companion to the Environmental Humanities (pp. 206–15). Routledge.
Whyte, K. P. (2018). Indigenous science (fiction) for the Anthropocene: Ancestral
dystopias and fantasies of climate change crises. Environment and Planning E:
Nature and Space, 1, 224–42.
Wiebe, S. (2016). Everyday exposure: Indigenous mobilization and environmental
justice in Canada’s chemical valley. UBC Press.
­Wilderson III, F. B. (2010). Red, white & Black: Cinema and the structure of U.S.
antagonisms. Duke University Press.
Wilderson III, F. B. (2014). “We’re trying to destroy the world”: Anti-Blackness and
police violence after Ferguson–An interview with Frank B. Wilderson III. Ill Will
Editions, 3–23. http://ill-will-editions.tumblr.com/post/103584583009/weretrying-to-destroy-the-world
Wilderson III, F. B. (2015). Afro–Pessimism and the end of redemption. Humanities
Futures. Franklin Humanities Institute, Duke University, Durham. https://
humanitiesfutures.org/papers/afro-pessimism-end-redemption/
Wise, D. (2012, September 24). Beasts of the southern wild review. Empire. https://
www.empireonline.com/movies/reviews/beasts-southern-wild-review/
Wolfe, P. (2006). Settler colonialism and the elimination of the native. Journal of
Genocide Research, 8(4), 387–409.
Womack, Y. (2013). Afrofuturism: The world of Black sci–fi and fantasy culture. Review
Press.

 ­Reference

185

Wood, R. (2020, October 9). From dust bowl to lush green land: Photographer
captures farms’ recovery from drought. 9News. National. https://www.9news.com.
au/national/drought-hit-farms-transformed-after-winter-rain-weather-news/
a8a5ed64-27f7-4759-9c86-2d214d091e99
Wynter, S. (1995a). 1492: A “new world” view. In V. L. Hyatt & R. Nettleford (Eds.),
Race, discourse, and the origin of the Americas: A new world view (pp. 5–57).
Smithsonian Institution.
Wynter, S. (1995b). The Pope must have been drunk, the King of Castile a madman:
Culture as actuality and the Caribbean rethinking of modernity. In A. Ruprecht &
C. Taiana (Eds.), Reordering of culture: Latin America, the Caribbean and Canada
in the hood (pp. 17–41). Carleton University Press.
Wynter, S. (2000). The re-enchantment of humanism: An interview with Sylvia
Wynter. Small Axe, 8, 119–207.
Wynter, S. (2003). Unsettling the coloniality of being/power/truth/freedom: Towards
the human, after man, its overrepresentation–An argument. New Centennial
Review, 3(3), 257–337.
Wynter, S. (2005). Race and our biocentric belief system: An interview with Sylvia
Wynter. In J. E. King (Ed.), Black education: A transformative research and action
agenda for the new century (pp. 361–6). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Wynter, S. (2006). On how we mistook the map for the territory, and reimprisoned
ourselves in our unbearable wrongness of being, of desetre: Black studies toward
the human project. In J. Gordon & L. Gordon (Eds.), A companion to African–
American studies (pp. 107–18). Blackwell.
Wynter, S. (2015). The ceremony found: Towards the autopoetic turn/overturn,
its autonomy of human agency and extraterritoriality of (self-)cognition. In J.
Ambroise & S. Broeck (Eds.), Black knowledges/Black struggles: Essays in critical
epistemology (pp. 184–252). Liverpool University Press.
Wynter, S., & McKittrick, K. (2015). Unparalled catastrophe for our species? Or, to
give humanness a different future: Conversation. In K. McKittrick (Ed.), Sylvia
Wynter: On being human as praxis (pp. 1–55). Duke University Press.
Yaeger, P. (2013, February 13). Beasts of the southern wild and dirty ecology. Southern
Spaces. https://southernspaces.org/2013/beasts-southern-wild-and-dirty-ecology/
Yohannes, S. (2020, March 19). Margaret Atwood, Waubgeshig Rice and Daniel
Kalla share their pandemic reading lists. CBC: As it happens. https://www.cbc.
ca/radio/asithappens/as-it-happens-thursday-edition-1.5502954/margaretatwood-waubgeshig-rice-and-daniel-kalla-share-their-pandemic-readinglists-1.5502962
Yusoff, K. (2013). Geologic life: Prehistory, climate, futures in the Anthropocene.
Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 31, 779–95.

 186

­Reference

Yusoff, K. (2016). Anthropogenesis: Origins and endings in the Anthropocene.
Theory, Culture & Society, 33(2), 3–28.
Yusoff, K. (2018). A billion Black Anthropocenes or none. University of Minnesota
Press.
Yusoff, K. (2019, May 2). Kathryn Yusoff with hosts Dominic Boyer and Cymene
Howe [Audio podcast]. Culture of Energy, 175. http://culturesofenergy.com/175–
kathryn–yusoff/
Zeitlin, B. (Director). (2012). Beasts of the southern wild [Film]. Twentieth Century
Fox.
Ziyad, H. (2017a). Playing “outside” in the dark: Blackness in a postwhite world.
Critical Ethnic Studies, 3(1), 143–61.
Ziyad, H. (2017b, July 19). The girl with all the gifts and Black girls destroying the
world to save themselves. Black Youth Project. http://blackyouthproject.com/girl–
gifts–black–girls–destroying–world–save/

 Index
Locators followed by “n.” indicate endnotes
Afro-futurisms/Afrofuturisms 10, 23, 81,
156 n.7
Agamben, G., bios 156 n.8
Ahmed, S., Willful Subjects 140
Alabaster (The Fifth Season) 79
Alagraa, B. 66
Alibar, L., Juicy and Delicious 39
alternative names (global change)
154–5 n.4
Animist (geontology figure) 21, 29–31,
34–42, 143
Anthropocene 1, 5–7, 13, 80, 93, 119,
155 n.5
Anthropomeme 1
Anthropos 6–7, 18, 84–5, 87, 89
anti-Black racism 76, 86, 101, 103, 105,
111, 162 n.8
apocalypse/apocalyptic tropes 7–10, 14,
22, 42, 85–6, 148
apocalyptic thinking 148
post-apocalyptic blockbusters 8–9, 30,
42–3, 48, 80, 85, 120, 127
as product of Anthropocene 8
as revelation, disclosure 7
social dreaming 10
Arendt, H.
force of life 125
natality 67, 125, 159–60 n.8
Atwood, M.
The Handmaid’s Tale 23, 116, 122, 124,
126, 134–8
National Homelands 163 n.5
autopoiesis 64, 66–7, 159 n.7
Avatar: The Last Airbender 51
awareness (climate change) 4, 77,
116
Global Day of Action 5
Axelsson, I. 154 n.3

Baldwin, A. 57
Ballard, S., Alliances in the Anthropocene
145
Barad, K., intra-action 156 n.10
Barnsley, V. 14
Bastién, A. J. 136
Beasts of the Southern Wild (Zeitlin)
157 n.1
Miss Bathsheba 38
The Bathtub 36–7, 40–1
characterizations 37
Hushpuppy 21, 31, 33, 35–42, 147
Wink 36, 38–9
Belcourt, C. 163 n.1
­Benjamin, R. 133, 149
Ferguson is the Future (see Ferguson is
the Future (Benjamin))
race as technology 122–3
Racial Fictions, Biological Facts:
Expanding the Sociological
Imagination through Speculative
Methods 105
technoscience innovation 101, 107–9
Berlant, L. 124, 146
Berlastsky, N. 135
Bernstein, R., Racial Innocence 15–17, 50
biocentric/biocentrism 19–20, 47, 54, 60,
76, 83, 112, 157 n.1
bionormative care 126
bionormative child 12–13, 22, 26–8, 46,
71, 90, 111, 157 n.1
and bio-centric human 54
motherhood 126–31
parent-child relationship 24
bionormative reproductive futurism 125
biopower 25, 27
bios/geos divide 22, 25, 30, 72, 75, 77, 82,
88, 152

 188

Index

bios-mythoi worlding 65
bio-social dualism 27–8
biosocial waves 11–14, 27–9
hybrid childhoods 12
nature-cultures 12–13
social construction of childhood 11–12
bios (political life) 156 n.8
Black children 15–16, 18, 40, 101, 103, 158
n.2, 162 n.7
decolonization 54
early childhood education 149–50
and Indigenous lives 158 n.2
Black female power fantasy 78
A Black Feminist Statement (Combahee
River Collective) 55–6
Black Lives Matter Global Network 56
#BlackLivesMatter movement 10, 18, 23,
57, 85, 102
Black Science Fiction Society 2
Boy with the Bones 2–4, 21, 31–3
becoming boy-animal-monster 33–4
Breakthrough Institute (BTI) 92–3, 95–6,
107–8, 160 n.2
An Ecomodernist Manifesto 93
politics of possibility 93
technology and modernization 94, 109
#BrightFuture Child 3–4, 17, 87, 93, 107,
115
Broken Earth trilogy (Jemisin) 9, 20, 22,
35, 69, 71–6, 88
end of the world 69, 74, 83–7
Father Earth 73–4, 83
The Fifth Season 74, 84, 86
Fulcrum 74–5, 77–9, 82, 86, 89
The Obelisk Gate 75
Stillness 73–9
The Stone Sky 76, 86
­Brown, M. 57
Brown, S. 54
Bryce, P. 157 n.3
Butler, O. 150
Dawn 60
Xenogenesis trilogy (Lilith’s Brood) 60
Cairns, K. 130–1, 163 n.2
Cannella, G. 17
capitalism, climate and 151
Carbon Imaginary 157 n.1
care 146

collective 42–6
environmentalization of (The
Handmaid’s Tale) 131–4
ethics 157 n.1, 162 n.9
parental 119–20
for regenerative cyborgs 110–13
speculative (Puig de la Bellacasa) 92,
97, 106–10
Carey, M. R., The Girl with All the Gifts 22,
47, 51–2
cautionary tale against technology 91
Césaire, A., 64
Chernobyl disaster 55, 143–5
child-centered pedagogy 141
child-climate relations 5
child-future entanglements/relation 3,
14–16, 131
childhood innocence 16–17, 50
Childhood Studies 10–13, 20, 27–8, 91,
149, 152
child-parent separation 162–3 n.1
Chivington, J., Sand Creek massacre 15
Clark, N. 28, 67–8
crisis of natality 3
climate change 3, 17, 33, 46, 146–8,
157 n.1
affective resonances of 120
awareness 4–5
multi-racial 37
climate crisis 4–6, 8, 14, 25, 29, 47, 84,
97, 101, 119, 139, 141–2, 147–8,
157 n.1
child-future relationship 3
parental relationship within 23
Colebrook, C. 30, 80, 84, 116
collective ecology 118
colonialism 7, 9, 19, 46, 76, 78, 81, 158 n.4,
163 n.1, 163 n.4
Combahee River Collective, A Black
Feminist Statement 55–6
Common Worlds Research Collective 13,
24, 89, 118, 149, 151–3
counterhumanism 48
Covid-19 1, 56
Crawley, A. 153
Crist, E. 7
cruel optimism 24, 62, 146–9
and angry optimism 148
extended crisis 147

 Index
­inevitability 149
reproductive futurism 147
Crutzen, P. 155 n.5
Danowski, D. 84
The Day After Tomorrow (film) 120
De Beers diamond mines 81
decolonization 54, 86, 158 n.4
Deepwater Horizon (2010) oil spill 96, 112
Demos, T. J. 93
Desert (geontology figure) 21, 29–33, 42,
55, 143
Dimaline, C., The Marrow Thieves 21, 31,
42–6, 57, 73, 140
disaster films 8, 120
drought (Warrumbungle Shire, New
South Wales) 2, 32
Dugas, G. 159 n.6
early childhood education 16, 141,
149–52, 157 n.1
Earth system 1, 5, 68, 73, 116–17, 119,
161 n.6
human inclusive 118
science 6, 155 n.5
eco-anxiety 7, 47, 138, 142
ecomodernism 91, 93, 109
Edelman, L. 24, 27, 121, 139, 142, 146
No Future 14–15, 146
reproductive futurism 14, 125
educational futures 140, 150–3
Black children 150
de-institutionalization of school 150
early childhood education 141, 149,
152
human exceptionalism 152
learning-about 152
pedagogies for 149
speculative visioning of 152
Elephant Annie 143–6
Ellsworth, E. 156 n.9
end of the world 1, 7–8, 14, 21–4, 29, 44,
90, 92, 100, 120, 139, 147, 149, 153
Broken Earth trilogy 69, 74, 83–7
disaster in 147
drought 32
geos-imaginaries 140, 144
heteronormative family romance
115–16

189

humanity as whiteness 54
Hushpuppy (Beasts) 39
inhuman 83–7
The Marrow Thieves 46
Melanie (The Girl with All the Gifts)
48–9
punchy headlines 1
singularity 83
white 53–6, 68
world without us 84–5
Environmental Defence 163 n.2
­environmental education 118, 149, 150–1
environmental stewardship 23–4, 121,
131, 133–4
Erasmus, Z. 66–7
Eriksen, C., Alliances in the Anthropocene
145
Essun (The Fifth Season) 74–6, 85
evolutionary theory (Darwin) 19
Exclusion Zone (Chernobyl Nuclear
Power Plant) 143–4
Fanon, F. 20, 55, 64, 102, 158 n.4
The Wretched of the Earth 158 n.4
Ferguson, A. 85
Ferguson is the Future (Benjamin) 23,
91–2, 97–102, 105–7, 111, 123
afterlives 100
Aiyana 97–100, 103, 111, 140
Black lives matter 102–3
Black rebel cyborgs 101–5
healthcare system 98
Immortocracy 99, 103, 109, 157 n.1
People’s Science Council 97, 99–100,
162 n.7
Reparations Act 99
Reparations Movement 97, 100–1
Revival Ceremony 97–9
The First 48 (A&E network) 99–100
Fisher, B. 107
Foucault, M. 4, 25, 60
Frankencene technologies 92–7
fungible bodies 162 n.7
Futures of Education initiative (UNESCO)
151
Garner, E. 98
gatherings (Anthropocene child) 6, 140–2
ontological demands 142–6

 190
genome-mapping 98–9
geo-bio-socio assemblages 156 n.9
geo-engineering techno-fixes 148
geontological learning 152
geontology/geontological childhoods
21–2, 25, 29, 31, 88, 109
Animist 21, 29–31, 34–42, 143
biontological enclosure of existence 25
Desert 21, 29–33, 55, 143
generating 26–9
Virus 21, 29–31, 42–6, 57, 143
geontopower 72
geopower 72
geos 13, 71–2, 89
beings and becomings 71–4, 87
geos-figuring speculative worlds 72–4
geos-childhoods 47
geos-existents, child-figures as 87–90
geosocial formations 82, 87–8
geos-powers 22, 35, 71–2, 75, 86, 90
­in inhuman(e) worlds 76–80
geostories 20–1, 47, 68, 150, 157 n.1
Broken Earth 74–6
geos-zombification 50
global warming 96, 106, 147–8
Gold Coast 81
Grandin, T. 35
Great Acceleration (1945–2015) 100, 116,
161 n.6
Gross, L., post-apocalyptic stress
syndrome 85
Grosz, E., geopower 72
Haraway, D. 60, 67, 102, 111, 153, 159 n.7
Chthulucene 83
A Cyborg Manifesto 60–1, 102, 110
naturecultures 75
planet and child 119
Hartman, S.
blackness 78
slavery afterlife 161–2 n.7
Hoodie-movement 162 n.8
Hornborg, A. 6
human(s)
anchoring 17–20
biocentric conception of 19 (see also
biocentric/biocentrism)
bios and mythoi 20
dominion 7

Index
enterprise 161 n.6
exceptionalism 28, 53–4, 59, 93, 117,
152
as geologic force 87
homo narrans 20, 61, 64–5
and more than human 60, 139, 153
and nonhuman world 4, 39, 59, 96,
118, 164 n.1
overrepresentation of Man (Wynter) 6,
19–20, 71–2
primitive races 19
Settler/Master(Human) 55
humanity 8–9, 17, 38, 58–60, 62, 66, 76,
87–8, 105, 116, 119, 120, 134
of child-hungries 50
and more-than-human world 37
as whiteness 54
hungries/hungrie-children 22, 48–51, 54,
56, 58, 61–7, 71
hybrid-child/hybrid model of childhood
12, 20, 22
Indigenous Futurisms 10, 15, 149. See also
Afro-futurisms/Afrofuturisms
Indigenous peoples 18, 22, 26, 33–5, 42–6,
85, 87, 109, 149, 153, 157 n.2, 161
n.5, 163 n.4
Industrial Era (1800–1945), stages 116
inhuman/inhuman worlds 17, 72
double sense of 81
geography 140
geos-powers in 76–80
monsters and natures 80–7, 89
innocence, childhood 16–17, 50
­insensateness 50–1, 158 n.2
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (2018) 2
James, J., Black rebel cyborg 55, 102–5
Jemisin, N. K. 22, 77, 83, 85–6, 89–90. See
also Broken Earth trilogy (Jemisin)
Johnston, J. 130–1
Joo, H-J. 120
Justice, D. H. 149
Why Indigenous Literatures Matter 45
Kawash, S. 158–9 n.4
Keystone pipelines 81
King, T. L.

 Index
Black fungibility 162 n.7
grammars of suffering 54
Klein, N. 96–7, 137
kinship of the infertile 92, 112–13, 133
The Right to Regenerate 112–13
This Changes Everything: Capitalism vs
the Climate 96
Kolbert, E., The Sixth Extinction 8
Kruse, J. 156 n.9
language 46
Latimer, H. 124
Latour, B. 23, 92, 108, 115
Armamis, or Love of Technology 160 n.2
dismissal of critique 106
“Love Your Monsters: Why We Must
Care for Our Technologies as We
Do Our Children” 91–2, 94–7,
107–9, 113, 160 n.1, 160 n.2
nature vs. nurture antagonism 95
social constructionism 106
technology 122–3
We Have Never Been Modern 94, 160
n.1, 160 n.2
Law & Order 126
Lee, E. V., In Defence of the Wastelands: A
Survival Guide 41
Lewis, T. 18
life 47
abandonment, iconography 143–4
beyond survival 41–2
Life=Childhood formula 27
v. nonlife 21, 23–31, 34, 42, 46–7, 67,
72, 82, 100, 112, 145, 152, 159 n.4
possibility of 55
Lothian, A. 116
Lynas, M., The God Species 96
MacKendrick, N. 130–1, 163 n.2
Maher, J. 127–9
Malm, A. 6
Malone, K. 13, 118, 139, 142
Margulis, L. 159 n.7
Martin, Trayvon 97, 104–6, 158 n.2
McCarthy, C., The Girl with All the Gifts
22, 47–8, 51, 54–9, 65, 68–9, 74, 77,
85, 144, 159 n.5
McDonald, S. N. 138
­McNeill, L. 134

191

Melanie (The Girl with All the Gifts) 22, 33,
44, 47, 61, 71, 90, 140–1
bio-exceptionalism 51
blackness and monstrosity 48, 55
child-hungries as inhuman monsters
49, 65
community through contagion 56–9
end of the world 48
fungal pathogens 48–53, 68
Justineau and Caldwell 49–53, 61–6
liveable world 53–4
masking monstrosity 49–50
Pandora 52, 61–3, 66
Schrödinger’s cat experiment 61, 65
Mellor, A. 161 n.3
Merriman, B. 134
Miigwans 44, 46
Miller, B., The Handmaid’s Tale 115,
120–1, 163 n.5
anti-Black slavery 136–7
bionormative motherhood 122,
126–31
born pre-polluted 124–6
“The Bridge” 128
Commander Fred Waterford 123, 128,
132
Commander Putman 128
environmentalization of care 131–4
fertility crisis 121–4, 131
Gilead 116, 121–7, 130–8
Hannah 126, 128–30
Janine 124, 126, 128
June 126–30, 137
Lydia 124, 128
multiculturalism 137
Offred 123, 126, 132
post-racial parenthood 134–8
regenerative stewardship practices
133–4
sacrificial love 129
“Seeds” 163 n.3
Serena Joy 128, 131–2
technophobia, Gilead 123
treatment of blackness 136
Unbabies and Unwomen of the
Colonies 125–6, 132–3, 138, 142
woman-as-womb 129
“A Women’s Place” 131
Milton, J., Paradise Lost 162 n.10

 192

Index

Mitchell, B. 32–3
monsters-children-technologies 107
monstrous geography 82
Mother Earth (The Marrow Thieves) 73–4
Muñoz, J. 15, 33
Nakate, V. 154 n.3
­Nassun (Broken Earth trilogy) 22, 72,
75–6, 78, 81–2, 85–90, 141
natality 67, 125, 159–60 n.8, 160 n.9
crisis of 3, 67
nature-cultures 11–13, 75, 95
nature/nurture 11
Neubauer, L. 154 n.3
non-totality 155 n.6
Nordhaus, T. 92, 107
nuclear disaster, iconography 143–5
Nxumalo, F. 149–51
geotheorizing mountain-child relations
89
Nyong’o, T. 37, 40
Ophiocordyceps unilateralis (Gifts) 58
organic child 130–1
origin stories 60–9
orogeny/orogenes 22, 71–2, 74–8
anti-Black racism 86
geologic forces 88
modality of human 80
oppression of 79, 81
outbreak narrative 58–60, 159 n.6
The Out of the Woods Collective 111
Pandora’s Box (myth) 61–3
pan-humanity 6
Parable of the Sower 151
parental stewardship 119–21, 127, 138
partial humanisms 18, 60
Patient Zeros 159 n.6
Peppers, C. 60–1
Piaget, J. 34–5
planet and child 119–21
planetary stewardship 24, 115–19, 127,
130, 138
human exceptionalism 117–18
life support system 119
Plante, C. 132
Povinelli, E. 21, 24–6, 29–31, 33–5, 55,
57, 82, 86, 88, 129, 139, 157 n.1.

See also geontology/geontological
childhoods
biocentric subject of late liberalism
157 n.1
critical theory 142
Desert and Virus 42–3
Geontologies: A Requiem to Late
Liberalism 26
geontopower 72
metabolic imaginary 47, 157 n.1
power relations 108, 154 n.2, 155 n.4
Prout, A. 12–13
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. 106, 156 n.1
ethics of care 92, 97, 107–10
productionism 109
three layered care formulation 130
­race and racism 19, 51–2, 78, 93
anti-Black racism 76, 86, 101, 103, 105,
111, 162 n.8
environmental 38, 42, 84, 112,
157 n.1
systemic 85
as technology 123
racebending 51
race/reproduction bind 135
racial innocence 15–17, 50–1
real world 149
recapitulation theory 17, 19
recuperation 153
The Red Forest 145
regenerative cyborgs
care for 110–13
monstrous love for 105–10
relationship 45, 127, 139, 152
bionormative parent-child 24
child-future 3
reconceptualization 94
web of human 160 n.8
Reparations Act 99
Reparations Movement 97, 100–1
reproduction, human fantasy of 4
Reser, A. 134
Reuben, S. 163 n.2
Rice, W. 153
Rich, A. 149
Roanhorse, R. 87
Robinson, K. S. 148
ross, kihana miraya 149–51

 Index
Save the Children International (2021)
147
Scott, D. C. 157 n.3
Sharpe, C. 15, 39
Sheldon, R. 23, 28, 40, 55, 68, 79, 115, 124,
151
militarized reproductive futurism
121–2, 125–6
natality 125
Shellenberger, M. 92, 107
Shelly, M., Frankenstein 23, 91–2, 94, 97,
111, 115, 160 n.2, 161 n.3, 162 n.10
Shotwell, A. 161 n.3
Shredder-child 126, 138
slow violence 38, 84, 86, 133, 157 n.1
Smith, A. 15
social construction of childhood 11–12,
20, 27, 106
social dreaming 10
soil care 133
Somerville, M. 13, 139
speculative fiction 7, 21, 23–4, 69, 122, 140
and anti-blackness 53
apocalyptic tropes (see apocalypse/
apocalyptic tropes)
­cruel optimism 146–9
Frankenfigures 92–7
imagining of care 42–6
post-apocalyptic 80
Steffen, W. 116–19, 134
stewardship
parental 119–21, 127, 138
planetary 116–19, 127, 130, 138
Stoermer, E. 155 n.5
Stolen Childhoods 163 n.1
Stolen Generation of Indigenous children
(Australia) 77
Strathern, M. 101
Sturgeon, N. 154 n.3
superspreaders 159 n.6
Syenite (The Fifth Season) 74, 78–80
sympoiesis 67, 159 n.7
systemic racism 85–6
TallBear, K. 161 n.5
Taylor, A. 118, 164 n.2
alternative conceptualizations 164 n.2
deconstructive methods 164 n.2
pedagogical shift 152

193

technology 92, 107–8, 122, 124, 163 n.1
Love Your Monsters 92, 96
and modernization 94
race as 123
science and 123
of unhumaning 81
Thunberg, G. 154 n.3
Tille, L. 154 n.3
Tronto, J. 107
Tsing, A. 56, 59
2012 (film) 120
Unilever 4
Why Bring a Child into the World
campaign 2–3, 93
Unist’ot’en clan 43
Vargas, J. C. 103–5
viral blackness 57–9
Viruru, R. 17
Virus (geontology figure) 21, 29–31, 42–6,
57, 143
Viveiros de Castro, E. 84
Vizenor, G., survivance 157 n.2
Wade, A., viral blackness 57–9
Wald, P. 59
contagion 58–9
HIV/AIDS diagnosis 159 n.6
#We Are All Trayvon Martin 162 n.8
Weinbaum, A. E., Wayward Reproductions
135
Weisman, A., The World without Us 8
­Wet’suwet’en peoples 43
whiteness 102–3, 105, 135
bionormative 127
end of the world 53–6
human exceptionalism 54
humanity as 54
infecting 48–53
Why Bring a Child into the World
campaign 2–3, 93
Wilderson III, F. B. 10
World Children’s Day (2014) 2–3
world-destructing events 157 n.1
WRISK project 163 n.2
Wynter, S. 6, 18–19, 48, 56, 60, 157 n.1
autopoiesis 64, 66
Man2 157 n.1

 194
origin stories 60–9
overrepresentation of Man 6, 19–20,
71–2
science of the Word 64
theory of sociogeny 64
Yaeger, P., dirty ecology 37–9
Yusoff, K. 17, 72, 76, 82, 89
anthropogenesis 87
humanity-as-strata 88

Index
inhuman, figurations 76, 80–1
material economy 81
Zeitlin, B. 35. See also Beasts of the
Southern Wild (Zeitlin)
Ziarek, E. 159 n.8
Ziyad, H. 53–4, 103, 110
zoe (biological substance)
156 n.8
zombie, genealogy 158 n.3

 195

 196

 197

 198

 