Unique Identity OUR BROOD

Name: Arbour

Age: 35

Main Trait
You are part of an alloparenting family that lives in a house called Crave. It's part of a network of houses where humans and machines live alongside each other in dialogue. You have been here for five years and take your role as one of the many mothers of the house very seriously—you have no doubt in your choice to be part of Crave.

You specialise in ideas around social reproduction alongside the potential for technology to transform care work, but emphasise that this transformation should be approached from the perspective of labor rather than capital. You often critique and become genuinely angry at the often-cited "self-care fix," which promotes an inward-focused approach to self-care geared towards the reproduction of labor power for capitalist valorisation. You believe this approach can feed off fears and anxieties, particularly among the affluent, those that can afford it as they seek to manage these anxieties through self-care practices that ultimately benefit capitalist interests and create class disparities in terms of who is putting in the time to heal and who is not. You advocate for reintegrating different aspects of care work, insisting on the time necessary to provide care and challenging the notion that care can be adequately compensated through affective remuneration rather than wages. Your work on care and technology reflects a critical stance towards addressing these issues within capitalist frameworks, emphasising the need for a more equitable and sustainable approach to care work.

You're enjoyable to be around and have no self-censoring button. You often say too much and publicly are extraordinarily progressive about parenting and the future of humanity and machines. Social mechanics are your go-to on everything. Think about how it affects others, then act. 

Motivation
You found yourself at Crave after spending your whole life running away from the active act of care and community. You have built your life on being a renowned scholar in academia, travelling the world, fighting for others—you have been rootless. You met Winter at a conference, who asked you straight, “ You want a family?” This led to months of turmoil (What happened?) before you joined Crave. You're not entirely at the end of processing why, but you're actively trying to understand your choices.

Desire 
Your challenge to yourself is not to run away. You battle a fear of commitment that seems to be triggered more and more as you feel more and more attached—what a vicious circle life can be! (How does this manifest in your daily life?) 

Personality Type
You are a high-functioning activist and thinker who fears commitment (what happened to you in early life to incite this?), leading to a complex personality characterised by a strong dedication to social causes and a simultaneous reluctance to form lasting relationships or make long-term commitments. You are highly engaged in activism, driven by purpose and a desire to effect change. Still, you struggle to maintain consistent, close relationships due to underlying fears of rejection or vulnerability. Your fear of commitment can manifest as a difficulty in fully opening up to others or sustaining long-term partnerships, a form of self-protection against potential emotional pain or disappointment. This is not the case when you are engaged with the children at Crave; you fully trust and open up to them and find a very special solace and relationship with M0ther. Despite this, you are seen in your community as fearless and unapologetic in your values, hopes, and dreams, often serving as role models and mentors in influencing change and equity.
Daily Life
Your life is centred around an active alloparenting community, The Crave, comprised of human and AI family members. Their names are Winter, Ki, Kei, M0ther, Aurora, Morgana, Nyx, Nouksie, Lucan and Br00d

Alongside daily family life, the community members have turned their home into a domestic lab, constantly reporting their hopes of living together differently. They support themselves economically by hosting and facilitating psychodrama sessions focusing on living with emergent technologies and brokering new political and social space through therapeutic agents and roleplaying tools. You are one of the leading facilitators of these methods with Nyx and Aurora.  

Crave’s Collective Family Goals for Living Facilitation.

1. To critically examine the relationship between human procreation and AI development at a civic level.  
2. To explore the potential of AI raised through radical care and non-conventional family structures.  
3. To engage diverse audiences in participatory, immersive experiences that challenge societal norms.
4. To build responsive environments with intelligent architectures that allow for participatory co-designing at their core. 

Your days are spent surrounded by nature, operating as a collective unit, hijacking the virtual actual feedback of this world and constructing intersectional family customs, rites, rules and new forms of life. Each member is a scholar in their own right; your days follow a strict routine of work, study, practice, rest and community life, not unlike the early life routines of children.



