 Everything to Play For
OceanofPDF.com

 OceanofPDF.com

 First published by Verso 2024
© Marijam Didžgalvytė 2024
All rights reserved
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2
Verso
UK: 6 Meard Street, London W1F 0EG
US: 388 Atlantic Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11217
versobooks.com
Verso is the imprint of New Left Books
ISBN-13: 978-1-80429-324-9
ISBN-13: 978-1-80429-325-6 (UK EBK)
ISBN-13: 978-1-80429-326-3 (US EBK)
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Did, Marijam, author.
Title: Everything to play for : how videogames are changing the world / by Marijam Did.
Description: First edition paperback. | London ; New York : Verso Books, 2024. | Includes
bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2024014080 (print) | LCCN 2024014081 (ebook) | ISBN 9781804293249
(paperback) | ISBN 9781804293263 (ebk)
Subjects: LCSH: Video games – History. | Video games industry.
Classification: LCC GV1469.3 .D52 2024 (print) | LCC GV1469.3 (ebook) | DDC 794.8 –
dc23/eng/20240411
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2024014080
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2024014081
Typeset in Fournier by Biblichor Ltd, Edinburgh
Printed and bound by CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon CR0 4YY

 OceanofPDF.com

 To the Jokubaičiai family – thank you for everything. I look forward to
wonderful evenings in the sun again, on the other side, smoking fish we just
caught.
OceanofPDF.com

 Contents

Introduction: Main Menu
Tutorial: History
Level I: The Theme
Level II: Communities
Level III: Efficacy
Level IV: Modes of Production
Conclusion: Final Boss
Acknowledgements
Notes
Index
OceanofPDF.com

 Introduction: Main Menu

The year was 2018 – Vladimir Putin had been re-elected for his fourth and
most influential term yet, Gazans were protesting peacefully in tens of
thousands in their fight for dignity, Prince Harry married Meghan Markle
and the US–China trade war began in earnest, with the US issuing tariffs
against China. In the world of social media, it was the year of the explosion
of TikTok and whistleblowers blowing the lid off Facebook and Cambridge
Analytica. A seismic, albeit less-discussed, shift was taking place in wider
mass culture and entertainment, too. That year, the global profits of the
videogames* industry became greater than those of the music and film
industries combined.1 Slowly but steadily, during its short fifty-year
existence, this boundless, fascinating, grotesque industry has conquered
traditional media and has become seemingly unstoppable.
Since that pivotal year for gaming, the trend has continued. When the
COVID-19 pandemic hit in 2020, concert venues, film sets, and theatres
closed their doors. Game developers, however, were not forced to pause
entertainment creation – they simply moved their hardware from office to
home and smoothly continued production. Videogames became more
popular than ever. While stuck at home with few ways to entertain
themselves, large swathes of the population bought videogames and
consoles. The pandemic was a time where, once more, game enthusiasts
could spend their evenings indoors and game without guilt, as there was
little else to do. A significant number of people either remembered gaming
from their teenage years and regained interest or, even more commonly,
discovered the world of gaming for the first time. It is now estimated that
more than two-thirds of all UK and US adults played videogames during the
pandemic.2
The power the gaming industry holds is immense – there were 3 billion
active gamers globally by 2023, and videogame sales will generate half a

 trillion dollars by 2028.3 The statistics become even more staggering when
one observes individual artefacts. Edinburgh-based Rockstar North
delivered Grand Theft Auto V (GTA V) in 2013 and, as of the time of
writing, have shipped more than 190 million copies of the game.4 In April
2018, the game became the most financially successful entertainment
product of all time, with about $6 billion in worldwide revenues.5 Its
current $8 billion revenue is larger than those of the three highest-grossing
movies of all time – Avatar (2009), Avengers: Endgame (2019) and Avatar:
The Way of Water (2022) – combined.
Despite this success, GTA V is not even the videogame with the most
significant sales numbers or the largest gaming crowd. That honour belongs
to the behemoth that is Minecraft. The quarter of a billion dollars in
confirmed sales of this 3D sandbox game is already impressive enough,6
but the game’s playtime compared to that of other cultural media tells a
staggering story. At the time of the writing of this book, the most-streamed
song on Spotify, Ed Sheeran’s 2017 megahit Shape of You, had been
listened to more than 3 billion times, a length of 24,000 years. Squid Game
– the South Korean Netflix sensation that swept the world in 2021 – boasts
190,000 years of watch time.7 According to Minecraft server statistics, in
China alone, the game had an estimated 597,607,200,000 hours of playtime
from June 2016 to May 2020. That is nearly 70,000,000 years of playtime!
In other words, the number of years back in history from now to when the
very first primates appeared on Earth. Minecraft playtime must have hit
100,000,000 years during the pandemic. The title reigns supreme as the
most-viewed game on YouTube, surpassing a trillion views in 2021.8 One
might think that children are over-represented in these statistics. Still,
according to the Entertainment Software Association, in the US, 76 per cent
of all gamers are adults, of whom 48 per cent are women.9
Electronic sports (esports) are demonstrating similar growth. The League
of Legends (2009 onwards) World Championship in 2019 was a recordbreaking esports event, boasting more than 100 million viewers.10 Most of
these fans tuned in through streaming services like Twitch and YouTube. In
comparison, the Super Bowl that same year had 98.2 million viewers across
the NFL’s digital properties and CBS.11 Even an event as global and
commercially significant as the Tokyo Olympics in 2021 drew only 17

 million viewers to its opening ceremony – a fraction of the audience
numbers that esports now regularly pull in. In addition, the esports and
gaming viewership is consistently growing every year. By contrast,
viewership of traditional sports is flatlining. The winner of the 2021 Dota 2
(2013 onw.) championship, held in Romania, took home just over $18
million. This is greater than the reward for the American Super Bowl that,
for a few days, sucks up the entirety of the Western airways every year ($11
million). The overall prize pool for the International Dota 2 championship
is $40 million, most of it crowdfunded.
Nonetheless, given the inadequate mainstream media coverage of the
development and size of digital gaming, the general public would be
forgiven for thinking that gaming is a small, unserious subculture with little
to no influence on the real world. The bit of televised news that comes
between the daily events and the weather is still dominated by what I call
old-school sports reports, which arguably cater to a shrinking audience.
More worrying and consequential is that gaming seems to be of little
interest to progressive crowds, even when they are convinced (in my view,
rightfully) that culture is where a sizeable part of the change happens.
Beyond the worlds of sport and pure entertainment, gaming has also
made serious, albeit underappreciated, strides into the realm of highbrow
culture. Videogames have occasionally featured in Western high-art cultural
institutions since the 1980s, but the last decade has witnessed the adoption
of elements of games into multimedia collections. The Victoria and Albert
Museum, MoMA and the Barbican have all organised gaming-related
exhibitions. In 2019, the Game Arts International Association (GAIA) held
its inaugural international summit of game curators in Argentina.
The temptation here is to describe a new dawn in game-making, some
fresh spring of artistic practices that are perhaps newly enabled by
technology. In fact, games have always contained outstanding opportunities
for sensual creative expression. Even as the industry was pumping out
vulgar, competitive titles barely worthy of artistic consideration, networks
of individuals enjoying a particular game found the means to break or mod
the game to their desire, bending the allocated rules and aesthetic of the
game.* As access to game-making hardware and software became more
freely available and as it became possible to store games online, games
bloomed into truly fascinating artistic inventions. Game-influenced artists
began making their way into elite museums in the 1990s. In 1998, the

 Walker Art Center in Minneapolis organised the Beyond Interface exhibit,
which featured playful web art. That was followed in 2001 by the Whitney
Museum of American Art’s BitStreams and the San Francisco Museum of
Modern Art’s 010101: Art in Technological Times.12
Among gamers, the most flourishing stream of creativity was often in the
modding community. Modders offer a deconstruction, a surreal
interpretation, of even the most basic, stereotype-clad game, with
fascinating results. Examples include the level design of the legendary firstperson shooter game Doom (1993) or a myriad of glitches discovered in
fighting games such as Street Fighter II: World Warrior (1991). These mods
display artistic genius, but modding remains underappreciated. The
computational, artificially augmented or sometimes unintentionally broken
elements of videogames have the potential to add greatly to visual
inventiveness, something that is essentially impossible to achieve in other
media.
It is much more usual to attribute artistic intentions only to games
harbouring some deeper narrative meaning. Her Story (2015) invites players
to experience the grimy daily grind of suburban English life in 1994, in a
story riddled with mystery and misery. Dear Esther (2012) strikes an
uncomfortable and ethereal note as it dissects the choices of a guilt-ridden
man, isolated on an island in the Outer Hebrides. I once heard the creator of
the game, and one of my inspirations, Dan Pinchbeck, reflect that in
videogames, ‘you get to be in a World. No other medium does that, gets
even close to doing that.’ Games offer opportunities for storytelling
unmatched by any other means, but this is only one part of the medium’s
potential for artistic expression. Sometimes what is under the hood – the
neatness of the code, the glitches, the space of distribution or the creator’s
methods of crafting the game – presents an equally compelling imaginative
argument. A myriad of approaches exists when judging a game’s cultural
quality, and this moment presents us with an opportunity to push gaming in
a particular direction.
Demanding more sophisticated, nuanced and confident output in
videogames criticism may seem like a niche pursuit, particularly at a time
when in the wider world, gaming is still perceived from such a narrow
perspective. Every once in a while, media outlets blow up with stories of
violence in videogames or of the tragic fates of gaming addicts. As in other
major entertainment genres, this young industry is rife with corruption and

 dodgy industry practices; but few parents get worried when their child is
interested in a cultural medium other than gaming. Gaming is unique in that
the entire industry and its way of operating are judged by its individual
artefacts and the behaviour of single games companies or of its individual
consumers. The world of gaming sorely lacks a multifaceted, refined
assessment of its merits and faults. Only once this has been provided can
gaming begin to transform.
And there is a lot that must be transformed! The sin begins at the moment
that games are created. Game development teams are worked to exhaustion
and burnout by the managerial class, which imposes tight, unrealistic
deadlines on the creators. Maybe the game-making process is becoming too
pricey or the team is too stretched already. No problem! To save money,
even very prestigious studios outsource development to anonymised support
studios in Eastern Europe and the Global South. Since the labour
protections in these regions are often even lower, large AAA companies,
even while reaping extraordinary profits, now employ a variety of costcutting measures, often at the expense of the workers.* Sexual harassment,
pervasive lack of diversity and inclusion, mass firings and low salaries,
especially in the quality assurance departments, are just a few of the
problems chronically plaguing this massive commercial enterprise.
The homogeneous demographic of videogame writers and designers –
generally, able-bodied white cis men in the first half of their lives – dictates
the flavour of the majority of available titles. The tropes infusing the
majority of games include women in skimpy clothes, military propaganda,
fetishisation of violence and reactionary political stances. Since many use
innovative and sometimes predatory and addictive mechanics to increase
their popularity, it is crucial to critically assess these products beyond their
narratives.
Reactionary pieces of art and literature will attract a reactionary
audience, and gaming is no exception. In addition, videogames usually have
a longer hold on the attention than other media. Of course, films and books
are dissected ad infinitum by their most ardent fans, but the sheer length of
some videogames – which can last hundreds of hours – and the varying
shape of the interactions in a given game result in an increased level of
dedication. Gaming, being a digital good adjacent to the internet and social
media, inspires gatherings of game fans in huge online forums, subreddits
and Discord channels.* Certainly, depending on the themes of a particular

 videogame – ones that are more progressive or artsy suffer from this less –
these spaces are often unmoderated, and reproduce the worst habits of
online behaviour. The slurs and insults are the least of it. Right-wing
influencers create armies in these forums, with the consequences sometimes
tragically spilling over into real life.
Zooming out and observing the videogames industry as a whole, we see
another crucial failing, fundamental to its existence, that radically separates
it from other cultural media. I call this phenomenon the dictatorship of the
console. Currently, almost all videogame devices are manufactured with
something close to slave labour in the Global South, from the killer mineral
mines in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the appalling conditions
in hardware manufacturing plants such as Foxconn and Riteng in East Asia.
The construction of this hardware is also a major contributor to climate
change. According to the investigation conducted by Lewis Gordon for The
Verge, more CO2 was emitted in the creation of Sony’s PlayStation 4
console over its first four years than by the entire population of Jamaica in
one year.13 All that pollution for one little videogame console, among the
dozens that come out every year!
In order to imagine a new kind of politics in videogames and in the way
they are marketed, perceived and critiqued, we must first reflect on the
modes of production of gaming. Videogames are the future of art,
entertainment, sports, and community organising, no matter how reluctant
some people are to accept it. They are shaping the world around us
culturally, economically, linguistically, aesthetically and politically. Our
mission, then, is not to opt out, ignoring this gargantuan industry and its
effects on the people we love and the people we fear, but to start taking the
industry very seriously. Only by injecting fresh, progressive energy into the
gaming world can we truly enjoy this invigorating, sensually unmatched
medium and its liberatory attributes.
A few years ago, hearing that I’d chosen videogames as a career, my
father introduced me to Homo Ludens by Johan Huizinga. Released in
1938, the book unpacks the importance of play in culture and society. Ludus
(play) is a primary and necessary (though not sufficient) condition for
generating culture. The book is a foundational text for academic game
studies. It establishes the significance of play as a cultural phenomenon and
of play and contest as civilising functions, as well as the themes enveloping
play and war, play and law, and even forms of play in philosophy. ‘We have

 to conclude, therefore, that civilisation is, in its earliest phases, played. It
does not come from play like a baby detaching itself from the womb: it
arises in and as play, and never leaves it.’14 Values, methods and structures
for compliance and resistance are formulated, even in an abstract state of
play.
Setting the politics of the vast commercial videogames industry to one
side, play is essential to the general mechanics of existence and, crucially,
to resistance. The unpredictable yet forceful potential of play allows for
freedom and transformation, which can be found in those moments when
the normal roles and rules of a community or society are relaxed and even
subverted. Videogames provide countless examples of such moments; these
are precious, and worth fighting for.
Are videogames a force for revolutionary good? Very rarely. Is gaming a
legitimate source of joy for millions of people, from all social and economic
backgrounds, in an increasingly fragmented world? Absolutely. Thus,
gaming deserves not only our attention, but our efforts to build an
infrastructure that improves it. At the moment, much of our play, even in the
realm of videogames, can be equated to labour; by definition, gaming
creates labour for the corporations that own the intellectual property of the
title. But these rules are not permanent; they can and should be changed.
The aim here is not to be less enthusiastic about transcendent forms of
entertainment, but to re-establish how they are created, distributed,
experienced and interpreted.
My father worked at a local radio station for essentially no money, but he
did get a few perks with the job. Our family enjoyed free tickets to city fairs
and discounts at a stationery shop, and my mum even once got a ride in a
hot air balloon! The job also kept my parents close to the intelligentsia,
bohemia and politicians of the town.15 As graduates of the Saint Petersburg
Institute of Performing Arts, during the collapse of the Soviet Union they
were poor, but they were intellectually curious – a quality they passed on to
me.
In one way, however, our home did feel wealthy: Very few households in
the late ’90s in Kaunas, Lithuania, had a personal computer. Yet, one day,
my father brought one home from work. My brother quickly discovered
how to pirate all the most recent videogames on the machine, and by the
age of seven or eight, I was already slaying monsters on Doom (1993)
fragging enemies on Quake (1996) and, soon enough, crafting a dream

 home on The Sims (2000). An entire universe of world-building, movement
and pure escapism opened up to me.
Sadly, my brother was cruel to me more regularly than I would like to
remember, but as I got good at certain videogames, he showed some respect
for me, or at least it seemed that way. The day that I won a mini-tournament
of the Windows operating system staple FreeCell and he had to hand me 10
litas (about €10) was one of the proudest and happiest of my young life. My
father was also incapable of showing much love. Gaming nurtured my
fragile relationships with the men in my life – hunting Nazi soldiers in
Return to Castle Wolfenstein (2001) or defending our settlements in
Blitzkrieg (2003) became a bonding ritual. While exploring a bootlegged
CD copy of Conflict: Desert Storm (2002), my father first taught me about
American imperialism. Driving around the fictional city of Lost Heaven in a
taxi, we listened to the 1930s jazz soundtrack of Mafia (2002) for hours.
Without these difficult and, at times, hurtful men, I would not have
discovered the strange, exhilarating, consuming world of videogames.
Becoming a regular at our local gaming arcade in my early teenage years
was a natural progression in my curiosity for digital games. ‘Arcade’ is a
generous word for what was essentially a hideout for a bunch of young lost
souls in a wooden house painted bright yellow, brimming with old consoles,
PCs and messy, dusty cables.16 I grew up in a very deprived neighbourhood
notable for abandoned kids, antisocial behaviour, drugs, alcohol and abuse;
the ’90s were not easy on Eastern Europeans. However, sitting by a
PlayStation 2, uploading Street Fighter II or a racing game, and competing
gently allowed us to forget our circumstances for a moment. The family’s
financial anxieties, my parents’ inevitable divorce, a terrifying sibling – all
of these concerns left my body when I was on a fictional SWAT mission in
downtown Washington, DC, or when I gained an advantage in a level of
Command and Conquer: Tiberian Sun (1999).
Details aside, my early encounter with the world of videogames is a
common one, an experience familiar to many – a story of bonding, the
creation of social relations and healthy competition. A collection of
positives, the preferable and preferred account of gaming as told by games
companies themselves. It is not so for everyone, however. The tentacles of
this juggernaut of an industry stretch further and are seldom discussed.
Gaming is beloved for reasons that are often wrong, and may be loathed by
people who are completely ignorant about it. Videogames are known for the

 often racist and sexist rhetoric in their narrative portrayal. At the same time,
games are praised for their ability to connect people. They introduce joy and
a sense of community to individuals on the margins of society. However,
the brutal modes of production and imperialist propaganda implicit in the
medium are rarely examined. Videogames are blamed for violence among
young people and the existence of mass shootings, but the connections
between the organised far right and the gaming communities are not noticed
even by the progressive left. People who play videogames constantly
engage in reciprocal altruism and self-organisation, expanding the horizons
of what is conceivable, and yet the people making the games often suffer
under unbearable conditions and work at the behest of brutal company
structures.
The industry is brimming with politics, but what those politics are is in
constant dispute. It is not a fixed space, although the upper hand currently
lies with the powers that formulated this industry through rapacious
practices. The question for this moment is, how can videogames be
deployed for egalitarian purposes?
No creative medium is unaffected by capitalist modes of production.
Videogames certainly have a reputation for encouraging and exemplifying
the predatory, neoliberal, regressive tendencies we recognise around us.
Still, to billions, gaming is a space for respite, for building lives not yet
lived, structures not yet imagined. And, as such, it has to be fought for. The
crossroads is clear – we can either allow this vast cultural space to be
eternally entangled in the awkward nets of conservativism and
financialisation that will suffocate and deform both it and the players who
touch it, or we can fight to rescue it. We can battle to build a mature and
potentially emancipatory digital medium that opens possibilities for worlds
not yet constructed.
While frequenting messy local gaming establishments and chaotic LAN
parties,* I discovered another pastime that would allow me to escape from
the dark everyday – political organising. Sure, it may have been draped in
punk aesthetic and youthful idealism at the time, and yet egalitarian
thought, solidarity and the pitfalls of capitalism – all these concepts began
to accurately explain the world around me. They began to inform much of
what would become my focus for years.
Similar to many people of my generation, my political convictions
formed in two waves – witnessing the atrocities of the Iraq War in 2003 and

 experiencing the financial crisis five years later. The latter had grave
consequences for my own quiet life. My mother, freshly divorced and in her
late forties, was unable to find work for a prolonged period of time. Our
choices were to stay in Lithuania with no food on the table or for her to
work for £4 an hour in a factory in England. The ruling class of the United
Kingdom wanted cheap labour; and the inclusion of Lithuania in the
European Union in 2004 certainly provided the conditions for that. For us, it
was a salvation.
I was swiftly installed in a sixth form in Leyton in East London, leaving
my ska-punk band and fully fledged anarchist community in my beloved
Kaunas behind. A year into living with fourteen other Eastern Europeans in
a tiny terraced house and staying with my mum in one tiny room, at the age
of seventeen, I knew that my only alternative was squatting.*
There I was, thrown into a new country for economic reasons, with a new
language, a new school, later a new, alienating service industry job and an
entirely new activist milieu with its own traditions and idioms. Partially in
search of a community and partially due to genuine faith, I gravitated
towards these circles dedicated to left-wing political organising. This
involved local housing campaigns, anti-raid and anti-fascist demonstrations,
and all manner of expressions of resistance towards the oppressive state
apparatus. Long days of battles with bailiffs, fascists or the police ended in
exhaustion. Methods for rest and recuperation had their own rules and
practices in my circles – wholesome activities such as gardening, biking and
arts and crafts were encouraged and supported. Losing oneself in a digital
space with a small body count of pixelated demons – that type of escapism
was judged, and even prohibited. Once, my friends and I were forbidden
from having a videogame console at a squatted social centre where we were
volunteering, as it simply didn’t fit the pure, ‘healthy’ aesthetics the space
was attempting to emanate. Gaming became something I did in secret,
rarely sharing any insights about this hobby with my fellow comrades.
Slowly I realised that gaming was not only an escape from my political
life, but would become crucial for comprehending the political forces
around me. Something clicked in 2016 when I read a headline that profits in
videogames were about to top those of the music and film industries
combined. Gaming is not a periphery of culture, unworthy of serious
political examination; it is much closer to the centre. At this point, I began
to seriously, albeit still passively, explore the connection between

 videogames and social change. I was convinced that videogames are, in
fact, key to identifying and perhaps even solving the current muddle of
crises in the twenty-first century.
In its short fifty-year history, gaming has consistently and subtly taken over
billions of people’s free time. It is the largest entertainment strand there is,
and yet its significance for our society is seldom noted. At least, not by the
people who purport to be changemakers – members of the cultural, artistic
and media communities, the activist class and academia. Art and Agenda,
Art and Politics Now and Artificial Hells are among the numerous books
written on the impact of fine art on our society. Entire university courses are
dedicated to the subject. Such treatment is rarely given to gaming, although
the global art industry is four times smaller. Even worse – there exists a
pervasive prejudice against gaming among well-meaning progressives.
My ambition here is nothing less than to recruit an army of gamechangers for this vast and influential field, which shapes so much of what is
around us. And yet my approach is infused with purposeful contradictions –
love and passion for this exhaustively mesmerising and charming artistic
expression, alongside contempt for its exploitative tendencies and practices
at the cutting edge of capitalist reproduction. ‘While games tend to have a
reactionary imperial content, as militarized, marketized, entertainment
commodities, they also tend to a radical, multitudinous form, as
collaborative, constructive, experimental digital productions,’ game
academics Dyer-Witheford and de Peuter point out.17
I was still an unbearable Goldsmiths art school kid when I discovered the
writings of the academic one of the college’s buildings is named after.
Stuart Hall insisted that pop culture is a space of push and pull. It is a
battleground. He understood that shaping popular culture is an ongoing
process in which relations of control and subordination constantly shift, and
specific cultural forms gain and lose support from institutions. Which
cultural content and forms are preferred and which are marginalised is not
fixed. According to Hall, there is a constant movement and interchange
between them due to shifting power relations, the assimilation of popular
content into ‘high culture’ and vice versa, and the use of pop culture to
disseminate the interests of the status quo.18

 Hall retained faith that culture was a site of ‘negotiation’, as he put it, a
space of give and take where intended meanings could be short-circuited.
‘Popular culture is one of the sites where this struggle for and against a
culture of the powerful is engaged: it is also the stake to be won or lost in
that struggle,’ he argued. ‘It is the arena of consent and resistance.’19 Over
his lifetime, Hall became fascinated with theories of ‘reception’ – how we
decode the different messages that culture tells us and how culture helps us
choose our identities.
He was not merely interested in interpreting new forms, such as film or
television, using the tools that scholars had previously brought to bear on
literature; he was also concerned to understand the various political,
economic and social forces that converged in these media. It was not just
the content or the language of the nightly news or of middlebrow magazines
that told us what to think, it was also how they were structured, packaged
and distributed – namely, by individuals with structural, institutional power.
Not many know who these key players with institutional power are, who
roam the gaming spaces, influencing the world around us.
Before taking a job as a political adviser at the Trump White House,
Steve Bannon was running Breitbart News – a grotesque, fascist online
media outlet with articles such as ‘Birth Control Makes Women
Unattractive and Crazy’, ‘Bill Kristol: Republican Spoiler, Renegade Jew’
and ‘The Solution to Online “Harassment” Is Simple: Women Should Log
Off’. His career before Breitbart? In 2007, he was an investor in a large
virtual gold mine: the hugely popular, massively multiplayer, online roleplaying game World of Warcraft (2004 onw.).
The business model was simple – employ armies of poorly paid Chinese
‘gold farmers’, who played in long rotating shifts, repeating grunt tasks in
the game to gain gold and rarer items. These would then be sold, with a
significant added price, to Western gamers willing to pay real-world dollars
to avoid the grind of World of Warcraft. In his own words, what Bannon
found was a world ‘populated by millions of intense young men’, who may
have been socially inept, but were ‘smart, focused, relatively wealthy, and
highly motivated about issues that mattered to them’. ‘These guys,’ said
Bannon, ‘these rootless, white males had monster power. It was the preReddit.’20 His venture did not succeed monetarily – following numerous
lawsuits and pressure from the players, he ended this tactic. But one of the
darkest public relations architects of the Western world was about to have a

 eureka moment. When his time in the spotlight came, less than a decade
later, he was quick to utilise the tactics he’d learnt with World of Warcraft.
During his tenure as the editor in chief of Breitbart News, Bannon
employed one Milo Yiannopoulos. According to Yiannopoulos, Bannon
made him into a star. He worked for the outlet’s wing in the United
Kingdom, where he wrote pieces like ‘Would You Rather Your Child Had
Feminism or Cancer?’ and ‘World Health Organization Report: Trannies 49
Xs Higher HIV Rate’. The headlines say a little bit about his politics.
In 2014, this flirtation between the far right and some gaming
communities reached its apogee, and with Bannon’s blessing, Yiannopoulos
became a significant voice during the Gamergate controversy. Gamergate
was one of the first online harassment campaign, and one of the most severe
ever. Beginning in August 2014, the campaign targeted women in the
videogame industry, most notably feminist media critic Anita Sarkeesian
and developers Zoë Quinn and Brianna Wu, among others. The harassment
campaign included doxxing them and their families and friends and sending
rape threats and death threats. At least once, Sarkeesian was forced to
cancel a guest lecture at the last minute as the intended venue received a
bomb threat.
Gamergaters claimed to promote ethics in videogames journalism and to
protect the ‘gamer’ identity. They opposed what they saw as political
correctness in videogames. The harassers typically organised anonymously
on online platforms such as 4chan, Twitter and Reddit. Yiannopoulos
engineered a sophisticated numbers campaign and made contact with
influential figures in 4chan and Reddit to make #Gamergate a viral success;
it wouldn’t be an exaggeration to call it a training ground for Trump’s
campaign and eventual election victory. In autumn 2014, nine #Gamergaterelated articles were published on Breitbart News. In the past, Bannon had
demonstrated open contempt towards gamers on the website – until the
editors realised that gamers are an often malleable group of people who
could be used for their political goals. They weren’t wrong!
As I heard about Gamergate and its close ties to the far right, being an
active anti-fascist organiser myself and by now grasping the economic
impact of this industry, I knew I had to get involved. At first, this took the
form of a weekly personal blog with texts about videogames and real-life
politics. Although extremely imaginative, the industry tends to be relatively
insular. As my tone and radical point of view stood out, the articles and my

 Twitter commentary suddenly got picked up – within months I was writing
for Vice, the Guardian and some of the largest gaming sites, such as Kotaku
and GamesIndustry.biz. While still working service-industry jobs and
participating in medical trials for money, I launched my own bite-sized
video show, Left Left Up, which dissected the games industry from a
historical materialist perspective. The good reception that followed allowed
me to elevate the subject matter to the next level – real-life events such as
Tetris (1984) tournaments that raised funds for progressive causes in the UK
and abroad, or setting up gaming events adjacent to an anti-fascist football
club. My aim was to introduce gaming as a political space for the left,
whose members surrounded me, and to introduce politics in an accessible
manner to individuals connected with the videogames industry.
All this didn’t feel like enough, though. And then I found myself in the
right place at the right time, and the stakes moved a notch higher at last. In
March 2018, at the annual Game Developers Conference in San Francisco,
the Game Workers Unite movement was born. A few workers, tired of the
appalling conditions they often had to endure, took matters into their own
hands and aired their grievances at an anti-union ‘round table’ organised by
the business (boss) wing of the industry. After the event, they exchanged
contacts, and numerous branches of the game worker network sprung up. A
few comrades and I rushed in to connect the local game workers that we
knew with the radical Independent Workers’ Union of Great Britain. And
thus the world’s first legal games industry trade union inspired by the
movement was born. In the meantime, I also started volunteering in
delivering communications for the Game Workers Unite International
network.
I saw trade union organising not only through its labour axis, but as a
gateway to introducing material politics to the lost members of the alt-right.
It must have worked to a certain extent: numerous people got in touch
stating that they had shifted their politics from reactionary and exclusionary
to more egalitarian, placing class at the centre. Political victories aside,
these were also the psychologically toughest years of my life – who knew
kicking up a fuss in the face of the most powerful individuals in the most
powerful entertainment industry of all time would lead to the complete
breaking of a person? It must have meant that we were effecting change.
But this beast – the current perverse foundations of this business – will need
a stronger kicking before an alternative can emerge.

 Politics in videogames stretch from the minutiae of a narrative and activities
of the title’s communities to the ownership of the code and of entire
hardware factories. All that happens within those spaces manifests itself on
a spectrum that is ripe for negotiation. It’s an Overton window that has
already pulled in so much of entertainment, culture, global economics and
political organisation. Is it possible to manoeuvre it towards a route of
emancipation, poise and abundance?
Or perhaps it is too late? Are we wasting our time in imagining
videogames beyond – dare I say the big word? – capitalism? Hardware
made from sustainable materials by co-operatives and distributed in a
sustainable manner. Accommodating videogames, made under great work
conditions that inspire boundless levels of imagination. Another world is
possible, but it must be fought for. We get enough judgement already from
our mates for playing games instead of going out. I look forward to a day
where I won’t have to be embarrassed about gaming on grounds of ethics,
either.
To a keen gamer, a seasoned games industry critic or a games professional,
this book will crystallise a list of aspects to pay attention to when evaluating
and scrutinising a videogame for its social efficacy. It is structured into
Levels – the reader will be increasingly challenged when exploring themes
surrounding videogames and IRL politics. The beginning of this book – the
Tutorial – takes the reader through a compounded political history of the
videogames industry, mainly focusing on the formation and configuration of
the power players who shaped how this arena is perceived and experienced
today.
Few technologies possess inherent civic agendas; they simply land in the
hands of particular influence groups, which then utilise the technology for
their own benefit. Nothing was inevitable about gaming growing into its
current state: a toxic, misogynist, imperial wasteland with few, albeit
crucial, saving graces. In a few short decades, distinct actors made it that
way. It could easily have turned out differently, and books like this one set
out to inspire the imagination needed to make gaming completely different.
But to move forward, we must understand how we got here. This
introductory chapter serves as a toolbox, arming the reader with helpful
terminology and concepts that will be used throughout the book.

 As readers begin the journey, Level I invites them to consider the obvious
– the themes of videogames. As with most cultural artefacts, viewers tend to
experience and judge games according to the stories they tell. Historically,
videogames have not been subtle on that front. Developers often attach
politically insensitive, propaganda-laced themes and tropes onto exciting
mechanics. Whether it’s the story or the stereotypical portrayal of
characters, or a needlessly brutal mechanic, or a particular moral to the
story – narrative plays a key role in how a game is perceived. On the other
hand, a growing number of socially conscious developers are crafting
games with plots that they hope will convince the player of some
progressive values. But is it enough? This section explores the initial
surface-level representation of a particular agenda, prior to going into the
ludological aspect of a videogame (ludology being the science of games and
play).
Level II complicates how we understand the political intentions of the
players of videogames. Gaming communities often construct relations and
languages seemingly in contrast to the motifs of a given game. While game
makers seem to have the power to forge the narratives of their games,
communities interpreting their games may not only fail to correspond with
the designers’ hopes, but they may even play these games against their
creator’s intentions. Furthermore, not all games are linear or driven by a
straightforward narrative – however, politics persist. Why is that? This
chapter investigates the phenomenon of political identity-building in the
expanse outside of the walls of games like Minecraft, Roblox (2006 onw.),
Fantasy Westward Journey (2001 onw.) and EVE Online (2003 onw.).
Let’s say a game development team has achieved the near impossible: to
craft a sophisticated, deep videogame with social critique, which has not
been appropriated by forces that would like to twist that message. The
million-dollar question is, can videogames be of political utility, if and
when directed for that cause? There are still so many obstacles facing any
game developer attempting to create a piece of digital art somehow
independent from the current modes of production. The very few and
centralised purchasing platforms make it exceptionally hard to bring a game
to an audience. The game must compete with titles backed by well-funded
entities of the industry, who often prey on consumers with the latest
addictive gambling techniques. Above all, developers need to deal with the
highly influential members of the liberal milieu who act as gatekeepers to

 any material changes to the industry – be it unionisation, art that explores
uncomfortable themes, or a substantial change in the reliance on the
hardware that is often created under brutal conditions. Level III invites
readers to ponder the efficacy of videogames with an agenda, often
contrasting their techniques to similar processes used in comparable artistic
media.
Level IV compels the reader to keep climbing higher, keep fighting
harder. Even if a game creator has done everything right, offering a
powerful, challenging theme that does not preach to the converted,
attracting an empathetic activist community and using modes of distribution
that introduce the creation to new audiences … videogames still comprise a
fundamental sin. The chapter adds further complexity when discussing
politics in gaming, studio structure and hardware creation issues, as well as
the blood, sweat and tears of so many just to deliver us our digital
entertainment. This presents a fundamental challenge to the creators who
are working within this industry in good faith and attempting to promote
change.
After four levels that lead the reader into various corners of this extensive
entertainment strand, a Final Boss battle will commence. At this stage, the
reader is armed with knowledge about the innovations and communication
techniques in this extraordinary industry, the fascinating demographic
groups shaping it and the deeply affecting artistic minds working in it.
Additionally, they are faced with the horrifying scale and ferocity of the
destruction this industry causes worldwide and the misery it brings to entire
populations. The techniques and procedures practised in the privacy of
gaming communities spill over into some of the darkest aspects of real-life
reactionary organising. What is to be done, if anything? Is gaming worth
fighting for? Can an alternative to the current state of things be achieved?
What would a non-destructive games industry look like? Few, but crucial,
parts of this engrossing industry can be left unchanged – what are they?
Only a glimpse into the ashes after a final battle can begin to answer those
questions.
While this book outlines numerous cases of gaming that cause active
harm to the world around us, only someone who dearly loves this universe
can offer a reasonable critique. My mission here is to rescue gaming, to
overhaul it, to work towards its emancipation, rather than have it turn us
into perfect capitalist subjects. Instead of accepting a dialectic of refusal and

 recuperation, inevitably ending in cynicism and failure, I turn towards
culture as a clear political terrain, as a terrain for organisation and action
from below.
There is nothing permanently determined or natural about the current
state of affairs. It emerged due to power relations, an endless chase for
cheap profits resulting in a chronic undermining of ingenuity. So, indeed,
everything is to play for.
* On the use of the word ‘videogame’, there is an ongoing debate within the gaming community
(honestly, just Google it!) as to whether the term should be one or two words: ‘videogames’ or ‘video
games’. While the Oxford English Dictionary lists it as two words, which has made this form the
more common use, I’m in the one-word camp. As I see it, the term ‘video games’ denotes ‘games that
utilise video technology’, and while the medium may have begun its history as the ‘video’ variant of
parlour games, the last half-century of growth and sophistication has brought it a long way from its
origins. Videogames today are much more than ‘video’ in their technology and much more than
‘games’ in their content. The medium as a whole could more accurately be described as ‘digital
experiences’. Given that the old legacy name is unlikely to be re-evaluated anytime soon, I’d rather
make it a portmanteau word, hinting that what used to be a variant has now grown into its own
unique set of qualities. Hence, videogames.
* Videogame modding (short for ‘modification’) is the process whereby players or fans alter one
or more aspects of a videogame, such as how it looks or behaves.
* AAA (Triple-A): a classification used within the videogaming industry to signify high-budget,
high-profile games that are typically produced and distributed by large, well-known publishers.
* Discord: a voice-over IP and instant messaging social platform with more than 150 million
monthly users as of 2021, mostly utilised by gaming communities.
* LAN party: a gathering of people with computers or compatible game consoles, where a local
area network (LAN) connection is established between the devices using a router or a switch.
* Squatting (more familiar to UK readers) is the action of occupying empty buildings, usually for
the purposes of housing. The BBC reported that in 2011, there were ‘20,000 squatters in the UK’ and
‘650,000 empty properties’.
OceanofPDF.com

 Tutorial: History

Many of the technological advances of today – the World Wide Web, the
foundational fragments of the iPhone, the Global Positioning System (GPS)
that enables geolocation and numerous others – share their roots in various
publicly funded laboratories, universities and army research centres across
the world.1 Videogames have a similar origin story. In the 1950s, digital
games were largely confined to research labs run by universities,
corporations or publicly funded laboratories. They were not intended for
mass distribution or even general consumption. This public research enables
most of the inner mechanisms that allow us to spend our free time zoning
out in digital universes. Semiconductors, triodes, integrated transistors,
memory controllers, cache designs and so on were invented at institutions
like PARC Xerox, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), the
University of Cambridge and Stanford University, which are all bankrolled
by taxpayer money.
The earliest public demonstration of a digital device that also contained a
game took place at the 1950 Canadian National Exhibition. The four-metretall computer, quirkily named Bertie the Brain, was created to research the
capabilities of electronic circuits.2 It invited the exhibition attendees to play
a game of tic-tac-toe against an artificial intelligence. After the two-week
display, Bertie was disassembled and forgotten as a curiosity. Elsewhere,
scientists programmed digital versions of games like chess and checkers.
But play was not seen as the mission here: these pieces of software were
constructed to calculate numerical probabilities and other statistics.
Tennis for Two, developed at the Brookhaven National Laboratory in
1958, is seen by many game historians as the first true videogame. Rather
than being an academic project or a scientific showpiece, this primitive
tennis simulator had little game design or technological innovation. Its
purpose was to entertain, to encourage play and competition. Unlike any

 predecessors, Tennis for Two had a competitive element and a visual design
that sought to be amusing.3
During the next decade, numerous similar machines were devised to run
games that had an increasing level of sophistication in interaction, graphics
and entertainment value. Academics and students at Carnegie Mellon
University, MIT and Harvard University were experimenting in this new
field of crafting playful experiences through computational contraptions.
The breakthrough came a decade later.
At the other end of the entertainment product spectrum, mechanical coinoperated arcade devices were a popular staple of most amusement fairs in
the first half of the twentieth century. These machines were spun into their
own industry with penny arcades – entire specialised physical spaces for
leisure and gambling. Coin-operated slot, pinball and fortune-telling
machines brought in huge crowds, but they had clear limitations.
Building digital devices for the purpose of play, on the other hand, was
incredibly expensive. But by the 1960s, a growing number of individuals
with large imaginations correctly concluded that digital gaming might be
the next big thing. Ted Dabney and his colleague Nolan Bushnell were
shown Spacewar!, an early videogame developed at the Stanford Artificial
Intelligence Laboratory. The pair became fixated on the idea of introducing
digital games to the masses. Bushnell combined his expertise in digital
engineering and part-time work at an amusement park. Dabney excelled at
analogue and hardware engineering. Together, they worked out how to
make a digital arcade device economically feasible. After a few trials and
tribulations, the pair formulated ways to manipulate a video signal on the
screen without a computer controlling it. Later, they removed the expensive
part – the computer – altogether. By using discrete logic circuits instead,
Bushnell and Dabney manufactured a system that was reliable, less
complex and, most importantly, much cheaper than computers.4
In 1971, Computer Space, a coin-operated arcade device, became the first
videogame to be released commercially. The game was presented in a
curvy, futuristic fibreglass cabinet, which had been designed by Bushnell
with modelling clay, built by a swimming pool manufacturer and painted in
bright, glittery colours. Computer Space sold 1,000 units (a non-digital
arcade game at the time might have sold around 2,000 units), which did not
give Bushnell and Dabney the overnight success they had hoped for. Still,
they felt sufficiently encouraged to incorporate themselves into a company

 called Atari and hired their first employee, computer scientist and engineer
Allan Alcorn. Their destinies were about to change forever.5
Vast technological advances in the digital gaming arena rapidly occurred
during this period. Numerous actors got involved; the race was on.
In 1972, an arm of Magnavox, a hardware electronics company, released
their version of ‘the new electronic gaming field of the future’, or a ‘closedcircuit electronic playground’. Their technical solution was Odyssey, the
first commercial videogame home console, which took a different approach
to what a console ought to be. What if, instead of trying to source all the
computing power necessary to run a game from a separate machine, they
used the inbuilt capabilities of a television set? Most people who were
interested in playing games were likely to have one already. This new home
console also allowed consumers to purchase separate cartridges with chosen
videogames on them. In contrast to Atari, which banked at the time on
shared spaces and separate devices, the home console market began to
shape up.
The development of Odyssey moved gaming closer to the kind of
experience we are familiar with today. The home console sold around
70,000 units, slightly below the projected performance. This was mostly
due to its steep price of $99.95 (the 2024 equivalent of $740) and the
unfamiliarity of the whole concept. Many assumed that the device worked
exclusively with Magnavox brand television sets. Still, the high customer
satisfaction reports in surveys convinced the company to continue investing
in the console.
Although consumers who played Atari’s Computer Space said they
enjoyed it, they also voiced frustration about the complexity of the
instructions. Bushnell and Dabney understood that their next game had to
be much more elementary. After witnessing a demonstration of the Table
Tennis game played on the Odyssey console in early 1972, Bushnell
directed Alcorn to produce a table tennis game fit for an arcade.
Developed swiftly in three months, the result was the now-legendary
Pong, and the rest is history. The controls were indeed simple this time: an
in-game paddle could be moved vertically across the left or right side of the
screen, while players bounced the ball (a dot on the screen) back and forth
from one side of the screen to the other. The goal was for one player to
reach eleven points; points were earned when one player failed to return the
ball to the other. The players could compete against each other or against

 the game itself. During a trial at a bar near Atari, the Pong cabinet drew in
huge crowds, with a queue of players forming in the street.6
Atari knew they had a winner on their hands. To avoid competition
snapping at their heels and, even worse, a complete replica of their game,
they sped up the production process of the physical arcade cabinet. By
1974, an estimated 100,000 coin-operated gaming machines were in place
in the United States, bringing in half a billion dollars that year.7
Videogames were now global, with Japan and Europe launching their
own industries and establishing customer bases. The Japanese game market,
mostly focussed on export, produced timeless consoles such as Super
Nintendo Entertainment Systems (SNES). With origins in analogue playing
cards and toys, Nintendo entered the digital games market in the 1980s with
the first handheld mini console, called Game and Watch. The device sold
43.4 million copies and became the company’s most popular product in its
100-year history.8 The mini console’s neat, minimal look, quality build and
ease of use revolutionised the market for handheld game hardware and
shifted the games industry eastwards.
From then on, Nintendo pivoted specifically towards gaming and became
a cornerstone of the global games industry. Until Game and Watch, the
company had been mostly known for their electronic toys, such The Love
Tester (1969), a novelty that measured the ‘love compatibility’ between two
people holding hands and touching the sensors on the device, and The Ultra
Machine (1967), an automatic baseball pitching toy. Today, Nintendo is a
giant of both games hardware and software. The company has sold more
than half a billion devices in the forms of Game Boy (1989, 1996),
Nintendo Switch (2017), the Super Nintendo Entertainment System (SNES;
1990) and Nintendo DS (2004), and they own some of the most profitable
IP products of all time.9 Pokémon (1996 onw.), The Legend of Zelda (1986
onw.) and Super Mario (1985 onw.) are all major staples of pop culture, and
their new releases are surrounded by enormous hype.
A few key players emerged in Europe as well. The British BBC console
paved the way for the UK to become a creative powerhouse in
contemporary game development. The Cambridge-based Sinclair Research
developed the ZX80 computer, which was successfully exported across the
continent. In the mid-1980s, British game studios such as Rare created
games that became big local hits, and the Scottish DMA Design eventually

 became the giant that is Rockstar North – the makers of the Grand Theft
Auto series.
The former Yugoslavia became another European capital of game
making: for example, Galaksija was a modular, DIY computer product
designed in Belgrade that offered a cheaper gaming alternative to the
consoles of the time. Game studios were also established in Croatia,
Slovenia and Slovakia, among other countries.10 The lack of access to
hardware in the Soviet Union hindered its progress on the game-making
front, but it was still home to one of the most famous videogames of all
time – Tetris.
Nonetheless, it is almost impossible not to locate the political history of
videogames in the United States. In the process of developing gaming,
Western technological powerhouses actively stifled innovation elsewhere.
Capital and research power were concentrated in the US in this crucial
period, inducing a snowball effect, with subsequent discoveries in
technology taking place within similar circles. Those discoveries were then
advertised and semi-imposed onto the rest of the world with heavy
proprietary guards.
On the other hand, the 1960s and early 1970s were also a unique time in
the US, when large sums of public funds were diverted into scientific
research. Many individuals forming private companies wanted to be close
to the action. Silicon Valley became a hub for the exchange of ideas and
iterations, and sometimes straight-up idea theft, all with the aim of
funnelling publicly acquired knowledge into privatised industries.
Who Gets to Play
The process of making games was inaccessible to most, which solidified a
stratified cabal of change-makers in this field. Their mission was to advance
specific technologies and a new commodity market, rather than interrogate
the cultural and political significance of this new terrain. As the history in
the following section demonstrates, the demographics of the people behind
these innovations also proved to be significant and, unsurprisingly, a point
of contestation.
The conscription of men during the Second World War resulted in the
technology, manufacturing and research sectors becoming dependent on

 women workers. During that period, women were responsible for
coordinating ballistics computing, a task seen by the remaining male
engineers as below their level of expertise. In the 1940s, way before the
time of videogames, almost all the people employed as computers (yes, that
was actually the term!) were women. According to MIT professor Jennifer
S. Light, even men acknowledged that ‘programming requires lots of
patience, persistence and a capacity for detail and those are traits that many
girls have.’11
Grace Hopper was one of the first women to earn a PhD in mathematics
from Yale in 1934. One of the first three modern ‘programmers’, Hopper is
best known for her trailblazing contributions to the development of
computer languages. She volunteered as a lieutenant in the US Naval
Reserves during the war. The Navy assigned her to the Bureau of Ordnance
computation project at Harvard, where her assignment was to program the
Mark I computer. She even coined the term ‘computer bug’, after a moth
shorted out the Mark II model.
Similarly, in Britain, Joan Clarke worked closely with Alan Turing on the
all-important Enigma machine, built in Bletchley Park. Many of the men
who developed methods increasing the speed of double-encrypted messages
had the techniques named after them. That was not the case with Clarke,
whose contributions have been largely forgotten by history.
In 1962, three Black women – Katherine Johnson, Mary Jackson and
Dorothy Vaughan – worked as NASA mathematicians and helped calculate
the flight paths that put John Glenn into orbit. An award-winning
Hollywood movie, Hidden Figures, celebrates the influential and inspiring
trio. But the period when women headed tech and, by extension, games,
was short-lived. In the aftermath of World War II, the percentage of women
programmers in the United States collapsed: only around 40 per cent of
computer programmers were women in the 1950s, and 25 per cent by 1960.
Today, around 8 per cent of programmers in the United States are women,
and the statistics don’t look better elsewhere in the world. While women
occupy a rising number of positions in art, design and human resources in
videogames companies, they are still a rarity among coders.
What were the conditions that prompted this dramatic demographic shift?
By 2017, a male programmer at Google was confidently circulating a memo
that used gender stereotypes to argue that women were inherently worse at
programming than men. ‘Women, on average, have more: Neuroticism

 (higher anxiety, lower stress tolerance). This may contribute to the higher
levels of anxiety women report on Googlegeist and to the lower number of
women in high-stress jobs,’ the memo reads. What was the path to this state
of affairs?
In her 2018 book, Brotopia: Breaking Up the Boys’ Club of Silicon
Valley, Emily Chang describes this transition insightfully and in great detail.
While her findings focus on the tech industry at large, they can be readily
applied to the games industry, too. As this exciting, brand-new field of tech
began to boom, and thousands more employees were required, large
companies used technical aptitude tests to identify and recruit programmers.
These tests filtered for traits that were thought to be essential to good
programming, such as logical thinking and abstract reasoning. In 1967
alone, 700,000 people took the IBM Programmer Aptitude Test, which at
the time was the gateway into the vocation.
However, aptitude tests were not enough for some, and a more
‘psychological’ evaluation was required to pinpoint not only good
programmers, but ‘happy’ programmers, who might stay in the profession
and in the workplace long-term. In the mid-1960s, a branch of IBM called
the System Development Corporation commissioned two psychologists,
William M. Cannon and Dallas K. Perry, to define a vocational interest
scale for programmers, a personality profile that would predict which types
had a good chance of becoming happy programmers. Cannon and Perry
profiled 1,378 programmers, only 186 of whom were women, and used
their findings to build a scale that they believed could predict satisfaction
and therefore success in the field.
Based on their survey, they concluded that people who liked solving
puzzles of various sorts, from mathematical to mechanical, made for good
programmers. That made sense. Their second conclusion was far more
speculative. Based on the data they had gathered from mostly male
programmers, Cannon and Perry decided that satisfied programmers shared
one striking characteristic: they ‘don’t like people’. In their final report,
they wrote, specifically, that programmers ‘dislike activities involving close
personal interaction; they are generally more interested in things than in
people’.
The limitations that this characterisation entailed for women’s careers
was immense. However, it is worth noting that the birth of the stereotype of
the reclusive, socially inept, nerdy man was also detrimental to men’s

 perceptions of themselves. Out of such framing, subcultures are formed and
within them, margins where radicalisation can happen. At that point in
history, these practices not just reflected, but actively constructed and
determined much of how gaming looks today.
Cannon and Perry declared that their new Programmer Scale was more
‘appropriate’ than existing aptitude tests and that it would help schools,
vocational counselling centres and recruiters across the country screen for
the best programmers. The use of their personality test became widespread,
which meant that people were being recruited not solely because of their
talent or interest level but, at least in part, because of dubious assumptions
about what type of personality made for a happy and productive
programmer. This was the beginning of an enduring stereotype that has
limited opportunities in the field for generations of women and people of
other marginalised genders or otherwise affected demographics.12
Another reason for this steep decline in acceptance could have something
to do with how and when children were learning to program. The advent of
personal computers in the late 1970s redefined the pool of students who
pursued computer science degrees at American universities. Until that time,
computers were a scarce and costly commodity, found mostly within
research facilities or corporate environments that provided a level playing
field – coding was new to all students. This shifted with the introduction of
personal computers, such as the Commodore 64 and the TRS-80. Families
that could afford these machines gave their children a head start in
programming skills. By the mid-1980s, students embarking on their courses
were already proficient programmers.
Technology was beginning to be marketed to a certain population,
predominantly white men, and this was reflected in the students who
enrolled. Clive Thompson wrote in the New York Times feature ‘The Secret
History of Women in Coding’: ‘Boys were more than twice as likely to have
been given one as a gift by their parents. And if parents bought a computer
for the family, they most often put it in a son’s room, not a daughter’s.’13
Thompson interviewed Jane Margolis, an academic from Carnegie
Mellon University, who painted a revealing picture. ‘Unless one had been
coding obsessively for years, they were not welcome in the classroom.’
Margolis continued: ‘While it was okay for the men to want to engage in
various other pursuits, women who expressed the same wish felt judged for
not being “hard core” enough. By the second year, many of these women,

 besieged by doubts, began dropping out of the program.’ According to a
1983 study of MIT students,
Women who raised their hands in class were often ignored by
professors and talked over by other students … Behaviour in some
research groups ‘sometimes approximates that of the locker room’, the
report concluded, with men openly rating how ‘cute’ their female
students were.14
Of course, in the late 1970s, the need to possess and know how to work a
personal computer excluded not only women from the tech industry, but
people from working-class backgrounds. In North America, this disparity
disproportionately affected Black, Latino and indigenous populations. The
international effect was stark as well. While the United States was racing
ahead in computer literacy and building its own infrastructure, other regions
were slower due to a lack of active investment at first, and then to the need
to adhere to expensive patents and software licensing fees. A certain tech
monopoly, geared to the interests of Western hegemony, emerged.
These conditions would only begin to be challenged by decoupling the
locations of software and hardware development a few decades later. While
America was home to a lot of intellectual property, the later decision of
many US companies to outsource a hardware building would change the
balance of power. The mass adoption of digital devices in offices and homes
in the rest of the world lagged behind until the 1990s, when a shift was
largely enabled by the more accessible (that is, more pirateable) Windows
operating system.
The phenomenon of women and girls being pushed out of computer work
occurred in parallel with what was happening at Atari. Pong brought
enormous success to the company, but the real money came with the
decision to tap into the home console market, instead of exclusively
manufacturing arcade cabinets. Turns out they were pretty good at that, too.
By 1975, Atari was posting $3 million in profits and $40 million in sales
(the 2024 equivalent of $17 million and $230 million, respectively). In
1976, the company banked a whopping $28 million when the brand was
sold to Warner Communication. The themes of videogames had yet to turn
overly gory (give it another fifteen years or so), and their late-1970s titles,

 such as Gotcha (1973), Tank (1974) and Breakout (1976), appealed to
young boys and girls as well as to men.15
However, Bushnell’s corporate culture showed all the signs of a boys’
club gone wrong, further excluding women from the industry. A 1985 ad by
Apple depicted how much a computer could help a boy named Brian, while
also demonstrating what fun Brian could have by teasing a girl who was
attempting to use a computer. The videogames industry had already
mastered this type of exclusionary advertising. In a 1973 Atari advert, a tall
woman in a see-through dress stood next to their Computer Space arcade
machine. It is astonishing that such abstract games, which had few explicit
themes, had already been deemed to appeal to a single gender.
In 2018, after Atari’s founder Nolan Bushnell received the Pioneer Award
at the Games Developers Conference in San Francisco, multiple people
finally spoke out about what went on inside their offices in Sunnyvale,
California.16 Reportedly, board meetings took place in hot tubs (naturally,
all the board members were men), with junior women employees sleazily
coaxed to join in the fun. Cocaine and marijuana were freely passed around
during work hours.17
In a 2012 Playboy profile of Atari, Bushnell, who often proudly wore a Tshirt with ‘I like to fuck’ written on it, recalled that prototype machines
were named after attractive female employees.18 The home version of Pong
was given the name Darlene – she ‘was stacked and had the tiniest waist,
just like one of our employees’. It should be noted that this was not Atari’s
first profile in a soft porn magazine. A reporter for the French Oui magazine
– which in the ’70s was the name of an adult porn magazine on the tackier
end of the spectrum – was invited to spend time at Atari’s offices for the
September 1974 issue. ‘If profitability were water,’ wrote Robert Wieder,
‘Atari could hold the Sixth Fleet.’19
Reports suggest that after work hours, professional porn movies were
shot at Atari’s offices. While supporting the local porn industry with its
resources may be commendable, little is known about the labour practices
being supported here, other than what’s implied by the imagery itself;
presumably the filming went ahead without the knowledge of Atari’s
women workforce. While desperately attempting to appear sexy, Atari’s
culture was unambiguously sexist. No doubt the acts described were the
norm at most early tech company hubs, but such a work environment could

 never substantially improve the numbers of women in the burgeoning
games industry; indeed, it likely solidified a certain status quo for quite
some time. As Kotaku’s Cecilia D’Anastasio wrote ruefully, ‘It’s a culture
where bragging about “stacked” secretaries as late as 2012 garnishes Atari’s
mythos instead of muddying it.’20
This demographic of white men soon began to define not only how this
new entertainment genre was created, but its content as well. The
consequences would be far-reaching.
The Crash
A pivotal moment in the early economic history of the global games
industry was the videogames crash of 1983, which took place mostly in the
United States. The reasons for the crash were multiple – mismanagement,
market saturation in the number of game consoles and available games,
many of which were of poor quality, as well as waning interest in console
games in favour of personal computers. The numbers are staggering – home
videogame revenues peaked at around $3.2 billion in 1983, then fell to
around $100 million by 1985. That is a drop of almost 97 per cent!21
Widespread stories exist about hundreds of thousands of Atari videogame
cartridges being buried in a New Mexico landfill site, as it was impossible
to sell them.
The crash, which lasted from 1983 to 1985, bankrupted numerous game
development and console production companies. Some thought the shift
was permanent and that the viability of a popular global industry was a pipe
dream. While the North American market eventually bounced back, that
was largely due to the widespread success of the Japanese export Nintendo
Entertainment System (NES). Rebranded as Famicom for Western
audiences, this 1983 console rebooted the North American games industry
market. Other countries weathered the storm much better: Europe was much
less dependent on the console market and so was less polluted by lowquality titles. Videogames were here to stay, but how they were to be made
and marketed was about to enter a new era.
Apart from realigning the geographical centre of the videogames
industry, with Japan now taking the lead, the crash also pushed games
companies to adopt more extreme marketing techniques.

 Before this time, apart from a few notable exceptions like Atari’s
‘efforts’, videogame advertising was not that explicitly divisive. In the
1970s and early 1980s, Adventure (1980), Combat (1977) and Space
Invaders (1978) were being sold through family-friendly toy channels. The
creator of the Japanese 1980s sensation Pac-Man, Toru Iwatani, also
wanted to expand the game’s audience beyond the typical demographics of
young boys and teenagers. He had noticed that arcades were much less
frequented by girls and women and wished to change that. Electronic
Games reported in 1982 that Pac-Man was ‘the first commercial videogame
to involve large numbers of women players’. Director of sales for Midway,
the company holding the North American licence for Pac-Man, Larry Berke
recalled: ‘Women kept calling us and saying it was “adorable”.’22 It turned
out that a game that avoided violence and did not have a purposefully high
barrier to entry sold tons of copies among casual players, women among
them. Many couples, groups of friends and entire families played these
games.
After 1983, the focus on a certain type of consumer sharpened. In the
Polygon article No Girls Allowed, journalist Tracey Lien unravelled the
story behind the stereotype of videogames being for boys and obtained this
enlightening quote from a games marketer of that time:
Knowing that you have limited funding, you can’t just market a
shotgun. You can’t just go after anybody, you need to have a very
clearly differentiated and specific brand because that’s going to play
into where you’re running your ads and what kind of ads you run. That
niche-ing, that targeting makes it easier for marketers to have a very
succinct conversation with their target without overspending and trying
to reach everybody. So the industry put all of its efforts on catering to
boys.23
And cater they did! The videogame crash of 1983 marked the creation of a
certain hegemony: in the United States, games were now made almost
exclusively by young men to please an audience of almost exclusively
young men. Games companies were explicit – during the September 1983
Boston Computer Society event, an executive for the Adam computer
clearly stated that that their target audience were ‘boys aged eight to sixteen

 and their fathers. We believe those are the two groups that really fuel
computer purchases.’ When audience members booed during his speech, the
executive simply added that the marketing strategy was based on consumer
research.24
The later expansion of the Japanese gaming industry did not particularly
help matters. Titles followed many of the objectifying and often misogynist
tropes found in some anime comic book culture. Furthermore, 1985 megahit
Super Mario used the damsel-in-distress trope that became a staple of
videogame themes.25 Polygon’s Tracey Lien highlights the story of Myst
(1993) – a game that was released in the same year as Doom, but made
more money, attracted a strong audience among women and yet failed to
garner the same cultural significance. ‘Why? Because video game
developers didn’t have to care. Targeting men worked … Industries tend to
look beyond their existing target demographic only when the market has
become totally saturated.’26
In Myst, the first-person adventure puzzle game, there is no dialogue, no
enemies, no time limit and no way of dying. Thanks to that, it still holds the
official Guinness World Record as the least violent adventure videogame
ever. Awards aside, Myst was the best-selling PC game throughout the
1990s but, bizarrely, it achieved nothing near to the canon-defining honours
that were attributed to Doom. Similarly, Barbie Fashion Designer (1996)
nurtured an entire generation of gamers and outsold Doom, with half a
million copies shipped.27 The game makers’ desire for violence somehow
trumped even the market logic of sales.
The 1980s brought about another foundational transformation in the
global videogames industry. While the axis of power in fields like
intellectual property, hardware design and software creation still stayed
firmly in the West, manufacturing and resources were about to shift that
balance. It was during this decade that East Asian countries entered the
world of games from an unexpected angle.
On 23 February 1983, in the wake of the crash, the New York Times
reported that Atari was transferring the bulk of its manufacturing plants
from California to Hong Kong and Taiwan. The move was intended to
reduce costs. The consequence, however, was the firing of nearly 2,000
workers in the United States. In a statement, the company said it ‘deeply
regrets the hardship that this necessary step to achieve manufacturing cost

 reductions may cause affected workers in the community’.28 Citing
competition from other companies, such as Commodore, as well as the
growing market for personal computers, Atari forever changed the ethics of
the creation of their hardware and arguably, by extension, the ethics of all
gaming of their devices. Even though some of the workers responded with
inspirational defiance and briefly occupied the Atari manufacturing facility
in Limerick, Ireland, withholding stock and machinery, the move to lowerwage territories appeared to be permanent.29 Other companies followed.
This was probably the most significant shift in the global videogames
industry – a cost-cutting, profit-raising, environmentally disastrous
decision. As a result, videogames became completely dependent on the
manufacturing lines in the Global South. This move is inseparable from any
discussion about politics in digital games. Unlike most other entertainment
and cultural practices, gaming is centrally tied to this circumstance. All
hardware used for gaming – personal computers, home consoles and lately
mobile phones – are assembled in factories riddled with labour abuses in
East Asia and utilise natural resources extracted in Central Africa under
conditions of mass displacement, slave labour and enormous corruption.
The Takeover
Post 1983, lessons were learnt and entire new centres of the universe
emerged. Some companies went bankrupt, and those that persevered
focussed ruthlessly on savvy marketing and outsourcing. The profits started
trickling in again. The next defining moment in the story of videogames
development came not from large market or economic fluctuations, but
from a single technique, a single title: the first-person shooter. A group of
young goth kids, who until then had been selling their creations to a
monthly magazine that gave out free CDs with games, were about to change
the industry forever.
Up until this period, technical limitations allowed only a few gaming
genres to emerge: top-down, left-right views and movement were a real
constraint on creativity. Platform games, puzzle games and top-down
management games were available and popular, but no company had
succeeded in crafting a game that enabled players to truly immerse
themselves in an environment, rather than manage it.

 In September 1990, American computer programmer John Carmack
developed an efficient way to rapidly side-scroll graphics from the firstperson perspective on a personal computer. This meant that a player could
actually stand in a room in the game and survey their surroundings, as well
as move forwards, backwards and sideways. Never before had such a
realistic perspective been possible. Players could finally feel like they were
walking around a particular space.
Working with other members of what would become id Software,
programmers John Romero, Tom Hall and Adrian Carmack knew they had
something special on their hands. To test the capabilities, they decided to
create a remake of Castle Wolfenstein, which had been developed by Muse
Software for the Apple II computer in 1980. The concept was pretty radical
– a Nazi shoot-em-up! The aptly named 2003 book Masters of Doom: How
Two Guys Created an Empire and Transformed Pop Culture, by David
Kushner, explains this moment in detail. The team was interested in the
idea, as Romero, Hall and John Carmack all had fond memories of the
original Castle Wolfenstein and felt that the maze-like shooter gameplay fit
well with Carmack’s 3D game engine. Encouraged by the reception of the
idea from his colleagues, Romero proposed a ‘loud’ and ‘cool’ fast-action
game where the player could shoot soldiers before dragging and looting
their bodies. The core of the gameplay would be simple, since Romero
believed that due to the novelty of a 3D game and control scheme, players
would not be receptive to more complicated, slower gameplay.
Now called the grandfather of shooters, Wolfenstein 3D showcased this
new concept very well and earned id Software $2.5 million in revenue,
selling 250,000 copies. However, the team knew they could push the firstperson perspective mechanic even further. To prove it, they went for a gore
extravaganza with distorted Christian symbolism, images drawing on
Hieronymus Bosch and demons galore. Doom was a game based in Hell,
and it changed everything. The legacy of this game cannot be overstated. It
revolutionised videogames in a variety of ways. What are now called firstperson shooters, which for many gamers is their understanding of what a
videogame is, for years were titled Doom-clones.
Doom became a ritual for the youth of the day, myself included: sharing
the diskette (floppy disk), playing it in school classes. It brought the
popularity and perceived social impact of gaming to a new level. In the age
of grunge and the Satanic panic, popular culture items such as Doom were

 blamed for the ills of the youth. Alienation, economic and social insecurity,
and mental health crises were all dismissed in the popular media in order to
denounce the perceived true culprit – videogames.30
In fact, Doom brought to many a sense of community and belonging.
Qualities associated with being an outcast in other settings were celebrated
here. The game inspired conversations and hours of socialising. Even
though its gory aesthetics became a catalyst for some of the more toxic
traits in gaming that would become difficult to shake, primarily the
insistence that a videogame is defined by an encounter with violence, it also
introduced the art of creative gaming and game making to millions.
The 1983 title Lode Runner had originated the concept of modding. The
game supplied a level editor in which players could craft their own levels
and share them with other players on the same computer. But the release of
Doom allowed modding to truly flourish. The developers deliberately made
the game’s engine separate from the assets, meaning that digital enthusiasts
could design their own ‘look’ for the game – redefining levels and wrapping
them in various skins, reimagining the product, enhancing character art and
manipulating the mood of the game.
The results were staggering, with many extraordinary pieces of digital art
conjured up. Now each user could give the title a new look and a new feel,
making it their own. For the first time, some of the pieces coming out of
these more abstract attempts to reimagine a game, including machinimas,*
were showing up in makeshift real-life fine art expositions and digital
showcases, exhibited simply by exchanging a floppy disk.
The release of Doom, therefore, was a crucial milestone in the narrative
about videogames. The abstract mechanics prevalent in gaming before
Doom were capable of creating a story – lines of dialogue and a degree of
character formation were certainly utilised. But immersion, the heart of
gaming as it is perceived today, made Doom the standout. Due to that firstperson perspective, an alternative world transported the player into the
game and was now sufficiently sophisticated to be truly immersive. And the
world into which players were drawn offered a variety of options. The game
opened itself to a reimagination of its own limits. This success also had its
downsides – the innovative mechanics of Doom, when wrapped in its
violent aesthetic, sadly solidified in many people’s heads what gaming
overall looks like. An image that is still difficult to dislodge even today!

 Finally, it was the first game with the potential to be truly viral. Doom
was very well optimised, tiny in digital size and, as a result, effortless to
pirate. It could be passed around and played on a variety of devices, which
endowed it with worldwide cult classic status. Before this time, games were
relatively locked into isolated infrastructures. Since this golden age of easy
distribution, the walls have gone up again, with hardware options for
gaming limited by strict subscription services and extremely proprietary
hardware. The sense that this medium can be almost limitless began with
this generation of videogames.
And yet, social gaming communities as we know them today were
arguably established at a slightly earlier stage. Same story, different game –
the mechanics were once again genre-defining. Two hit boxes have their
health chipped away as they interact with each other;* two opponents press
buttons at an arcade cabinet in a unique combination, competing to reduce
said health. To this day, Street Fighter II has one of the most loyal and
devoted fan bases in the global videogames arena, with annual competitions
drawing in thousands of fans of all generations. This 1991 creation by the
Japanese developer Capcom is not subtle on the aesthetics – buff men and
women and characters wrapped in every racial and gender stereotype
imaginable violently settle scores in various geographical locations. For
professional players, the graphics or plot of the game are absolutely
irrelevant; all they see are the speed and the size of their hit boxes. John
Romero thought similarly about Doom and some other shooters – they can
be seen as screen-cleaning exercises, harnessing the inherent satisfaction in
clearing a level of messy enemies, revelling in the hygiene and precision of
it all.31
Fighting games exposed another inequality brought about by the
industry: who even gets to play or win at videogames and how? In most
other videogame formats, the time and money that players invest ultimately
lead to their advantage. A competitor can invest coins to practise against AI
bots, which are likely to mimic most of another player’s moves. Fighting
games do not really work that way. Of course, practising, and practising a
lot, is important, but what is crucial is practising the game in a live context,
against other, better players. No amount of playing online will resemble the
moves and the mind games that players encounter when competing against
current champions. This phenomenon, along with issues of latency,* results
in the necessity of live tournaments and sessions in real life.

 The demographic of the Western fighting games community is workingclass, often hailing from ethnic and racial minorities. They cannot spend
days practising, but even if some can, practice is not really rewarded with
any serious advantage. There is a historical precedent for this classless
meritocracy – arcade culture. According to research by the historian Carly
A. Kocurek, most players insisted that the money they put in the arcade
machines was not given to them by their parents, but was earned through
doing household chores, collecting bottles and cans for return deposits or
working newspaper routes or other odd jobs.32 But even if players had more
coins in their pockets, if they lost, they went back to the end of the queue.
Much of the early arcade culture has been deliberately dismantled: these
spaces were undermaintained and overpoliced. As is sadly common, urban
areas that attract young people without parental supervision often also
attract a disproportionate negative reaction by the state. Gaming arcades
were swiftly viewed in the same way as gambling arenas. Local officials
feared that arcades ‘would become a hang-out for teenagers who would
cause problems for police’. Neighbourhood groups feared that ‘video game
arcades located near residential neighbourhoods might introduce
undesirable elements into the community.’33
The spread of the home console moved much of gaming to people’s
living rooms, but we have to thank the arcade culture for one of the most
fascinating aspects of gaming – IRL communities. The fighting games
community is the outstanding example of organic affiliation building, a
precursor to much more heavily manufactured, but still powerful, current
electronic sports fandoms. LAN parties hosting Doom, Quake and StarCraft
(1998 onw.) tournaments also emerged as the precursors to the kind of
gaming communities in existence right now – self-reliant, complicated,
sometimes exclusionary, incredibly precious to those involved. The state of
gaming as we know it today was shaping up, both with its creativity and its
ills. Everything was up for grabs.
State Actors Enter the Ring
By the 1990s, videogames were mainstream, both as a creative product
delivering new and profound moments of joy and as a space for political

 actors to create political realities. As profits soared, this creative industry
succumbed to the claws of financialisation and corporatisation.
It was a decade of bursting creativity and the calcification of business
practices. Games like Cosmology of Kyoto (1993) or Vib-Ribbon (1999)
were revered by art critics, and even acquired by institutions such as the
Museum of Modern Art for their profound aesthetic and conceptual aspects.
On the flip side, studio sizes grew, leading to a bloated managerial class,
with their lingo and auditing of certain creative ambitions. The orientation
of games as products, or artefacts of popular entertainment, along with the
mechanisation of production and marketing processes, rendered the games
industry homogeneous in terms of both output and cast of creators.
At the same time, game distributors clamped down on pirating, tightened
their grip and increased their share of the pie for offering their shopfronts to
game developers. Thrown to the margins, many smaller game developers
could not keep up. Any potential ambition for a mass movement of artistic
game development guilds or cooperatives, fair trade hardware solutions and
diverse themes and mechanics in videogames was buried here … for a
while.
Many kids who grew up with games between the 1970s and 1990s
became important players in this new billion-dollar industry. By the time
the new millennium rolled over, the technology in games had become
sufficiently advanced to focus not only on the exciting mechanics of the
game; storytelling could begin to truly take centre stage. What kind of
stories were to be told, of course, was up for debate. At the same time, a
certain stratification was underway, too.
A few popular game genres could be trusted to release a significant dose
of endorphins. Shooter games like Duke Nukem (1991 onw.), horror titles
like Resident Evil (1996 onw.), platformer games like Super Mario World
(1990 onw.), racing games, sports games, strategy games, role-playing
games or horror games all had significant fan bases and ever-growing
production teams, and produced healthy revenues. The technological
advances accommodated not only singular, linear stories with twodimensional characters, but also entire worlds, side quests and labyrinths of
plot devices.
Players could now focus not just on the plot, or the mise en scène of a
game, but also on the broader message. What type of values or narratives
did this produce? Videogames were now sufficiently sophisticated to build a

 chronicle of persuasion. Those eager to popularise a particular ideology –
be they opinionated game developers, publishers courting a particular
demographic, political spin doctors funding the projects, or other cultural
influencers wishing to diversify their storytelling techniques – wasted no
time getting involved in this innovative medium.
Strategy games like Freeciv (1996 onw.) or Sid Meier’s Colonization
(1994 onw.) and shooters such as Tomb Raider (1996 onw.) were already
independently peddling colonial or jingoistic fantasies. In these games, the
plot usually unleashed tropes of imperial land grabs, white supremacy and
racist depictions of non-Western populations, ranging from ‘primitive’ to
full-on terrorists.
By the late 1990s, the United States Department of Defense was
beginning to sense the power of the games industry over adolescent men –
the Department’s main audience – and created a campaign of recruitment
and manipulation around gaming. Serious institutional power underwrote
the move to tie the global videogames industry to the Western military
complex. The Pentagon spent more than $150 million on military-themed
games or simulations in 1999 alone, with another $70 million injection in
2008 and still more since, all on projects with their own, very particular
political agenda.34
America’s Army, released in 2002, developed and published by the
United States Army in the wake of the post-9/11 military boost, was the
starkest and priciest example of this practice – with a ten-year development
and marketing budget of $50 million, on top of the investments mentioned
before.35 This round-based team tactical shooter with realistic combat
scenarios was described in a review of the time as ‘the most realistic
portrayal of weapons and combat of any game’.36 The game has collected a
number of awards over the years and has managed to attract several million
players, on both personal computers and consoles. This so-called ‘strategic
communication device’ was ‘intended to inform, educate, and recruit
prospective soldiers’. On the official Frequently Asked Questions page, the
developers confirmed that one of the reasons people outside the United
States can play the game is that they ‘want the whole world to know how
great the US Army is’. Not subtle, then. Nonetheless, videogames were a
perfect vehicle for the purpose of state propaganda. When the franchise was

 eventually discontinued, a total of forty-one versions of the game had been
released between 2002 and 2014.
Themes around militarisation and armed resistance were instilled in
games to build narratives around a variety of conflicts. Jane’s IAF: Israeli
Air Force (1998) was clearly intended to raise publicity for the Israel
Defense Forces. The content of the game included two types of campaigns.
The first covered historic operations of the Israeli Air Force in the 1967 SixDay War, the 1973 Yom Kippur War, and the 1982 Lebanon War. The
second type included fictional futuristic operations in Iraq, Syria and
Lebanon.37 A Syrian game studio released the action game Under Ash
(2001), which recreated moments from the history of Palestinian resistance
to the Israeli military occupation.
This attention and the seemingly popular acclaim military-themed games
received in the early 2000s inspired an entire generation of neo-colonial
videogames that underlined Western military agendas and values as a prime
moral objective. Developers of the Conflict: Desert Storm, Medal of
Honour (2002) and the now-infamous Call of Duty (2003) franchises found
it relatively easy to secure funding during this moment. The revolving door
of consultants going back and forth between the organised military complex
and the enormous Call of Duty franchise is well documented, albeit hardly
spoken of. A colonial narrative can be transmitted through the story plot and
the cast of characters featured or, sometimes even more significantly,
omitted. Bias can be transmitted through choices as simple as the colour
grading for different settings: yellow for Africa and the Middle East,
signifying ‘dusty’, ‘historical’; blue for the West, that is, ‘modern’,
‘civilised’. Other choices include what languages players hear spoken in the
background and the tone of voice used.
All these aspects invite an interpretation that often reflects a certain
ideological affiliation. In gaming, the introduction of such narratives
alongside the development of technology strong enough to support them
presented a double victory: a moral judgement and a desensitisation towards
massacring anyone deemed to be a state enemy.
Today, the modern military complex uses experiences that are styled to
look like videogames to train soldiers. More disturbingly, they apply an
aesthetically pleasing user interface akin to that of a videogame in targeting
machines for real-life remote bombing action. A 2007 video, which
WikiLeaks titled ‘Collateral Murder’, depicting US soldiers engaged in a

 helicopter strike that killed two Reuters employees and a number of
civilians, has a distinct videogame look to it. The user interface in today’s
drones was in fact designed to replicate that of a videogame.
Electronic sports events and gaming conferences are now regularly
funded by local state military bodies. It’s a win–win strategy. Games
companies represent governmental organisations and boost their own public
image in the process. An image of being close to the state allows studios to
receive lucrative tax breaks, too. And the military outsources the building of
cumbersome training simulators and attracts new recruits in the process.
Critics of such arrangements and the tight relationship between the military
and games companies are rarely listened to. While these camouflage-tainted
collaborations may benefit one side of the global games industry, more
progressively minded studios suffer when they’re drowned out by these
slick and bombastic displays of aggression.
Gamify Everything
As the arms industries got involved, the propaganda and profit-making got
bolder and more cynical. Weapons companies, including Colt’s, Barrett
Firearms, Kalashnikov Concern, Zenitco, Remington Firearms, Daniel
Defense, Troy Industries, Insight Technologies, Aimpoint and Eotech, have
their guns actively licensed by numerous games companies in order to
appear in videogames; details of such deals or the money changing hands
are undisclosed.38
Arms companies and various advertising agencies were not the only ones
beginning to sense that digital games were worth investigating. The
dopamine hit that reaches the brain after a correctly solved puzzle or a wellplaced shot could be applied to areas other than mere entertainment. In
2008, the concept of gamification began to surface in the entrepreneurial
and corporate worlds.
Other fields had already adapted elements from videogames – for
instance, some work in learning disabilities and scientific visualisation
comes from user interface inventions in gaming. Venture capitalists soon
started to experiment with incorporating social, rewarding aspects of games
into their software. Elements of game design that were originally intended
to increase the satisfaction of a player experience, such as points, badges,

 leaderboards, performance graphs and slick button design and audio effects,
could be extended to other digital implementations.
In their 2014 book, The Gameful World: Approaches, Issues,
Applications, editors Steffen P. Walz and Sebastian Deterding chronicle the
wide adoption of gamification. According to the authors, with the rise of
Web 2.0 business models in the mid-2000s, web start-ups were increasingly
faced with the challenge of how to motivate users to sign up with the
offered service, invite people they know, and interact with their products
regularly. They needed new tools for raising engagement. For instance, in
2007, IBM contracted communication researcher Byron Reeves, who
published a white paper on the role of online games for business leadership.
In 2008, a question-and-answer platform for software developers titled
Stack Overflow was launched using a reputation system with points and
badges inspired by the gaming experience of its developers. It quickly
gained cachet in the technology industry. In March 2009, the iPhone app
Foursquare debuted at the South by Southwest (SXSW) festival and
demonstrated that game design elements can drive the initial adoption and
retention of users. The following August, Bunchball’s Rajat Paharia
registered the domain gamification.com. The video-sharing site Vimeo
added a ‘like’ button in November 2005, and Facebook followed suit four
years later. Adding a calculus, a playful interaction into the interface,
increased the sites’ engagement rates.39
Today gamification is a widely adopted technique that is almost
seamlessly incorporated into how we engage in various digital scenarios,
such as organisational productivity, self-help apps, knowledge retention,
employee recruitment and evaluation, physical training, traffic rules
learning and more. Naturally, the biggest adopters of gamification have
been marketing agencies; 70 per cent of Forbes Global 2000 companies
surveyed in 2013 said they planned to use gamification for the purposes of
marketing and customer retention.40
Gamified shopping experiences are now common online, but companies
have also added videogame visual components to their brands. Games
theorist Ian Bogost writes:
Gamification is reassuring. It gives Vice Presidents and Brand
Managers comfort: they’re doing everything right, and they can do

 even better by adding ‘a games strategy’ to their existing products,
slathering on ‘gaminess’ like aioli on ciabatta at the consultant’s
indulgent sales lunch.41
On the other side of the spectrum, many videogames now offer a ‘labour’
angle: complete tasks, collect points, solve problems and grind your way to
the next high score. From the 2009 farming simulation sensation FarmVille
to the modern cult classic Euro Truck Simulator (2012 onw.), game
companies now unapologetically invite the player to labour all day, and this
toil has been embraced by the player base. In November 2022, A Little to
the Left, where players tidy shelves or cleaning items and do other
organisation tasks, was released to rave reviews and branded as the ‘cosy’
game of the year.
The highly successful social simulation series Animal Crossing, launched
in 2001, was praised by players for providing them with a sense of security,
no matter how unreal. Many reported that completing the tasks gave them a
feeling of accomplishment, stability and safety, and that they found the
tasks impossible to resist. To players, this game personified the promise that
capitalism made to them: that there will be rewards for their labour.
It is tempting to judge these players as capitalist subjects, doing laborious
profit-making exercises for somebody else’s gain. Nonetheless, fans of
Stardew Valley (2016) – another staple of the genre – would probably argue
that in a world filled with so little certainty and sense of control, the
predictable, repetitive results of the actions in these games have a calming
effect. And who am I to argue with that?
Grandma Picks Up a Console
Videogames became an increasingly powerful apparatus, not only in the
realm of digital entertainment, but as a pioneering space in private
advertising, public cultural discourse and national and international
propaganda. After seemingly selling a gaming device to every middle-class
adolescent boy in the world by the mid-2000s, gaming companies began to
look around for a new demographic of consumers. The unexpected success
of doll-house social simulator The Sims, released in 2000, once again
broadened the purpose of videogames and the emotions they are capable of

 eliciting. Inducement of fear and anxiety, resource management and
distribution are game design tricks as easily attached to a lifestyle and
relationship management game as to a military one. The only thing that
changes is the setting.
Japanese gaming giant Nintendo had always been a bit more expansive in
the pool of players they marketed their hardware and games to. Their 2006
Wii console had something special going for it – the accelerometer chip
inside the wireless hand-held ‘Wiimotes’ that detected motion in threedimensional space. Without the restraints of messy cables, players could
freely move around the room. Most importantly, their hand gestures and
movements were registered in the game! The Wii games also provided
Nintendo an opportunity to sell a range of accessories for the controllers, so
that many households in the late 2000s had white plastic racquets, guitars or
golf clubs cluttering up the living room.
Crucially, the marketing of Nintendo Wii, whether on billboards, TV
adverts or public relations documents, had one central message: this console
is for everyone; it is for the entire family, for every generation, for
dedicated gamers and newbies alike. An iconic poster featured an old lady
with silver hair and a bright smile holding one of the Nintendo Wii
controllers. This message, combined with a lower price, allowed Nintendo
to sell 135 million copies of the console.42 Even retirement homes, not
widely known as active digital gaming communities, bought them in
droves.
During the same time, as mobile devices began to reach the pockets of
millions, digital games were tailored for them, too. The total global revenue
from mobile games was estimated at $2.6 billion in 2005. Three years later,
that figure doubled to $5.8 billion.43 Mobile gaming revenue reached $50.4
billion in 2017, accounting for almost half of total global gaming
revenues.44
The model for acquiring such profits has changed, however. At first,
games were embedded within the phones themselves – think Snake and
Space Impact 2 on the Nokia 3310, which were beloved by many. With the
introduction of the WAP, or wireless internet access on mobile devices,
many owners could now access browser-based games and, later, purchase
new apps. In an attempt to merge the two markets, Nokia released the NGage in 2003, designed as both a handheld console and a phone. However,

 separate consoles were still technologically superior at the time, and the unit
was a commercial failure.
When it arrived in 2007, the iPhone changed the game. Apple’s
touchscreen product, with intuitive user experience featuring a strong
wireless connection, crucially came with an integrated App Store. Users
could download various applications, and naturally, digital games, for free,
or for a unit price. The free games often contained advertisements that
brought in profits for the developers. Later, in-game purchases for specific
features or aesthetic add-ons would become a goldmine.
Candy Crush Saga, which debuted in 2012, is considered the most
successful use of the freemium model (a free game with money-making
bloatware). The gameplay consists of swapping two adjacent candies
among several on the board to make a row or column of at least three
matching-coloured candies. Incredibly basic! While the game can be played
without spending money, players can also purchase special actions that will
assist them. This option earns King, the developers of the game, eyewatering sums. At its peak, the company reported that gamers were
spending more than $4 million per day.45
Around 2014, more than 93 million people were playing Candy Crush
Saga, while the revenue over a three-month period, as reported by King,
was nearly half a billion dollars.46 Five years after its release on mobile, the
Candy Crush Saga series has received a staggering 3 billion downloads.47
Such profits incentivise predatory practices, and many of the addictive
facets of certain videogames were conceived in the mobile game market.
Today that market is plagued with malicious operational networks that
have made products akin to digital casinos. Methods of endorphin
stimulation are studied as science and implemented into products in
nefarious ways. Deceit, false advertising and various psychological tricks
that keep the player engaged are all integral to this enormous industry,
which has overtaken PC and console games sales and is projected to bring
in one-third of a trillion dollars in sales by 2030.48
On the brighter side, the rise of mobile game development also enabled
the birth of a videogames industry in the Global South. Local developers in
countries like Kenya and Nigeria, in territories where fast broadband was
less available and console games were expensive, leaned into the strength of
burgeoning mobile game markets and became active developers of them.

 Recently, a game developers association in Africa was launched,
encouraging this growing community of consumers and creators. The Pan
Africa Gaming Group (PAGG) is made up of ten studios from Cameroon,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Rwanda, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania and
Tunisia, with more expected to join soon. The association will bring
together games developed by its members for publishing under Gara, an
African game store, and Afrocomix, a content hub for Afrocentric creative
work.49 The African videogame market was worth $3.9 billion in 2023, and
revenue is expected to reach $5.8 billion by 2028.50
The Indian videogame industry is centred in Bangalore, Mumbai and
Pune, with mobile games again dominating the $2 billion market. While the
existing studios are slowly beginning to make a case for developing their
own intellectual property (IP), the region is still a major space for
outsourcing of more manual tasks from large Western companies. Similarly,
in my native Lithuania the industry grew from being a space largely for
outsourcing and building relatively simplistic mobile titles to forging a
growing number of its own IP and experimental artistic projects.
The Indie Game Revolution
High-end, story-driven AAA videogames like Grand Theft Auto III (2001),
Mafia: City of Lost Heaven (2002) and Max Payne (2001) were thriving by
the early 2000s, transporting games into the mainstream. Consoles such as
PlayStation and Xbox were a common item in middle-class living rooms,
and game development teams had grown their numbers from dozens to
hundreds, while budgets scaled into multiple millions. The emerging and
astonishingly popular mobile games market proved something new,
however: a project does not need overtly complex graphics or profoundly
elaborate mechanics to be popular. A different way of making games had
emerged.
As the price of hardware decreased, reaching larger swathes of people
who could now play games, the software required to make games likewise
became more readily available. By the mid-2000s, cross-platform game
engines, such as Unity or Unreal Engine, and tools such as Adobe Flash
were easy to obtain or license, meaning that anybody could potentially
make their own videogame on a personal computer. Entire communities

 crafting smaller games and mods had been in existence for a while, but for
the first time, physical copies of the game were not the only medium for
releasing one – the internet allowed players to fully access large digital files
from anywhere in the world. Game makers were no longer dependent on
external publishing deals and the business of imprinting of the game onto
CDs and cartridges and distributing these physical copies to game stores.
Now, they could either cook the entire thing and release it online
themselves or approach publishers, who might invest in them and release
the game on their digital platforms.
For the first time, the tools required for entering the global games
industry were not entirely in the hands of a few publishing conglomerates
and increasingly enormous games companies with dozens of departments.
Anybody with some experience in coding, digital sculpting and marketing
could generate sales with their own creation. These conditions expanded the
pool of who could make games. Whereas games companies were by and
large populated by young, middle-class men, now anyone could have a go
at making their stories relevant in gaming. A new range of authors resulted
in a new wave of subjects and methods of gameplay.
In fact, many independent game developers of this time saw their mission
as providing an antithesis to contemporary gaming choices. Women, people
of colour, trans, queer and non-stereotypically masculine people could
finally have stories made for them, by others who wanted to share their
experiences. Progressive social and political causes, which hitherto had
seldom been explored in gaming, had finally found a voice.
Size, it turned out, was not all that mattered. Indie developers found
substantial revenues by simply releasing their game straight to the audience
and advertising it online.
The success of the indie games revolution can partially be ascribed to the
tendency of leaders in other other media – notably the legendary film critic
Roger Ebert – to dismiss gaming as an inferior cultural realm, driving game
makers to prove otherwise and seek to have their digital oeuvres recognised
as fine art. Some institutions agreed: in 2012, the Museum of Modern Art
purchased a version of Pac-Man and Tetris for their permanent collection.
With the help of the burgeoning social media, indie game developers
created brand and marketing campaigns by themselves and for their own
tiny companies; they acquired direct access to their audiences and became
adept in nurturing these communities, forging loyal customers out of them.

 Now, any person with the financial means to put in the time could spend
days in their bedroom tinkering with a small game that had the potential to
become a huge best-seller.
Gamergate
Some failed to see the expansion of narratives in games, and the
diversification of the people making them, as a pie growing larger. To many
long-term gamers, these changes felt not only like their share of the pie was
decreasing, but as something even more personal. As feminist and racial
justice causes altered the everyday realities of marriages, workplaces and
even mainstream entertainment, gaming zones had felt exempt from these
shifts, in a ‘safe space’, if you will, from the cultural turn towards the
‘woke’. No longer, many gamers feared.
This pent-up tension was released in forums and message boards,
expressing all the discontent over what gamers perceived as a major shift of
attention from small and big games creators towards more politically
correct, inclusive content. Gamers would not allow these changes to take
place without a fight. The breaking point came unexpectedly: 2014’s
Gamergate exposed these resentful communities, to very unsettling effect.
Encouraged by far-right organisers such as Steve Bannon, Milo
Yiannopoulos and Ian Miles Cheong, legions of gamers went after a few
game developers, journalists and commentators who were deemed to be the
enemies of gaming as it should be.
As with any harassment campaign, Gamergate needed a trigger to justify
the participants’ cruelty. In this case, it was a blog post penned by a
disgruntled ex-boyfriend of a game developer named Zoë Quinn, including
copies of personal chat logs, emails and text messages that dissected their
failed relationship and subsequent break-up. Crucially, the post implied that
Quinn had received a favourable review of her game Depression Quest in
exchange for a sexual relationship with Nathan Grayson, a reporter for the
gaming websites Kotaku and Rock Paper Shotgun. Depression Quest was of
a genre typically detested by the right-wing gaming milieu – an indie game,
exploring themes of mental health and loneliness, made by a woman. It did
not matter that the accusation of a lapse in gaming-journalism ethics was
false. Nor did Gamergate have a leg to stand on with the plea to leave

 ‘political intrusions’ out of their games (videogames have always been
political). The #Gamergate crowd now had the numbers, the organisational
infrastructure (4chan, Breitbart and Internet Relay Chat (IRC), among
others) and, most importantly, a target.
As a consequence, Quinn was subjected to severe online harassment,
including rape and death threats and doxxing that subsequently led to her
fleeing her home. Anyone who dared to defend her – journalists, other
women game developers and various online activists – also became targets
of a coordinated online assault. And why not settle some old scores in the
meantime? YouTuber and activist Anita Sarkeesian, who had already tasted
some of this harassment back in 2012 after she released a YouTube video
about the tropes that plague women characters in most videogames, also
appeared in the firing line. Sarkeesian was forced to cancel an October 2014
speaking appearance at Utah State University after the school received
numerous anonymous bomb and shooting threats, all of which claimed
affiliation with #Gamergate. The threats were not subtle. The gaming sphere
was the training ground for a form of online harassment that today seems
ubiquitous.
After a relatively quiet period of acceptance by the mainstream media
that videogames are a legitimate entertainment field, stories plastered across
the New York Times and the Guardian once again warned about the dangers
of gaming communities. By the time the dust settled in 2016, the
professional games industry was split into two – those who justified the
behaviour of #Gamergaters and those who vehemently opposed them. Even
all these years later, it is not easy to determine who had won – yes, the
industry is much more open to diverse casts in videogames and their themes
have certainly branched out to include all manner of underdog stories. More
people of various backgrounds are working in games than ever before. On
the other hand, there has been an upturn of conservative and regressive
content in games and other digital media, too.
Participants in Gamergate provided an environment that encouraged and
applauded numerous real-life acts of terror. The perpetrator of the shootings
in Dayton, Ohio, that killed ten people; the 2019 Poway synagogue shooter
in San Diego; and the attacker in the Christchurch mosque massacre, which
killed fifty-one people, all referenced gaming memes in their manifestos.
In 2019, a twenty-seven-year-old neo-Nazi stormed a synagogue in the
German city of Halle before attacking a nearby kebab shop, killing two

 people and injuring two more. The perpetrator broadcast the attack on the
gaming streaming platform Twitch, repeatedly calling himself a loser for
failing to kill more people, as his gun kept on jamming.51 Grotesquely, his
fascist manifesto included a ‘score sheet of achievements’ for the attack,
including goals for the numbers and methods of killing.52
Recently, the husband of the Democratic party leader Nancy Pelosi was
attacked at his house just before the 2022 midterm elections. Again, the
attacker named Gamergate as his moment of radicalisation.53 It was another
merging of the gaming world and real life.
Game Workers Rise Up
And yet, it is a sad reality that the people who can afford to have
discussions about representation and those who land top jobs creating the
games are already lucky enough not to be employed in manufacturing the
tools that are paramount to the industry. With this in mind, I ventured into
this scary, problem-ridden, utterly fascinating industry. My sense was that a
material inquiry into the ethics of the games industry may help us discern
the real enemies who dictate and formulate our everyday experiences.
The enemies were clearly not women and other minorities. Perhaps it was
the asset owners, the proprietors of these products, who deserved our ire. If
gamers really cared about the level of political correctness in their games
and the demographics of the people who made them, they would also show
interest in the well-being of these developers. Developers who are well
looked after produce better games and, for the most part, the consumers
understood that.
The loud collective voice of gamers has sometimes become a tool for
organising, uniting various political factions among videogame enthusiasts.
Bobby Kotick, the former CEO of one of the biggest game companies in the
world, Activision Blizzard, is now almost universally disapproved of,
regardless of the commentators’ political affiliations. Under his leadership,
games were rushed or unfinished, to the irritation of the players. His tenure
also exposed masses of labour violations, including discrimination, sexual
harassment and union busting.54 The internet, and people of all political
inclinations, were united, and #FireBobbyKotick regularly trended on social

 media. With their proximity to fans, numerous game developers could tell
their stories on digital forums first-hand.
The notion that not all was perfect for the workers in the games industry
was now a subject for action. While most games studios seek to curate a
public relations image of a relaxed workplace, with ping pong tables and
afternoon beers, the reality is much grimmer. In 2004, as people began
posting public messages on the internet, a spouse of an Electronic Arts (EA)
employee penned a passionate letter about the constant anguish of her
husband.55 The anonymous post detailed the declining mental health of a
worker who was struggling to meet increasingly brutal deadlines with a
decreasing sense of job and material security. The worker experienced
numerous nights at the office, ‘crunch’,* depression and anxiety and
difficulty connecting with family back at home – and many of his
colleagues were seemingly in the same situation.
EA has amassed extraordinary revenues developing and publishing
popular franchises such as The Sims, FIFA and Need for Speed. The letter
kindled a sense of solidarity that had not been felt before. Three class action
cases followed, and in 2007, the plaintiffs were awarded $14.9 million for
unpaid overtime.56
Predatory tactics were rife not only within the production of videogames,
but also in the way they were marketed, structured and sold. Free-market
economics surely had a hand in the debilitating circumstances in both work
and leisure. Game developers, often nurtured by entrepreneurial Silicon
Valley ideologies, knew that their will, attitude and discipline might not
guarantee a safe, comfortable and secure work environment. The priority
was making money, and caring for workers was not a useful tool in meeting
that goal. Games industry execs, in tandem with those of tech, saw
unionisation as an outdated practice, limiting innovation and growth.
Accepting the necessity for those structures felt to developers almost like
looking backwards, admitting some kind of defeat. Luckily, they did not
have to look back, they could just observe what was taking place in parallel
to them.
In 2016, the Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and
Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA), which represented voice actors and motion
capture artists in the videogames industry, organised a strike against eleven
American game companies, including giants such as Activision, EA and
Disney Character Voices International. SAG-AFTRA advocated for better

 compensation for their members at a time when studios were making
hundreds of millions. Traditionally, voice actors and motion capture artists
received a flat-rate payment for their work. The union held that residual
payments should also be considered. Other issues raised included more
safety precautions, oversight to avoid vocal stress for certain roles and
better safety assurances for actors while on set.57
After 340 days of strike, the longest-ever for the Screen Actors Guild, a
settlement was reached. The action received broad support among the
player base as well as from equivalent international guilds and unions.
While strong unions and worker protection are historically a common
feature of Hollywood movie studios, the games industry had never received
that support. The success and the energy of the strike generated a lot of buzz
among the game-dev community. All this momentum needed was a spark to
ignite it into a full-blown movement. Game company bosses visiting the
2018 Game Developers Conference (GDC) in San Francisco were about to
provide just that.
The International Game Developers Association (IGDA) is a US-based
lobbying body for the industry, mostly advocating for the needs of the
management of companies – tax breaks, governmental funding, anticensorship, business and legal issues and student and academic relations.
Few can comprehend why, during such a delicate moment in the games
worker–management relationship, they thought it was a good idea to host an
anti-union round table talk at the GDC. The talking points in the event blurb
were familiar – Human Resources departments would take better care of
workers than unions could, unions curb innovation in industries, the games
industry is uniquely unsuitable for broad unionisation.
Nevertheless, the room for the round table was packed with game
workers challenging the misleading notions about unions. Furthermore, the
event inspired the gathering of individuals determined to take active steps
towards broad unionisation in the videogames industry – Game Workers
Unite International was born.58 In the preceding months and years,
numerous networks as well as actual games industry unions were founded
in dozens of countries. Support for these movements was universal – even
the reactionary crowd of the games industry saw the necessity of these
institutions. Few expressed fears of some sort of Marxist takeover of their
beloved ‘anti-woke’ videogames. The legal processes of setting up a union,
and the issues that need to be confronted, vary from country to country, but

 broad coalitions have been established and are doing incredible work thanks
to the dedicated activists involved.
Labour issues in the videogames industry in the Global North are
extensive, pernicious and well documented. Crunch, sexual harassment,
insecure wages, mass layoffs and union-busting are problems that most
people working in the videogames industry have experienced or heard
about. Still, many of these workers can use their voice to hold their
employer accountable, either via unions or other networks. On the other
hand, outsourcing for software development, as with the destructive but
lucrative instrument of hardware outsourcing, had become an option, thanks
to the World Wide Web. In game-development facilities in Eastern Europe
and the Global South, a race to the bottom determined workers’ pay and
conditions.
Dozens of prestigious game companies in the Global North are holders
and planners of intellectual property that is often completed by outsourced
staff in India or Belarus, creating tremendous savings on labour costs. The
mobile games market relies heavily on underpaid and overworked staff in
Asia-Pacific and South America. Furthermore, the in-game economies of
many free-to-play titles are artificially inflated by click farms in the Global
South. In click farms, workers are assigned a display of up to 100 mobile
devices, where they are instructed to manually click on particular prompts,
commands, rewards – anything that creates currency that can then be sold
off to wealthier gamers in the Global North.
Click farming was, in fact, the business that Steve Bannon dabbled in
before running Donald Trump’s election campaign. The right recognised
and used spaces of gaming for their own ends, allowing the industry to be
shaped into an integral part of the contemporary capitalist system, rather
than offering an alternative to it.
The Game Is On
Today videogames affect the world on both micro and macro levels. On a
granular level, practices of gamification have seeped into a host of everyday
activities – language learning, Human Resources activities, mental and
physical health tracking and more. Apps such as PACT, HealthyWage and
Nexercise have gamified a way to pay the user for exercising! Billions of

 people now enjoy casual videogames, and more ardent gamers have entire
clothing, furniture and esports industries dedicated to them. Rivalled by
Twitch, Netflix is now considering setting up its own live-streaming
service.59 There are games informing us about news and elections,
educational games on history and others on science or medical research.
Celebrities have their avatars in videogames, famous musicians are creating
soundtracks for them and fashion giants such as Balenciaga are setting up
exhibits of their clothes in game engines. Communities of particular
videogames stretch beyond continents and provide friendship groups,
solidarity and support systems for millions. The organisation Games for
Peace has even demonstrated how gaming can bring torn communities
together, in this case young Israelis and Palestinians. Videogames are
therapeutic for children with chronic illnesses, and they can improve
preschoolers’ motor skills and help individuals with dyslexia.60 Some
studies have even shown that first-person shooters can improve players’
eyesight.61
Artificial intelligence – almost certainly the future of most technology –
also shares a long and intimate history of evolving alongside gaming. While
AI is currently mostly used for graphics efficiency, non-playable characters
or enemy behaviour, the future of integration of AI in games may affect not
only their content, but also how they are made. If not opposed, the tools will
be utilised in game production, with entire departments replaced by AI bots
that instantly generate desired work with a few commands. This is an
upcoming labour issue that will require adaptation and creativity from the
newly formed global videogames industry trade union movement.
Recently, dodgy financial speculators also flooded gaming zones with
non-fungible tokens (NFTs) and other crypto schemes, scamming many in
the process. The economies of many popular videogames are lamentably
filled with encouragements to gamble, amid various shades of fraud, deceit
and tactics that prey on customers. The FIFA World Cup Qatar 2022
demonstrated the consequences of depoliticising an entertainment medium
for too long, leaving it to metastasise into a corruption machine that cannot
be stopped and costs numerous lives. Arguably, games already produce such
an outcome, with the aforementioned production of devices necessary for
games hardware. What nefarious, unchecked repercussions can be awaiting
in this industry, which morphs into new phases and stages every few years?

 Videogames are everywhere – in people’s living rooms, in their real-life
and digital ad space. More passively, they are also propping up many side
industries that contribute to the current neoliberal order. Within that, there
are also wonderful pockets of resistance. These range from union organising
to studios forming themselves into cooperatives, and are manifest in games
so eclectic, elegant and thought-provoking that they surely provide a respite
from the homogenisation of culture. Despite the efforts to strip the soul
from this artistic medium, serving only the darkest parts of our society,
game makers continue conjuring up pieces that reimagine how lives could
be lived.
* Machinima is the use of real-time videogame graphics engines to create a cinematic production.
The word machinima is a portmanteau of the words machine and cinema.
* Hit box: an invisible shape outlining all or part of a model (such as in a videogame) used to
determine whether another object collides with the model.
* Latency: the time between pressing a button and it registering and displaying the effects in the
game.
* In the videogame industry, crunch is a word for worker overtime, usually occurring close to the
completion of a project or its milestone. Crunch can lead to sixty to 100 hours of work per week, for
extended periods of time, and is often uncompensated. While it is often perceived as a failure by
management in planning the workers’ time, crunch is commonly used as a planned part of the
videogame development cycle.
OceanofPDF.com

 Level I: The Theme

The history of videogames production has always been mired in politics
but, for most, one aspect of politics here seems to overshadow the rest.
Digital games are perceived as primarily a representational medium;
crucially, mainstream media prefer to fret over the content, the theme of
games, as opposed to focussing on how they are made. Gameplay footage
tells a speedier story than the context for these depictions. Critics rarely
pass up an opportunity to scrutinise and sensationalise the distasteful
narratives of average videogames, the crude and hackneyed characters in
anime digital trends and the brazen mechanics of shooter games.
Communities that support them, which are examined in Level II, provide
their own, often more inventive, interpretation of these concepts. The
mechanics or, as some researchers would describe it, the ludology of a
game, present a whole other dictionary for analysis. Just as the editing
techniques of the legendary French–Swiss director Jean-Luc Godard are
assigned political meaning, simply through his use of jump cuts, games too
consist of design systems, mechanics and interfaces to instil affect.1
As long as a narration, a plot, is key to describing a videogame and its
moral or ethical values to the masses, this inability to look beyond the
theme infantilises the medium, warps the capacity for critique and, as a
result, weakens the prospect for making more sophisticated games.
Upon its release, the creator of Super Columbine Massacre RPG! (2005)
was dragged through the mud for depicting the violent aspects of the
shooting in a game so soon after the 1999 tragedy.2 The game was not
refined or subtle; at times, the killing aspect was explicit, and the graphics
seemed crude. It felt juvenile and jarring for a game that deals with such a
serious issue; and the attempt to humanise the perpetrators – risky. Still,
Danny Ledonne’s main objective was to create a piece of art that utilised
games to understand the thought process of the killers and society’s reaction

 to their crime. Flashbacks, haunting audio design and gameplay tricks
luring the player into making uncomfortable choices are all thoughtfully
curated to produce an unsettling, multifaceted societal critique.3
Ledonne, himself an avowed loner subjected to intimidation and bullying
when he was young, felt an urge to understand where the point lies when
one crosses from normal life to the dark side. After seeing the 1971 film A
Clockwork Orange and hearing of the school massacre, Ledonne reflected
on how close he had come to becoming like the shooters: ‘It was a bit scary,
once I learned more about these boys, because it was like I was looking in
the mirror and I didn’t want the same fate for myself.’ He began taking
martial arts classes, studying film and seeing a therapist. He graduated from
school with high grades and was voted Most Likely to Succeed by his
peers.4
The release of Super Columbine Massacre RPG! a few years later nearly
destroyed Ledonne’s life, as he was publicly vilified and rejected by
gamers, artists and activists alike, many of whom had probably never
loaded up the game and experienced its depth of soul-searching, exploration
of atonement and commentary on the American media landscape. The
game’s creator was inundated with hatred for daring to touch the theme. The
game was banned from traditional envelope-pushing industry events, and
Ledonne was accused of fetishising and profiting from the Columbine
tragedy. A piece of art that would have probably received acclaim if it had
been executed in any other medium proved to be too controversial as a
videogame. As the prominent games critic Ian Bogost pointed out in his
book Newsgames: Journalism At Play (2010), two years before the release
of Super Columbine Massacre RPG!, Gus Van Sant’s film Elephant (2003),
a fictional account of a school shooting inspired by Columbine, won the
Palme d’Or at the Cannes International Film Festival.5
At the other end of the spectrum, games that feature powerful women or
cute objects are hailed as a progressive victory, ignoring the sometimes
militaristic undertones of the women heroes or the deeply conservative
nature of ostensibly wholesome narratives. Deconstructing videogames
purely on their narrative risks losing much of their civic and cultural
meaning, yet this is the space that commands most public interest. Violence,
sexism and other politically charged meanings become the primary lens
through which the products are viewed. Although this is only the first layer

 of necessary enquiry, its potency and weight in the discourse dictates that it
become the first obstacle we encounter in our journey.
To progress to Level II of this book, readers must be capable of
answering the following questions. What are the limitations of considering
politics in games through the consideration of narrative alone? Can violence
in videogames ever be progressive? Are more powerful women characters
the answer to sexism in videogames? Can anti-colonial videogames even
exist, given the current modes of production? How are game creators
widening political literacy through the stories they write, and is it working?
Just how much correspondence exists between players’ political affiliation
and the politics of the media they consume? And can that relationship be
changed?
Violence
Most parents will avoid encouraging their kids to game, presumably due to
the fears about the influence of violence on young minds. Many
progressives sneer at gaming spaces, seeing them only as vulgar digital
products where macho men enact their most brutal fantasies or, even worse,
project them onto real life. Railing against gaming is a cyclical event that
often occurs when attention to the medium is most concentrated. This
suspicious characterisation, although for the most part misguided, is not
entirely misplaced. Politicians, wishing to signal some basic care for the
well-being of families, denounce videogames and call for regulations on
how games are packaged and sold. Notably, though, in almost all the
instances of attackers professing to be gamers, it was the player
communities of the cited title that encouraged the actual violence, not the
games themselves.
Relatively innocent compared to the games of today, violent videogames
were developed even during the time of very primitive graphics. Spaceships
downed each other, tanks collided and aliens prepared to colonise the Earth,
even in a very low count of available pixels. Mortal Kombat, launched in
1992, pulls no punches – broken bones, gore, pools of blood and scenes that
are brutal to the point of exhibitionism glamorise violence. Governments
around the world rushed in to condemn the game and attempt to ban its

 sale.6 Meanwhile, movies with similarly violent content were becoming cult
classics.
But this assumption that we have to judge games by their violent
properties requires a closer look. A competitor game to Mortal Kombat,
Street Fighter II, was released around the same time with analogous
fighting game mechanics. However, its community members challenged the
idea that they were there for the violence. Other aspects of the game were of
greater interest to them. Professional fighting games players report that an
aesthetic of a game, namely that two individuals are engaged in a virtual
fight, fades away as soon as they begin to take the battle seriously. All the
player sees and perceives are hit boxes – the invisible rectangular space
inside and around the character that determines and represents whether an
attack was successful or not. Characters with larger hit boxes are more
vulnerable, but stronger. Smaller hit boxes mean weaker characters who are
substantially nimbler and speedier. It is the battle between the two hit boxes,
rather than the aesthetic of their characters, that is of significance here. Yes,
the design of these characters and their interactions employs over-the-top
shock-value imagery, but for the players who spend the most time with
these games, all of that becomes invisible.
Similarly, Under Ash (2001), created by a Syrian games studio, invites a
rethink on whether the presence of violence or the purpose of it is more
significant. The game sheds light on the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
lands, also through the strong use of violence.7 The player takes the role of
Ahmed, who, through the course of the game, progresses from throwing
rocks at Israeli soldiers to destroying Israeli military positions with real
weapons. The design of the game’s use of violence tells a story, too. It is
very easy to be killed; hence, the game is actually very hard. If the player
shoots a civilian, the game ends automatically. In the end, similar to the
reality for Palestinians living with the existing imbalance of power, it is not
possible to achieve victory. The goal here is not education or a bid to inform
or project a meticulous moral judgement; rather, the game is a cathartic,
fantasy-fulfilling exercise.
There is nothing inherently evil about the mechanic of shooting or
hitting. After all, videogames in which the main character is invited to shoot
Nazis or other baddies are rightly revered. What is of significance, then, is
the identity of the body receiving the blow or the bullet. Here, the direction
many game creators have taken is clear. Sadly, many of them hold abhorrent

 views that justify or positively encourage game themes which subject
already marginalised and brutalised populations to violence. Women,
racialised characters, and entire demographics that are deemed expendable
in life are violently killed off to advance the hero’s storyline.
Historically, comic books, television and hip-hop have all been unjustly
blamed for inspiring violence. But, in contrast with other media, games
offer an opportunity for truly enacting certain manoeuvres, actively
pursuing the objective of destruction, rather than merely observing it.
Instead of being a target of the projection, a videogame player becomes an
actor in it. Despite this property, numerous studies have shown that violent
videogames do not intensify a player’s relationship to violence. However, it
would be naive not to acknowledge the games’ ability to be the perfect tool
for someone to indulge an earlier desire for a violent action.
Virtual violence in isolation is not necessarily a radicalising force. One
can play the most brutal shooters (guilty as charged!) and retain a sense of
empathy, or even find it strengthened. How boring would the arts be
without violence! The Viennese Actionists in the 1960s used violence in
performance art to underline the desperation of the human spirit. Damage
and visceral pain were moulded into poetry. The American artist Chris
Burden had himself shot in a white cube gallery. The English artist Jeremy
Deller orchestrated a lavish re-enactment of the Battle of Orgreave, a
violent confrontation between strikers and police that occurred in 1984
during the UK Miners’ Strike. Violence in the arts is a necessity, but how it
is sold must be closely examined and, in certain cases, regulated. When
used as a tool for terrorising already marginalised populations, the content
is hateful and must be called out as such. But when violence in a piece of
art is handled with maturity, it has the potential for bringing about sublime
experiences.
The indie game Hotline Miami (2012) became a sensation upon its
release. This high-octane, top-down-view shooter did not refrain from
depicting blood and violence; even in its minimalist pixel-art graphics, gore
was ample. Spoiler alert: there is even a nuke at the end of this intense and
surreal action game about the fight against the Russian mafia in Florida.
The game is also laced with extraordinary, melancholic, exquisitely
produced music, and offers rich character development.
Hotline Miami exposes the banality of violence, instead of glorifying it.
In isolation, violent imagery may be perceived as an instinctive reactionary

 tool, unless engaged with by the right people, of course; but artistic
decisions can also turn this inherent gore into a tool for reflection. Few
things illustrate this better than a simple comment on a YouTube video of
one of the songs from the score of Hotline Miami:
My eyes were drawn to a random gangster I had shot earlier, lying still
on the floor in a pool of his own blood. He was clutching his chest and,
despite the pixel graphics of the game, I could tell that his face was
scrunched up with an expression of agony. I took a second and
wondered; who was this guy? What was his name? Why was he a part
of this gang? … Then, I realized that I had done this very thing to about
thirty-five other gangsters just a few moments ago. I finished the level
after that, but I didn’t feel happy or victorious after I shot the last
enemy; I felt awful. I still absolutely love this game to death, but
goddamn, I still sometimes think about all of the people that you have
to kill in order to complete just a single level of it.8
All this underlines that we must continue to challenge and question the
purpose of violence in a given videogame. If violence is an apparatus to
further entitle people in positions of power – imperialist state militaries,
fascists, misogynists and so on – then as with to all reactionary propaganda,
it must be called out. But otherwise, violence should not scare the
progressive left. There is a lot of it in the world, and more of it will come
our way before we feel like we’re winning. While videogames are a space
for escapism, they do not have to be sanitised of the discomforts of life to
be radical or politically useful. One can be sure that the political right will
employ the gaming space for any and all themes; instead of blindly
censoring violence, we must come up with egalitarian alternatives.
Misogyny
Another depressingly correct suspicion of videogames is that most of them
are sexist. It turns out that when horny, lonely game devs are given free rein
on how women should be depicted in their games, if at all, their assumption
is that other lonely, horny men will only buy games that present women in a
disparaging or sexualising light. The Tutorial describes the methods by

 which women were essentially pushed out of the tech and games industries
for a good while.
This expulsion allowed for the festering of sexist portrayals of women;
they were hardly the target consumer audience here, anyhow. As per the
stereotype, there are indeed abundant examples of misogyny in videogames
– women NPCs (Non-Player Characters) in tiny bikinis who can be brutally
beaten and murdered by characters or, alternatively, saved from danger –
only by muscular strong men, of course.9 Women characters until recently
had no representation other than subordination and a need to be rescued.
Countless franchises, such as Grand Theft Auto (1997), Dead or Alive
(1996) and Duke Nukem (1991) share brazen misogynistic attributes. These
games contain endless references to fellatio and lesbian sex (not for queer
audiences), and dress women in underwear thin as dental floss. The
depictions often border on the surreal – the women’s breasts are so large
that they have entire animation physics systems dedicated to them, their
improbable bounciness calculated to look just rubbery and elastic enough to
not seem liquid. Of course, mechanics exist for men characters to slap said
breasts.
The one-sidedness of the gender portrayal cannot be overstated. A
famous meme illustrates this beautifully. An astonishingly muscular Black
man is wearing a hat that conceals his eyes and a white cape that covers
most of his oiled-up body, except for his torso, pubic area and thick thighs,
which are covered in stringy lace. His abs are so defined, one could grate
cheese on them. A penis half the size of the model’s arm is sheathed in
white silky fabric and tied with a string. The text above the picture reads, ‘If
male video game characters were dressed like female characters’.10
Needless to say, male characters are not often sexualised in this way in
videogames. Heterosexual men game devs would never.
Sexist videogames and their success send a message which, in effect,
asserts ownership over the entire medium. Enthusiasts of games without
explicitly sexist elements, such as Halo 3 (2007) or Fortnite (2017), exploit
the chats systems to communicate misogynist views just to repel non-men
gamers from joining these spaces. The message that videogames are not for
girls is thus entrenched, even when sexism is only in the heads of the people
playing rather than in the games themselves. According to studies, in game
chats, women are subject to three times more derogatory or offensive

 remarks than men receive.11 Many women gamers report that they now
prefer to simply hide their gender online, a move rarely reported by men.
The bullying experienced by LGBTQ+ players is undoubtedly even worse –
homophobia and transphobia are devastatingly rampant among gamers.
This dynamic further seeps into the way the industry carries itself overall
– scantily clad ‘booth babes’ are a common sight at many gaming
conventions, and reports of scores of sexual harassment incidents still
plague the industry. It’s a closed circle – as long as videogames are sexist
and their public relations exude misogyny, women will not want to be part
of the industry. All this is changing for the better, but very slowly and with
various degrees of success around the globe.
The trends and structures of sexist videogames are horrifying, reflecting
the worst of humanity. Even people who know next to nothing about digital
games can tell you one thing: for the most part, and until relatively recently,
videogames were a boy’s world. Instead of listing examples of these
egregious practices, I prefer to dig into the reasons for and results of such
tendencies.
Many credit the Proteus effect when explaining the inclination of swathes
of game players to act out their misogynistic fantasies online. The term
describes a phenomenon whereby, within the walls of a virtual world,
individuals inhabit the characteristics of their avatar. Borrowing its name
from the shape-shifting Greek god Proteus, the effect theorises that this
online personality switching is the result of an assumed expectation by
other users of the virtual environment towards the avatar. So, if the avatar
that the gamer has adopted is a buff, emotionally unavailable macho guy,
then their actions are likely to reflect that stereotype.
A recent study investigating the relationship between avatar design and
real-world behaviour supports the existence of the Proteus effect. The study
compared the appearance and behaviours of avatars in the virtual world of
Second Life (2003) to the reported real-world behaviour and appearance of
their users. It found that participants who had designed their avatars to be
more physically attractive also reported engaging in more confident and
extroverted behaviour when interacting through their avatars, in comparison
to their typical real-world selves.12
Seemingly, then, people go into titles with already existing prejudices and
simply have an opportunity to enact their desired tendencies without guilt.
That, of course, shifts the responsibility to game makers to avoid providing

 platforms for destructive acts, to create limitations for certain behaviours. In
a study conducted by Edgehill University in Lancashire, England,
researchers concluded that game studios should consider implementing
systems that encourage more constructive, cooperative forms of social
interaction among players, such as allowing players to collaborate on tasks
while still remaining part of their said groups. The authors propose that such
set-ups would mitigate the negative and aggressive attitudes frequently
expressed towards women players.13 Perhaps through this encounter with
other players, and with a suitable representation of themselves, gamers
could engage in self-actualisation and, by extension, exhibit kinder
behaviour. The task, then, is design, not narrative.
As more marketing executives woke up to the lack of women characters
(and potential women customers) in videogames, an effort was made to
bring some ‘bad-ass’, brave women into the casts. Yet the results were at
times less than politically affirmative. The authors of a phenomenal book on
videogames and capitalism, Games of Empire, point out the following:
The new mainstream game ‘sheroes’ are corporate – military
professionals, death-dealing, punishment-absorbing exemplars of …
women that kill – avatars for an era of a female national security
adviser and an equal-combat opportunity US Army. The protests of
‘Girl Games’ and ‘Grrrl Gaming’ had been captured in the virtualities
of imperial feminism compatible with militarised capitalism.’14
The quintessential example is Tomb Raider’s Lara Croft, a figure that crops
up in every piece examining the burgeoning representation of women in
games. Sure, she may be a woman, but that is just one of her characteristics;
the others are much more problematic. Her daddy issues compel her to visit
a number of the world’s archaeological wonders. Somehow, after thousands
of years of existence, these historical sites are destroyed as a result of her
stopover. This descendant of an aristocratic family ferries herself around the
world, asking for help from poor indigenous people, who almost always
certainly meet their death. Not exactly a progressive hero to emulate.
Similar typecasting was given to Chun-Li from Street Fighter – an expert
martial artist and Interpol officer who relentlessly seeks revenge for the
death of her father at the hands of M. Bison. Tifa Lockhart from Final

 Fantasy VII (1997), another strong pin-up shero, runs after Sephiroth, who
became her archenemy for murdering her father, Brian Lockhart. One can
guess the writers’ gender from these storylines. In the mid-2010s, women
were typecast again as traumatised, self-centred teenagers, as portrayed by
The Last of Us (2013) and Life Is Strange (2015). Violence against women
is a vestige of women’s historic status as property: a product of the division
of society into exploited and exploiting classes. Far from solving the
historic inequality of women, capitalism incorporates violence against them
into its business practices and its imperialist military strategies. It is
unambitious and politically ambiguous for women to support the exact
same systems.15
Only quite recently, and entirely thanks to the energy of creators of
marginalised genders, have we begun to enjoy videogames with women
characters who are complex, flawed and empathetic. The protagonist of
Dead Pets Unleashed (2022) is a woman named Gordy, trying to manage
her punk band and life in her early thirties. In Immortality (2022), a story
about the demons of Hollywood reminiscent of the work of David Lynch,
actress Manon Gage puts on a tour de force performance in the role of
Marissa. In Night in the Woods (2017), Mae, a twenty-year-old college
dropout, deals with the effect of economic stagnation in Rust Belt America.
We have come a long way from the egregiously sexualised, dumb female
characters in other videogames. Not that there are fewer of those – as the
videogames industry expands, the breadth of characters is simply
expanding, too.
There are still plenty of two-dimensional sex symbols to choose from,
they are just not all that exists. Trans characters such as Birdo in Super
Mario Bros. 2 (1988), Tyler in Tell Me Why (2020) and Lev in The Last of
Us Part II (2020) are allowed to simply have their story play out, without
their gender identity driving the narrative.
Lately, though, videogames have pushed the envelope on expectations of
more diverse characters. In 2023, critics lined up to praise the third episode
of HBO’s The Last of Us, a TV adaptation of the famous videogame,
featuring a gay couple named Frank and Bill. Set in a post-apocalyptic,
fungal-infection-ridden world, the game portrays a passionate, but fraught
relationship between the two, with Bill being particularly unlikeable. The
TV show, however, wishing to positively represent these characters, went

 for a sort of Romeo and Juliet story, with little friction apart from the
circumstances Bill and Frank found themselves in.
Although the two scripts had the same writers, they felt that TV
audiences would struggle with a more nuanced approach to gay characters.
All this underlines the way games are now entering a truly mature chapter
in their existence where, depending on which direction we press the
industry to take, they can either concentrate the vilest impulses of our
society or provide a space for experimentation and make a real positive
difference in pop culture. The goal is for complex and empathetic characters
to become mainstream, not just part of progressive games. Pushing the
Overton window wide open is important.
Colonialism
Perhaps less discussed in the mainstream media, but no doubt very visible
to the players themselves, are the racial and colonial undertones of many
games. The birth and expansion of this digital space is intimately linked
with the perspectives – or, more to the point, the limitation of perspectives –
of the creators and audience of the Global North. The United States in
particular tends to dictate much of the political tone in games. Videogames
have seen it all: violence, expansionism, orientalism and outright racism,
laced with jingoism, the white saviour complex and straight-up state
imperialist propaganda.
Numerous small, independent far-right productions tout white
supremacist and Nazi paraphernalia or attract game communities building
fascist monuments in existing, massively multiplayer online games. But
racism in games is not just a phenomenon on the margins: multi-milliondollar franchises, backed by major corporations, are also more than content
to peddle similar narratives.
The scholar Stefan Schubert reminds us:
Video games relate to constructions of empire narratively – as it is
broadly understood – in a number of ways, and this is often how they
most obviously engage with the topic: series like Age of Empires
(1997–) or games like Empire: Total War (2009, part of the Total War
series) signal this interest already in their titles, and the way in which

 such strategy games, and others like the Civilization series (1991–),
represent the history of colonization and imperialism is highly
significant for judging whether they assume a critical, postcolonial
stance on their subject.16
A 2009 study analysing the portrayal of racial identities in videogames
revealed that the racial depiction of characters largely resembled the
demographics of the game development industry, which is predominantly
composed of white men. Until recently, African-American men were
depicted accurately only in games simulating real-life sports leagues. In
contrast, African-American men in non-sports games tended to be shown as
gang members or individuals living in poverty.17 Latino, Hispanic and
Asian characterisation in games is also plagued by tropes and often gives
these characters little to no agency.
Outright white supremacy and casual racism are peddled by major
franchises, such as Call of Duty 4: Modern Warfare (2007), Resident Evil 5
(2009), Gears of War (2006) and Grand Theft Auto: Vice City (2002). In
contrast to films or other artistic media, the racism evident in these worlds
is barely critiqued. The profits roll in with minimal scrutiny. Freedom of
speech is certainly a worthy principle, but more often than not, this
argument is used simply as an excuse or a means for inflicting a violent
rhetoric on marginalised communities. As usual, money talks first. There is
not a particularly interesting story here – the game creators know which
side their bread is buttered on and are attempting to match the games’
politics with their expectations of the audience. When game budgets are so
large, challenging the audience with a progressive agenda is seen by many
as a money-losing exercise. Recent surveys by Deloitte and other large
consultancy agencies, which are beginning to make their mark in gaming,
suggest there is profit to be made from inclusiveness, so things are
changing.
As in the case of of misogyny in games, it is often even more useful and
interesting to dissect games that are attempting to present a more complex
picture, often failing in the process. Consider BioShock Infinite (2013), the
last of the first-person shooter trilogy BioShock, which has earned a spot in
the history of videogames for merging clever combat mechanics with a
sophisticated plot. The first two instalments of BioShock took place in the

 underwater city of Rapture, a place with pristine art deco aesthetics and
Norman Rockwell–style paintings building an eerie, enthralling
atmosphere. BioShock Infinite moves the action to the floating steampunk
city state of Columbia.
Institutional racism and elitism are widespread there, embodying the
essence of American exceptionalism. The conflict arises between the
Resistance and the ruling class of Columbia, culminating with the leader of
the Resistance, a Black woman called Daisy, threatening to kill a young
boy. This is a plot twist heightened by a liberal, centrist ideology – both
sides of extremism are to blame. Instead of framing the conflict as one
between oppressor and oppressed, the white ruling class somehow gets to
keep the moral high ground, as they are merely ruining the lives of a mass
of children rather than ordering the elimination of one. Daisy is then killed
by the protagonist Elizabeth – a white woman. Another twist awaits – in
fact, Daisy arranged to have Elizabeth kill her in order to teach Elizabeth to
make hard decisions and because she may have not survived long after the
revolution anyway.
In the end, Elizabeth’s growth, her story, is the more significant, while
those of Daisy, the Vox Populi resistance movement, and the liberation of
Columbia’s subjugated people are of lesser importance. The white hero’s
path and her mounting strength trump any collective anti-racist effort. This
is a failure of storytelling, but also of game design, which relies heavily on
the established hegemony of a singular hero – an individualist who
destroys, manipulates, conquers and accumulates power – game-play habits
dictated by a form of imperialist ambition plaguing many game devs.18
The self-proclaimed progressive wing of the game development
community is not itself free of semi-colonial tendencies. In early 2010,
Lucas Pope, a white American independent games developer, noticed that
he felt uneasy going through passport checks in airports. He thought this
would make a fun game! The result was the 2013 hit puzzle simulation
game called Papers, Please, which sold around 2 million copies in three
years (5 million copies by 2023), bringing huge revenue and fame to the
sole developer.19
The gameplay of Papers, Please involves assuming the role of a border
agency officer in the fictional country of Arstotzka. The player is invited to
scrutinise the documents of various individuals seeking entry into the
country. The task is to identify expired or fraudulent documents and other

 irregularities in the migrant’s paperwork. The overall aim of the game is to
illustrate the often-mechanistic bureaucracy involved in determining life-ordeath outcomes for many people in real-world border control situations.
While the game’s intention to shed light on modern border control practices
is commendable, it ultimately ends up preaching to the converted, and may
even be deemed self-congratulatory. The game was catnip to the liberal
class of the videogames industry – an indie game with political undertones!
It wiped the floor at pretty much every games awards ceremony that year.
The UK continues to proudly implement harsh border controls and
operate detention centres that have been accused of human rights abuses,
such as Yarl’s Wood, Harmondsworth and Dungavel. The British
government’s appalling treatment of migrants arriving on the country’s
shores is well known, but their plight did not feature in Lucas Pope’s speech
when collecting his BAFTA. In fact, Pope made no mention of his subject
matter at any point while on the accolade-collecting tour. Pope had spotted
a theme that earned him millions, yet he made little to no connection with
the real-life devastation caused by these issues during the promotion and
publicity of this game. Some critics have suggested that Pope was not
consciously making an overtly political game, so it should not be judged as
such. This heightens our suspicion of such practices: creators are
universally acclaimed precisely for their edgy, antagonistic thematics, but
when challenged, they choose to take a more apolitical stance in order to
appease potential buyers of the product.
The danger of falling into mediocrity when making ‘politically engaged’
games is enormous. It is not sufficient to claim that a work possesses antiracist and anti-colonial content while blithely using these forces yourself.
Instead, creators must actively evaluate their own practices and their
connection to oppressive systems in a genuinely just manner.20 Of course, it
is almost impossible to achieve such ambitions, since videogames rely
entirely on technology that perpetuates brutal exploitation in the Global
South. I long for a day when political games don’t stop at merely critiquing
the status quo but provide tools for destabilising it.
To be generous, Papers, Please can incite a sense of guilt and empathy
through its mechanics of moral dilemmas. As the game progresses, the
player is faced with decisions such as whether to allow an immigrant with
incorrect documentation through, potentially risking the entrance of a
terrorist, or accepting bribes to provide for the player’s own family. The

 narrative here suggests a commentary on individual and systemic
responsibility and action.
However, humanising the plight of a border agency official also suggests
a certain shedding of responsibility. Such institutions, like the police, thrive
on corruption, and the border of Arstotzka is not inefficient or flawed, but
rather a prime example of how such systems are designed to function.
Few people in the gaming industry are honestly prepared to acknowledge
that one of their primary rewards is a sense of superiority, particularly when
associated with the status of being a ‘political’ game developer. Producing
actual cultural or social change can be much harder and more isolating.21 As
such, self-prescribed artistic practices calling for social change may fall into
the category of mundane preaching, leaving the player feeling guilty rather
than empowered. In the worst case, they may be co-opted and used to
endorse oppressive structures and ideologies.
The practice of shedding such narratives from videogames is beginning
to grow. In a recent conversation published as ‘How to Design Games That
Promote Racial Equity’, Lai-Tze Fan, Kishonna Gray and Aynur Kadir
‘consider responsible theories and methods towards racial equity, racial
justice, and anti-racism in game design’.22 As well as hosting a conversation
helping people grasp the intricacies of these issues, the scholars also
released a handbook, How to Not: A Guide to Avoiding Worst Practices,
which offers advice to game makers on pursuing anti-racist game design.
Together, they facilitate a network of creators learning from each other
about how to design games in a manner that is inclusive, but also, crucially,
not ashamed to revisit and reiterate. One exercise consists of going through
various perspectives and asking how different populations would receive
the narratives they are designing. Gray explains that
Black Card Revoked (2015) is rooted in mainstream Black culture and
knowledge [which] epistemologically is really recognized in the game.
I brought it into a classroom and a white student talked about the fact
that they felt at a disadvantage to playing the game but, after sitting
with the discomfort, realized that this game doesn’t have to be for them.
That student used it as a learning process and enjoyed learning about
Black culture from the game and the people in the space with them.

 Black Card Revoked is an example of designing a game by us, for us,
but it’s also a way to educate other folks about Black culture.
Similar to the representation of women in games, stories from and about
characters who do not fit the usual ‘hero’ story are crucial, made even more
powerful when negating, or moving beyond, the imperialist fantasies of
conquest and pillage as a source of power. In 2015, the British studio The
Chinese Room’s Everybody’s Gone to the Rapture depicted the experience
of a Black lead character in a small English village. This is only a small part
of the devastating post-apocalyptic plot, but the game captures beautifully
the minutiae and mundanity of the everyday racism experienced by the
protagonist. Pentiment (2022) by Obsidian Entertainment also achieves
something unusual. The writers conducted substantial research to recreate
the true diversity of sixteenth-century Bavaria; Ethiopian missionaries and
Jewish characters play a role in the tapestry of the cast here.
In 2021, the indie sensation Hades also offered a brilliantly diverse
Mount Olympus. Both Athena and Eurydice are Black women, with
Eurydice’s Afro styled with tree branches and leaves. Dionysus is of South
Asian descent and Hermes is East Asian. 1870: Cyberpunk Forever (2018)
by Santo Aveiro-Ojeda, an indie title that received rave reviews, asks
fascinating questions about the aftermath of colonialism. Numerous BIPOC
game creators, such as Michelle ‘Missy’ Senteio, Derrick Fields, Cara
Hillstock and Andrew Augustin, are developing much-needed games
reimagining the audience and the purpose of videogames in an industry so
often built by white people for other white people. Even the largest
franchises are now adding an option to change the hero’s skin colour,
something that was unheard-of as recently as the early 2010s.
Still, it will take much more than diverse characters and storytelling for
games to truly shed their colonialist impact and practices, especially in the
manner of their making. Moreover, the bulk of the white supremacists
organising in gaming are purposefully targeting abstract massively
multiplayer games, meaning that the fight to get rid of racism in games
must go beyond themes and narrative.
Escaping Political Narrative

 Videogames occupy an odd space; they are the most influential and
profitable entertainment strand there is, but at the same time they are
exempt from any serious cultural criticism. The liberal media overall treats
gaming as an infantilised space with a negligible impact. The Met Gala, the
Oscars and the discourse around the latest tour of a pop star receive many
more headlines. This, in effect, creates a vacuum and a vicious cycle, where
gamers and game makers feel misunderstood and fall deeper into their own
exclusionary languages and alienating subcultures. But challenging this
dynamic seems like a very tall order when the general adherence to the
cross-pollination of games and politics is mostly confined to the previously
mentioned discourses. Political narrative, or the lack thereof, continues to
play a crucial role in our understanding of gaming, even when it is not
overly offensive.
Multiple subgenres of politically inclined games also exist. Sometimes
they educate players about a particular historical or political event – 1979
Revolution: Black Friday (2016) fits the bill. Sometimes they’re satirical,
like Liberal Crime Squad (2004), or derivative – war survival simulator
This War of Mine (2014) leads the charge here. Then there are games that
value simplicity and relaxation and purposefully avoid conflict and tension.
That, in itself, signals a certain political stance. There is no escape: even the
rejection of politics is political.
An online event titled Wholesome Direct, showcasing a burgeoning
genre known as ‘wholesome’ games, has attracted tens of thousands of
viewers since 2021. Wholesome Direct also sparked an active online
discussion about the goals and limitations of wholesomeness as an artistic
practice. In case the name is not self-explanatory enough, here are a few
examples from the event: a puzzle game set against the backdrop of a rainy
afternoon, with a lo-fi soundtrack and Bob Ross-style paintings (Behind the
Frame, 2021); a girl running around a warm-toned pixelated world
completing tasks with animal companions (Yokai Inn, 2021); and even a
game in which the player simply takes pictures of cute dogs (Pupperazzi,
2022). It is easy to see the appeal of these games. Cute animals, cosy tasks
and warm pastel colours are the standard fare of this subgenre.
Wholesome games represent an entirely justified sentiment of resistance
against mainstream gaming products, so often marketed towards adolescent
white men with an interest in violence and competition. We should be glad
that now thriving spaces exist for game developers concerned with different

 audiences, and that their aesthetics are now being celebrated. After all, how
many more exhausting, grimy, frustrating post-apocalyptic games can we
really handle?
But the concept of wholesome escapism warrants examination. ‘Cute’
here is equated with the good, positive and democratic; the ethos is
reminiscent of the cults of hygge (the Danish word for ‘cosy’) and positive
psychology, which may seem grotesque and unattainable to anyone
experiencing increasing material anxieties or the erosion of actual freedoms.
It is understandable that game makers would wish to stick to safe, sanitary
and accessible themes when crassness, complication, intensity and
awkwardness can be classed as punishable crimes.
The inbuilt contradiction in wholesome games’ desire to represent a sort
of ‘games for good’ comes into sharp focus when, halfway through the
Wholesome Direct stream, the presenters introduce their appeal to donate to
the International Rescue Committee – an organisation that helps victims of
global humanitarian crises, including in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. This region is gravely affected by conflicts related to the mining of
the minerals needed for electronic hardware, including those used for
playing wholesome videogames. Needless to say, the connection was not
mentioned, and the brutal irony of the situation appears to be lost on the
organisational team of Wholesome Direct.
In the art world, the term kitsch refers to aesthetic qualities that are cute,
quirky and sentimental, rather than controversial or unsettling. Some might
argue that all videogames can be considered kitsch, as they are massproduced commodities that often prioritise accessibility and appeal over
intellectual or mechanical challenge. However, critical practitioners of
kitsch in the art world, like Takashi Murakami and Jeff Koons, have used
this aesthetic with self-awareness and an understanding of their art’s place
in the larger cultural context. In contrast, the wholesome games movement
seems to lack this self-reflection, and it remains to be seen if it will be able
to produce a digital equivalent to Koons’s work.
As Liz Ryerson, musician, writer and theorist of the videogame industry,
notes,
Wholesome Games come out of the same collective lack of imagination
that AAA game tropes come from. Either we have to have meaningless
violence as mass spectacle, or we have to be pure and stripped of

 anything too troubling. It is two sides of the same coin. They are both
unchallenging! People want to read ‘conservative’ as politically
conservative and not as ‘without risks and defined by market trends’,
which is also what ‘conservative’ means.23
It is important to recognise that, while games can provide temporary
escapism and relief from everyday stress, their true potential lies in their
ability to foster solidarity and promote learning and activism. By focussing
on creating wholesome, meaningful experiences, the videogame industry
has the opportunity to make a positive impact on the world. However, it
must not shy away from feelings of discomfort, irritation, struggle – all of
which are often a reality for people closing themselves into the digital
realms.
Chasing Utility
Finally, games can reach beyond their echo chambers when they are
consciously designed for educational purposes, especially when they
purport to be politically useful. Examples include titles that centre on
political events or assign particular civic functions to them – to inform,
research and present information in innovative ways. The practice is
nothing new. Tax Avoiders (1982) was a title that garnered praise when it
was released on the old-school Atari 2600 console. Currently, small-scale
propaganda games often accompany any election or other significant
political event. While games are mostly crafted with moralistic or grotesque
stories, this final grouping of political games seeks to effect civic change by
curating information in an inventive and surprising fashion.
In 2003, in preparation for the US presidential primary elections, the
campaign for progressive Democrat Howard Dean presented a novel way to
send a message: The Howard Dean for Iowa Game. The purpose of the
first-ever official game for the US presidential election was to encourage
people to participate in pre-caucus campaigning in Iowa and other states.
The game clearly did not move the needle enough to secure Dean the
nomination (ultimately John Kerry won the Democratic nomination but lost
the election to Republican George W. Bush in 2004), but it was a good
example of diversifying the methods for reaching an audience.

 Institutionally, left-leaning activists may have been too slow to recognise
gaming as a space for political negotiation and dissent, but these dedicated
projects prove that they were always there at the margins. Still, while the
political right has had tremendous success in moulding much of how the
games industry is understood and organised, the left has yet to gain similar
influence, even with its own propaganda games.
Election games vary in form. Most often, they are constructed to stage
comical encounters between politicians, while also informing the player of
the policies of both sides. In Corbyn Run (2017), the player is cast as
Jeremy Corbyn, the British Labour Party’s socialist leader at the time of the
game’s release. The player’s task is to chase the Conservative politicians
Boris Johnson and Theresa May and the ghost of Margaret Thatcher, who
are attempting to stymie the player’s run. How long can you escape these
attacks? In more ways than one, as Corbyn found out, not for long.
Bernie Sanders, the progressive senator of Vermont, also commissioned a
game for his 2016 primary campaign against Hillary Clinton. Labour –
Elections 96 (1996) invited Israeli players to control a jet fighter piloted by
the politician Shimon Peres in order to change poll results in different cities.
It’s an entire industry now: Persuasive Games is an Atlanta-based
consulting company developing tools in persuasive game design as well as
titles worldwide that would fit the category. The efficacy is still debatable –
while presenting information through a variety of methods makes sense,
just how much these games actually change people’s minds remains to be
researched.
Videogames have also been found useful in the realm of digital
humanities. Stella Wisdom, digital curator at the British Library, talks about
collaborating with game creators to bring historical documents to life.
Pudding Lane Productions, mostly staffed by students at Leicester’s De
Montfort University, crafted an interactive environment of London before
the Great Fire in 1666, based on the detailed street surveys and maps by
John Leake. These visualisations include the Old London Bridge, which
existed between 1209 and 1831. There are also modular houses with
different tops, middles and bottoms that can be arranged in various manners
to assemble very different-looking streets.24
In 2014, a team of three students from the University of South Wales
crafted a virtual reality experience of rebuilding Fonthill Abbey. There is no
trace left of this once-stunning Gothic revival mansion, as it was

 demolished in 1845 after the collapse of its gigantic ninety-metre tower. For
this digital reconstruction, the game makers used detailed illustrations of the
building from the British Library.25
Although the mainstream associates videogames with mental health
issues for their tendency to cause addiction or induce isolation, research has
shown that games can also work as a form of therapy. One example is the
SPARX (2012) videogame, developed as a treatment for depressed
adolescents. The acronym SPARX stands for ‘Smart, Positive, Active,
Realistic, and X-factor thoughts,’ crucial for combating depression. The
study included 168 adolescents, with an average age of fifteen, who were
suffering from depression.
Half of the participants received ‘treatment as usual’, typically consisting
of five one-on-one counselling sessions, while the other half played SPARX,
a fantasy game in which players created avatars to eliminate ‘negative
automatic thoughts’ and restore balance in the virtual world. Each level of
the game educated players with facts about depression, strategies for
managing intense negative emotions, and relaxation techniques. The results
of the study were particularly promising for the group that played SPARX,
as 44 per cent of those participants fully recovered from depression, while
only 26 per cent of the control group were no longer depressed.
PlayMancer (2009) was a project funded by the European Union aimed
at creating a videogame to treat specific mental health conditions, including
eating disorders and impulse control disorders. The game, called Islands
(2009), introduces players to an interactive scenario with the goal of
improving their emotional self-control skills and helping them manage
impulsive behaviours. A team of clinicians, engineers and programmers
designed the game based on the needs and emotional responses of the target
patient population, as well as their personality profiles.
Short-term effects of the game have included the development of new
coping strategies for managing negative emotions in response to everyday
stressors, more generalised patterns of improvement, and increased selfcontrol when faced with challenges. Crucially, the game has been found to
be highly patient-friendly, with 85 per cent finding it comfortable to use for
these purposes. This high usability may make it more likely that certain
groups of people, variously resistant to other forms of mental health
treatment, may work to improve their mental health by using the game.26

 Multiple studies reveal a variety of benefits of gaming. Videogames are
therapeutic for children with chronic illnesses, and improve preschoolers’
motor skills.27 They can reduce loneliness among older people, and they
help doctors refine their dexterity and develop their knowledge of
anatomy.28 Computer games help dyslexic kids to read and can even
alleviate pain.29 The uses and benefits of games, especially when
developers set their eyes on this goal, are vast, and specialists are only
beginning to tackle the potential utility for the body and mind. Gaming is a
potentially persuasive medium that can have many civic implications. Yes,
the theme of the game can be hugely instrumental here, but this is only one
element of the connections between digital gaming and real-life outcomes.
Beyond Representation
There are limitations and even pitfalls in hoping that representation alone
will achieve all victories, that if only games were endowed with a certain
theme or mechanic, they could be rehabilitated as instruments for change.
In fact, this idea formed the basis for two prevailing schools of thought
dominating the games academic discourse. Which is more important:
narratology (roughly, the plot) or ludology (roughly, the gameplay)? The
framing of this argument already reveals a lot about the type of stakeholders
involved in defining the rules of game studies, and indicates a certain
politics through what it excludes. A more critical perspective would involve
a study of production and marketing elements. The efficacy of social
relations, of which play is a fundamental part, can only be reflected, then,
by paying attention to the circumstances in which they are situated.
To that end, framing games studies as pivoting only between narrative
and mechanics exposes a dissonance with the world outside the enclosed
spaces of games media and parts of games academia. So much of how a
game is played, perceived and utilised for ideological means depends on
how it is located in the commodity market, meaning that its proprietary
value, accessibility and marketing techniques can have an infinitely more
significant role. Anthropological, ethnographical and, crucially, material
methods of games research are emerging and ought to be encouraged.
Still, for people less versed in the intricacies of how videogames are
situated in global class relations, judging a game in terms of its overarching

 themes is a predictable and popular approach. Doubtlessly still influential,
and capable of providing insight into our social reality, the subjects of
games are more varied every year. At the same time, games marketers are
more insistent on classifying them within a specific genre. Whether a firstperson shooter (albeit with a moral story about the shooter), a role-playing
game (albeit with a surprising location), a racing game (albeit with a
character arc for the driver) – games sell better when they stick to
familiarity.
This circularity of what is permitted or what is deemed to be unprofitable
(and hence not given the production time and resources to be achieved) both
classifies games and gives them stringent limitations. While noticing more
intricate stories with more complex characters and granular settings, we
also observe a distinct stratification.
The late academic Mark Fisher wrote extensively about the narrowing of
culture and, by extension, pop culture, and his findings can most certainly
be applied to videogames. Under a consolidation of political systems (i.e.,
semi-democratic state market economies), the boundaries for citizen
expression are predefined, reducing the plurality of cultural expression as
well.30 By retaining a definitive outline within which creativity is pursued
and articulated (in this case, IBM- or NVIDIA-chipped Microsoft or Sony
machines), we are forced to curtail our imagination and, by extension, our
ambitions regarding the conditions of our collective livelihoods. So games
convey the notion that all significant ideological debates have concluded,
portraying politics as mere administrative tasks. If economic discourse is off
the table, the focus inevitably shifts to allocating the leftovers.
This is not to fetishise abstraction, which can also lead to interpretations
formulated by the powerful. However, an upsurge of abstract tendencies is
not a current problem for gaming, whereas its reliance on aesthetic tactics
tends to underline, overexplain and align ideologies according to the
consumer base. This impulse should be interrogated, if only to encourage
better techniques of propaganda for egalitarian ends.
Avant-garde art, art that challenges, surprises and is unorthodox, implies
possibilities and the urgency of social, political and economic reform.
Instead, many games are conservative and formulaic, a source of stability
for the status quo. There would be little wrong with that if the medium were
not actively harmful while also dependent on the processes of destructive
forces. But non-challenging structure coupled with nefarious modes of

 production leave a lot to be desired. These problems must be addressed if
games are ever to serve a broadly egalitarian agenda.
Even the voices of resistance, games that are made with the best of
intentions and actively support the mental and physical well-being of
numerous groups of individuals, are still commodities under the capitalist
mode of production. And, as discussed in the Tutorial, games are especially
susceptible to becoming dependent on fundamentally antagonising
logistical tools.
Focussing too much on the content may leave us feeling helpless,
overloaded with imagery, overstimulated and incapacitated as to how to
change the conditions enabling that imagery. There is an overwhelming
feeling, rooted in much of our everyday experience, of being stuck in the
prison of digital baroque.31 Powers beyond our control are pumping dozens
of immaculate, high-octane images into our daily existence at an
incomprehensible speed. This makes us feel disorientated and leaves little
space to consider action beyond spectacle. Just as the overwhelmingly
baroque and rococo styles were chosen to reflect the interests and desires of
the ruling classes, much of today’s digital depictions also fight for our
attention. Jean Baudrillard assists here:
It is often said that the West’s great undertaking is the
commercialization of the whole world, the hitching of the fate of
everything to the fate of the commodity. That great undertaking will
turn out rather to have been the aestheticization of the whole world.32
Baudrillard was of the view that ‘we have lost the secret’. Everything is
said, everything is exposed; everything acquires a meaning and nothing is
said at the same time. To borrow Marshall McLuhan’s gospel, not only is
the medium the message but crucially – the selling is the message.
We do not have to be sceptical to this extent, but it is important to
underline that advocating for decentralised, democratised and egalitarian
systems can only take place when the actors fighting for these goals are
themselves engaging from within democratised and decentralised
systems.33 We must update Baudrillard’s critique to account for the vertigo
of the internet and other vast digital realms.

 As an old punk at heart, I am also conflicted – what about the incredibly
explicit punk aesthetic, our brash, loud pronouncements of our politics? We
were clad in pins and patches signalling our political beliefs. I felt at home
at political punk gigs and benefit concerts for various causes, organising
anti-fascist events under various banners. Following my critique, are these
worth little, too? The crucial difference must be at the level of the mode of
production, as always. At its most visceral and material, the best of punk is
executed by DIY means, reaching for something authentic. What would that
mean in games?34 It would mean repurposing existing objects by
withdrawing them from the commodity market and changing their aesthetic
to something antithetical to the habits of consumption.
Mods, free games and non-commercial projects created with free
software such as Bitsy and Twine all come close to that ideal. It would
involve the creation of games to be played on devices built under decent
labour conditions, with components that did not cost lives in the Global
South. It would somehow publicise that it did not rely on the internet, with
servers owned by asset management firms who landlord our communication
networks. In this particular age, I can hardly imagine how all of that might
work, but this has to be our ambition. (Of resonance in this framing are the
words of literary critic and theorist Fredric Jameson: ‘It is harder to imagine
the end of the world than the end of capitalism.’) Anything less does not a
decolonised videogame make, and influencers who attempt to claim the
contrary are only building their own social capital. To be clear, I’d
absolutely love to play a Tatar farm simulator of my grandfather’s bee hives
in the Urals Mountains, but I also know that currently it would not be the
most efficient method to tell his story and would not honour the anticonsumerist ethos he lived by.
Jen Pan, in her video essay for the magazine Jacobin brutally titled ‘Why
Liberals Lose Their Minds over Hollywood Movies’, brilliantly
encapsulates the deliberate and limiting choice of focussing on
representation above all else. She points out how tempting it is to call the
recent burgeoning of diversity in Hollywood products a political win. After
all, when we control so few of the actual outcomes of our lives, observing
victories in pop culture may indeed feel empowering. Pan cites two novels
that arguably prove political pop literature can bring about material change:
Uncle Tom’s Cabin (1852) by Harriet Beecher Stowe, and The Jungle
(1905) by Upton Sinclair. She then reminds us that these cultural artefacts

 were in fact complementary to the political struggles of the time, rather than
instigators of them.
Neither Stowe’s nor Sinclair’s books themselves catalysed political
change or led to the creation of new movements. Rather both novels
came out of political movements that were already underway. The
abolitionist movement in the case of Stowe and the socialist movement
of the early twentieth century in the case of Sinclair. Cultural
production can only ever complement, not stand in for the work of
politics.35
Pan then aptly quotes the political scientist Adolph L. Reed Jr: ‘Nothing
could indicate more strikingly the extent of neoliberal ideological
hegemony than the idea that the mass-culture industry and its
representational practices constitute a meaningful terrain for struggle to
advance egalitarian interests.’36
The interests advanced are usually ones reflecting what already exists;
real political victories are harder to achieve and involve real risk. These
critiques must be applied to videogames, or should at least be addressed by
self-described political videogame makers. At best, the authors should stress
that their work broaches only the themes that can be tackled due to practical
political organising. At worst, the exploitation of certain themes, while
offering little to no material help to the people who live in that struggle,
should be seen for what it is – a marketing ploy. The message of the director
of the Crazy Rich Asians (2018) franchise, who claimed, ‘It’s not a movie,
it’s a movement,’ illustrates the need of the liberal class to envisage
emancipatory politics within representation, even if it is one of obscenely
rich individuals, who in all probability acquired that wealth through the
oppression of individuals of the same race but lower social-economic
rank.37
On an institutional level, however, it seems that games will continue to
receive support predominantly for their themes, while their other special
traits continue to be ignored. The storytelling aspect of games seems to be
the safest bet in securing future investment from parallel industries, too. The
success of The Witcher (2019) adaptation for Netflix and the critical

 darlings that are HBO’s The Last of Us (2023) and Amazon Prime’s Fallout
(2024) are helping gaming reach the final frontier – Hollywood.
In the public sector, narrative is also valued seemingly above all else.
Cultural heritage organisations in the United Kingdom, for instance, have
divided their support for games into the following categories: the Victoria
and Albert Museum is interested in the art and design aspect of games; the
British Film Institute is focussed on film and animation; Tate Modern on
digital art; and the British Library on narrative and storytelling. One can pin
the highest hopes on the Tate here, as it is most likely to next investigate
some lesser aesthetic parts of a videogame, such as mechanics, communities
and impact, but, to date, they have done nothing with the field.
Videogames have promising political uses, but their current limitations
must be clearly outlined, if only to abolish them soon. Games critic and
writer Samantha Greer, mostly known for her exploration of the
marginalisation of working-class voices in the games industry, released a
poignant video on YouTube reflecting on the scope of empathy in computer
games. ‘Games Are Not Empathy Machines’ investigates the lessons to be
learnt from The Last Guardian (2016) – an action adventure game centred
on the relationship between a little boy and a half-bird, half-mammal
creature who becomes his companion. Greer concludes that the narratives
of videogames are mirrors.38 If a player possesses qualities that lead them
towards empathy, then, with most probability, they will feel it. If not,
empathy for the characters in game will fail to materialise. Games with an
intrinsic political theme can be evaluated in a similar fashion – other
properties must be mobilised in order to achieve a change in consciousness,
rather than just supporting an already existing inclination.
The idea of games as mirrors is supported by studies, too. One conducted
in Germany from 2012 to 2015, with 824 participants, found no correlation
between the amount of time spent playing videogames and sexism.39 The
study, which followed a theory called cultivation, did not, however,
demonstrate that sexism is not present in the gaming industry and culture.
Certainly, most popular games depict women in a stereotypical or
sexualised manner, and sexism is a common issue among players,
particularly as experienced by women players. There must be another power
that turns people into political actors. The theme is imposed by the creators,
but what the players themselves do with the games can become much more
subversive, creative and, at times, dangerous.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Level II: Communities

The year was 2015, and I was in my safe cocoon of an anarchist lifestyle –
political struggle day and night, more tranquil, private moments of partying
and gaming in between. I fell in love with an English lad who was moving
to London at the time. Like me, he also found temporary housing security
through squatting. I was a political person with a niche interest in gaming.
He was a fighting games influencer and YouTuber, known online as
TheoryFighter, with a lefty heart.1
We started exchanging thoughts, ideas and life experiences, and an entire
world opened up to me. It was TheoryFighter who first told me about the
Goonswarm versus Band of Brothers struggle in EVE Online (2003),
probably with some Polish beer in hand, during a cosy bohemian street
drinking session in Hackney Marshes. As clearly as I can identify, this was
the moment that broadened my conception of what gaming spaces are
capable of. And opened my eyes to the possibility that all of us are living in
a reflection of the customs of these spaces.
To those who have not spent years in it, EVE Online appears like a
glorified spreadsheet. Playing this space-themed MMORPG (massively
multiplayer online role-playing game) involves a lot of counting and
organising while dispensing a finite amount of resources among the
characters within the game. Set more than 21,000 years from now, when
Earth’s resources have been exhausted, EVE Online imagines humanity
seeking to colonise the rest of the Milky Way. Players control a fleet of
ships, the size and powers of which depend on the skill and social or
material capital of each player.
However, by the late 2000s, this monetary inequality became glaring.
While some players were investing tens of thousands of hours to upgrade
their fleets, others took a short cut by acquiring in-game enhancements with
real-life money. The so-called Band of Brothers was a small group of

 spaceships that used the latter tactic – outsourcing, or straight-up buying,
power over the virtual environment – and soon dominated the galaxy of
EVE Online. A group of poorer, but more skilled, players grew fed up with
this dynamic and began scheming and coordinating on ways to reverse this
trend, which they believed had wrecked the game.
In 2006, thousands of these players formed the group Goonswarm, and
commenced an epic battle against the Band of Brothers. It took an
incredible amount of gameplay, unity and coordination, but eventually
Goonswarm secured the victory in this modern David and Goliath story.
The destruction of the Band of Brothers’ virtual fleet cost its players around
$6,000 actual real-life dollars.2
The key to Goonswarm’s success was their number, their anonymity, and
their inventive communication techniques. Their members infiltrated the
private forums of the Band of Brothers, leaking information to their
teammates and sabotaging any counter-attacks. Their large numbters and
dedication to the mission allowed them to gain the upper hand over their
affluent adversaries. The turning point came when the chairman of Band of
Brothers, Haargoth Agamar, defected to Goonswarm because he, by his
own account, preferred the group’s more horizontal organisational structure.
To add to the beauty of this marvellous act of resistance, it thoroughly
undermined the business plan of the game’s developer – CCP Games. The
company had introduced microtransactions to boost profits, a move
seriously challenged by this legendary fight.
Such activities by gaming communities exhibit the potential for game
spaces to be sites of political expression. Unlike the narrative imposed from
above by the game maker, the actions of communities are self-defined and
self-motivated and reflect the active will of hundreds, sometimes thousands,
of players. This expression adopts many different forms: explicit political
organising in games, consumer organising, cooperative disruptions and
online meetings where players enact various functions in real life. This
constitutes, perhaps surprisingly, an activation of otherwise passive
individuals into political subjects.
Advancing to Level III will require readers to examine how and why
players regularly behave as publicly engaged beings. What are some key
examples of civic engagement in games? Why is it barely recognised as a
form of political expression? At a time of general political malaise and
nihilism, what is it about videogames that ignites a sense of belonging and

 what makes this space ripe for meaningful action? What is the spectrum of
this expression, and who controls of it?
Some of us recognise our role as consumers in videogames and learn to
effect change as active entities in this role. Having achieved our goal or
enjoyed trying, we move on to attempting to affect real-life politics. Some
succeed; in other instances, the results are devastating. From in-game
experimentations with various models of self-organisation to political
actions and straight-up radicalisation, the intensity and techniques represent
an assortment of aims. While players like me simply admire clever
storytelling tricks and engage in relatively basic sportsmanship, other
players were creating entire civic systems in game. Sure, some of it arose
from a spirit of competition, but as I started digging into the world of
gaming communities, it became clear that much of it lay somewhere
between power grabbing and seeking a sense of belonging. And if those are
not politics, I don’t know what is.
Gamers as Civic Entities
While some players assign political meaning to gamer communities, many
do not. In fact, many participants in the epic Goonswarm versus Band of
Brothers fight might shrug or even shudder to hear their struggle described
as reflecting leftist tendencies. Gamers do gamer stuff, they would retort,
and it’s nobody else’s business. Nonetheless, many of them engage in
activities that are altruistic, such as coordinating and agitating; they canvas,
form and self-select into distinct factions. MMORPGs provide a platform
that is abstract and relatively light on narrative which can become a rich
space for self-expression, civic or otherwise. There, consciously or
unconsciously, players compose slogans and languages that mimic existing
power structures and the struggles between them. In an age of fears over
declining civic participation and a widening gap between governmental
bodies and the people they are meant to represent, it is fascinating to
observe populations building communal structures and experimenting with
various forms of management and administration, all this voluntarily!
Similarly to EVE Online, World of Warcraft (WoW) is another massively
multiplayer online game that is hugely popular. It is home to an array of
groupings with their own traditions, expressions and forms of unity. For

 almost twenty years, it has captivated audiences with its huge, lore-rich
universe, plentiful customisation and progression options and epic high
fantasy, including mythical creatures and diverse kingdoms. Famously, the
game contains the Horde and the Alliance, which have a long history of
conflict – the player is thrust into being a soldier in battle, looking for
associates to gain the best result. The relationship between the two powers
are grounded in complex loyalties, according to the game’s lore. But even
within those flowing communities, distinct organisational formulas emerge.
In his YouTube video ‘DKP Is Market Socialism’, the artist and streamer
Joshua Citarella explains in detail how WoW’s virtual loot system, called
dragon kill points (DKP), demonstrates a level of sophisticated horizontal
trading that should be analysed and admired by progressive thinkers. A
standard World of Warcraft raid involves forty or so players attempting to
defeat a boss together. Once defeated, the boss usually throws only some
four or five collectable items, not easy to share among dozens of players.
‘So the guild is tasked with the distribution of scarce resources among a
group of angsty nerd rage gamers. Each player is a worker in a cooperative
system of a guild, it incentivises playing the best and sharing the loot
equally,’ Citarella says approvingly.3
Fifteen years of practice, habit, and care have turned these presumably
chaotic groups of digital participants into members of some of the most
trustworthy, horizontal and fair mass economic distributions in existence.
Some guilds democratically appoint ‘loot councils’, who represent the
players and make decisions about resource distribution. Other guilds
assemble themselves under elite clan monarchies that keep the spoils. Some
decide the beneficiaries of the loot with a dice roll, but these groups are
often unstable, and the tactic rarely yields winning results. None of this is
suggested or encouraged by the game creators (Blizzard Entertainment); all
these structures come from the players themselves. One can only conclude,
therefore, that in the proven economy of World of Warcraft, reciprocal
altruism, cooperation and an equal distribution of wealth results in the most
consistent victories and player happiness.
Another example of gaming communities organising for a single issue is
the 100th anniversary commemoration of the armistice that ended World
War I, in the online first-person shooter Battlefield 1 (2016). Players
coordinated to temporarily cease their eternal hostilities at 11 a.m.
Australian time on 11 November 2018 – exactly a century after the Allied

 powers and Germany ended fighting on the Western Front. The gameplay
footage depicts something truly and strangely powerful – a huge battle on a
beach between dozens of people, with explosions and bullets flying in every
direction, and then … nothing.4 Peace.
The players observed a moment of silence, remembering those who
fought in the real battle. This kind of ceasefire could never be officially
mandated by Electronic Arts, the game’s publisher, because their business
model relies on the agreed ceaselessness of war and on customers endlessly
duking it out across their privately owned perpetual battlefields. But the
players themselves had no such obligations. In typical gamer fashion,
however, the two-minute period of eerie silence was shattered by an
opportunist launching an attack from a plane.
A sense of collective coming together, of this beautiful, sensitive
melancholia, was also recently displayed by the China-based players of
World of Warcraft. After a licensing dispute between the US developer
Blizzard and its local partner NetEase, it was announced that the game
would go dark in China for good at the end of January 2023. ‘It was not just
a game. It was also the memories of a whole generation,’ a Chinese player
wrote.5 In its more than fifteen years online, some had given their entire
lives and built their entire livelihoods on the platform.
In the final moments when the servers were available online, the stages
were filled with devastated, yet crucially, hilarious and kind players, all
collectively commiserating in chat, while their virtual avatars were
gathering, shooting out sparkles and fireworks and, most heart-wrenchingly,
gifting each other expensive and rare items that would have taken years to
obtain.6 It was the last carnival of a group of friends who had seen each
other through so much – weddings, birthdays, divorces and funerals.
Numerous stories exist on the internet forums describing how groups of
players finally met IRL, after having spent years playing together online.
Mostly, they are joyful stories and sometimes utterly tear-jerking. This was
the case with Joe, who in 2018 finally met the five pals he had gamed with
for the past five years. After hearing about his diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma,
they all met at a New Jersey oncology clinic. Speaking to the BBC, one of
Joe’s friends, Davi, said: ‘Wet played pretty much everything. Even if we
weren’t playing games we would be just hanging out talking about
anything. We just hung out like we had done it a thousand times before.’7

 In Elite Dangerous (2014), another player with cancer was trying to
reach a Dove Enigma station. He wished to make this his last journey. As he
was getting near it, he found that the station had been taken offline. Some
troll had exploited a glitch that made it possible to shut down stations by
overloading them with unknown artefacts. But when a bunch of gamers
found out about this, they all got together and beamed meta alloys, an item
that counteracts the interference. So, the station was brought back in time
for Brandon Keith, the cancer patient, to reach it before his passing.8
This game is also known for its crew of Fuel Rats, a dedicated group of
players who spend thousands of hours catching up with other players stuck
in the outer regions of the game’s universe and delivering fuel to them.
There are also beautiful stories of gamers organising in-game funerals,
vigils or just hype campaigns for their playing colleagues who are
struggling, shooting little beams into the air in solidarity or engaging in
other kind-hearted theatrics.9
After player organisation for gameplay purposes comes the consumer
protest. Players can utilise game mechanics to convey their frustration with
the game’s developers and publishers. By demonstrating a threat to their
profits – the only language the CEOs of most gaming companies understand
– gamers can bring about real change, affecting the course of a company or
sometimes even an entire industry.
Ultima Online (1997), one of the first MMORPGs, suffered persistent
problems upon launch, having amassed hundreds of thousands of
subscribers within its first six months. A year into the game’s existence,
players organised a ‘peasant revolt’ to protest the unrestrained killing of
novice players, lagging servers, lost progress and catastrophic world
crashes. During the action, scores of serf avatars invaded the virtual castle
of Lord British – the character created and voiced by Richard Garriott, selfmade millionaire and creator of the game, who was investing vast sums of
money into the game to maintain his advantage. In an exhilarating display
of chaos, destruction and the joy of protest, the crowds of gamer protesters
virtually drank their master’s wine and ate his food, danced naked in the
halls and vandalised his chambers, while loudly airing their grievances in
the chat.10
Archived screenshots from this protest look like a surreal, beautiful mess
– much like many real-life protests – and its organisers should be hailed for

 their innovative usage of the new medium. The power imbalance, the fact
that Lord British got to rig the rules of the game simply by virtue of his
wealth, turned what could pejoratively be called a mob into class warriors.
Deliciously, this also sent a message to the developers – the huge
corporation Electronic Arts – that the players would resist the company’s
reliance on in-game currency for financial gain.
In another instance of disappointed players taking things in hand,
Chinese players of the MMO Fantasy Westward Journey (2001) were not
pleased with what they perceived to be its pro-Japanese sentiment and
content. The stakeholders of the game had been recently bought out by a
Japanese company, which sparked nationalist distrust among the players.
The administrators then locked the account of a player with an antiJapanese username, who was also the leader of an anti-Japanese guild with
700 members. On 7 July 2006 – the anniversary of the beginning of the
Second Sino-Japanese War – an astonishing 80,000 players simultaneously
mounted what is perhaps the biggest political demonstration ever held in a
virtual world. Since there was no active real-life conflict taking place, it is
hard to conclude that this was anything more than a consumer protest; but it
also clearly demonstrates how early networked game players were able to
bring nationalist views to this burgeoning medium. Predictably, the action
attracted little to no interest from groups studying the development of
nationalist ideologies away from the screen.11
While some types of consumer activism are lauded by liberals, it is
generally overlooked when undertaken by gaming communities. Twelveyear-old Maddie Messer, a fan of the hit mobile game Temple Run (2011),
noticed that it was free to play as the default character, Guy Dangerous,
whereas playing as a girl character cost extra. Not cool, Maddie thought,
and she decided to publicise it. The Washington Post agreed to publish her
complaint, which was retweeted by people at the Financial Times and then
reached the creators of Temple Run – Imangi Studios. To Maddie’s delight,
and no doubt to clear up the PR mess caused by her complaint, the
developers emailed her that same day, confirming that they would make the
Scarlet Fox character free. They also promised a cast of diverse characters
in the future.12
In another expression of protest towards a game creator, Russian players
of The Sims spoke out loudly against the developer Electronic Arts’s

 decision to comply with the law passed by the Kremlin regime, outlawing
any mention of what is deemed to be LGBTQ+ propaganda in the country,
by turning off the ability of same-sex individuals to marry inside the game.
The slogan #WeddingsForRussia was endorsed by many gamer
communities on Twitter, and an online petition attracted over 10,000
signatures. The protest worked, and EA announced their decision to market
the ‘My Wedding Stories’ game pack unaltered to their player community in
Russia.13
With the progressive politicisation of gaming communities in the wake of
Gamergate, players on the left are attempting to effect real-world change. In
this nascent stage of lefty gamer activism, the preferred technique thus far is
boycotts. In 2023, swathes of internet communities campaigned for a
reduction in sales for the Hogwarts Legacy (2023) action role-playing
game, in response to the franchise author J. K. Rowling’s transphobic views
and the antisemitic tropes portrayed in the game.14 The social online
pressure to not engage with the game was so strong that mainstream gaming
media outlets, such as IGN and Kotaku, were running their reviews with
large disclaimers about the politics of the game, or outright refused to
review it.
Where were these activists when the new Call of Duty was released?
Where were they during the glamorous launches of one Islamophobic
videogame after another? Why am I seeing so few calls to boycott Atomic
Heart (2023) – a game created and funded in Russia during its invasion of
Ukraine, which glorifies the imperial violence of the Eastern Bloc? Why are
we not collectively skewering the huge investments into gaming by Saudi
Arabian princes, or other dictatorships?
But I recognise I am seeing the glass half empty. In practice, we are
witnessing an increase of left voices within the gaming space and of
progressive activism in the industry. One boycott turns into many boycotts,
and that fuels political awareness and the drive to get involved in action
with higher stakes. Instead of playing an ever-satisfying game of
whataboutism, I am choosing to celebrate this collective political
awakening. Culturally, the Hogwart’s Legacy protest had clout, with many
media outlets following and reporting on the community’s refusal to buy the
product and urging others to follow. Monetarily, it was less effective – the

 game recouped the expenses to its reported $150 million budget in the first
week of release, hitting a $1 billion revenue three months after its launch.15
Techniques such as review spamming, public shaming and boycott have,
after all, been weaponised by the right for quite some time, with equally
limited success. Buck Up and Drive! (2022), an innocuous driving game
inspired by arcade classics, offended some whose experience of the game
was apparently affected by a few Pride flags on the side of the digital track.
An attempt at lowering the game’s review scores failed when the game
creators pushed back and justified the flags. The subsequent media coverage
ensured a wave of positive reviews, protecting the game’s status on the allimportant Steam game publishing platform.16
Still, this is another example of gamers organising politically to effect
change beyond the game’s own walls. The question of what is a useful
political action can sometimes grip the left to the point of paralysis. It took
many of us too long to recognise the rebellion of the summer 2011 rioters in
the UK as a righteous cause against systemic racism, not just an angry,
violent mob (as the media described it at the time). Protests in digital
playgrounds are in these cases way less consequential – incurring none of
the brutally harsh sentences meted out to protesters in Tottenham and
elsewhere that year – but their methods are equally misunderstood. The
aesthetics of protest can be varied as well. What constitutes its
righteousness or usefulness must be calculated, taking into account the
reasons for protests, the power balance, the aim, and the technique. A
Gamergater is closer to a 2021 Capitol rioter than to an Ultima Online
looter, who is closer to a Tottenham rioter, who is closer to an anti-fascist
demonstrator.
Gamers Turning into Actors
Besides organising within games, players also organise en masse to effect
change outside of the game arena, without explicitly declaring or perceiving
themselves as political agents. Let’s touch briefly on three cases – review
bombing, charity streams and Gamergate – before diving into the depths of
a fourth one, the 2021 GameStop short squeeze.
The attempt to rally conservative forum members online into leaving
negative reviews for the game Buck Up and Drive! is a classic case of the

 practice known as review bombing. This tactic is commonly used by
gamers to express their disgruntlement with aspects of a game or the
politics of its creators. Average user review scores matter a lot – digital
distribution services like Steam and the Apple App Store are the main
avenues for game sales, and their design highlights aggregated user review
scores much more prominently than other metrics, such as reviews by
professional critics. Moreover, their algorithm employs user review scores
to choose which games to promote on the store’s front page. So, a
successful review bombing can seriously harm a game creator’s business.
For many gamers, this is their first experience of activism, such as it is.
Forming into large affinity groups, strategising on tactics and implementing
them is something gamers are good at – in-game, structuring themselves
into an outward-facing online force comes relatively easily. Affinities and
networks built in games, with their own language, ‘memeology’ and
traditions, can spill out of game chats and forums and into very tangible,
material consequences on the outside.
On the positive end of this spectrum, gaming communities are
responsible for some of the largest fundraisers online. A 2022 charity games
bundle raised more than $12 million for the victims of the war in Ukraine.17
Games Done Quick – a fascinating organisation of gamers who play on live
stream and attempt to get through a game as quickly as possible, sometimes
by the ingenious use of glitches – have raised nearly $100 million for the
Prevent Cancer Foundation. Jingle Jam, which focuses on the mental and
physical well-being of young people, has raised more than $40 million for
charities over a decade.18 These are just a few of hundreds of such
endeavours, not to mention the thousands of individual Twitch and YouTube
streamers who have their communities raise large or small amounts for
various causes all the time.
On the darker end, one can find #Gamergate and similar gaming
communities, who instigate and support what amounts to acts of terror
while still claiming to be apolitical. The Verge ran a brilliant piece outlining
the themes of some of Ubisoft’s games, which their executives insist are
politically neutral. The themes include an island compound in the South
Pacific owned by a rich tech CEO, who made his fortune through
autonomous drones and AI; a rogue group of former US soldiers, Mexican
drug cartels and huge civilian populations destroyed by US-government
special agents; a white supremacist–glorified Americana takeover; and a

 Washington, DC–based shooter in which the player is tasked with clawing
back control of the capital’s government buildings. The community’s
response to these games was predictably reactionary. ‘Not political’,
insisted Ubisoft’s spokespeople.19 Strangely and for obviously different
reasons, this denial was a distorted mirror of the views held by many selfproclaimed progressives.
There are many stories online of girlfriends and mums who have
witnessed their partners or sons become radicalised to right-wing
communities in the wake of Gamergate.20 No doubt these men already
harboured poisonous opinions, but crucially, in Gamergate they found a
community that justified those thoughts.21 Members of the Gamergate
community gathered in online forums such as 4chan, where they formed an
identity out of geek culture and resolved to protect it, perceiving diversity in
games as a threat.
At the time, the Gamergate movement was walking a tightrope, calling
their campaign a consumer protest against what they regarded as ethics in
games journalism. They demanded that media and creators alike not
‘politicise’ games, while at the same time using starkly political language
and methods that extended into real-life action. The ‘leave politics out of
our games’ crowd was, in fact, highly politicised.
Huge communities met on spaces like 4chan and grew up together. These
message boards are filled with requests for brotherly advice and mentoring.
Technological advances have barely reduced the working week and, in
many cases, made it more all-encapsulating. Widening class inequality
forces many to work longer days, leaving them lonelier and more alienated.
Communication devices provide the easiest method for social encounters.
Patriarchy and other prejudiced belief systems underpin these forums, the
opinions shared by a majority curdling into the extreme when members
meet enough like-minded souls.
Progressive ideas countering this extremism are innovative and require
change. If put forward by only a very few people, these ideas can hardly
compete. So forums like 4chan, reflective of broader trends, have simply
become spaces where individuals can find unfettered support for their
darkest instincts, having to prove themselves with the most exclusionary
attitudes. The left can sometimes neglect giving personal advice for a call to
action for the many, and individuals can fall through the cracks, forming
into masses at the bottom. The GameStop short squeeze phenomenon of

 2021 provided an opportunity for a rambunctious, productive and, once
again, outward collaboration between these communities.
The relationship between the internet cesspool of 4chan and the
videogaming communities is a complicated one – people who are ‘very
online’ congregate around these forums, looking for like-minded souls. If
someone spends so much time on their computer that they reach these
depths of the internet, it is safe to assume that the activity they are engaged
in online is gaming. Sure enough, 4chan is filled to the brim with gaming
memes, much more than with memes on books, fine art, music or literature.
Many of the original internet memes can be attributed to videogames, such
as the mother of all memes, ‘All your base are belong to us’.22
The short-squeezing of GameStop made sense in the logic of these
spaces. GameStop is an American brick-and-mortar videogame shop chain,
the largest of its kind worldwide. As the world of media, games included,
moves rapidly into digital distribution, physical storefronts like GameStop
suffering financially. GameStop’s demise was predicted by major capitalist
conglomerates, Goldman Sachs among them, who began investing in bets
against the company. The COVID-19 pandemic only accelerated its
seemingly inevitable fate. However, the gamers had other ideas.
The subreddit WallStreetBets, self-described as ‘4chan finding a
Bloomberg Terminal’, is a congregation of 4chaners with bank accounts (or,
more accurately, with Robinhood accounts) which the app utilised for the
short squeeze. In mid-2019, investor Michael Burry, of The Big Short fame,
had acquired a 3.3 per cent stake in GameStop and wrote to the company’s
board of directors, urging them to buy back shares due to identifying
overlooked value in the company.23 The guy who predicted the 2008
subprime crash and made billions from the mainstream banks’ collapse was
urging the company to invest in its own shares? That was enough to pique
interest, and the Canadian activist investor Ryan Cohen joined GameStop’s
board in January 2021 with a 9 per cent investment.24 This was the key to
triggering the stock rally.
Hundreds of Robinhood account holders, organising on Wall-StreetBets,
decided to jump on this ‘troll with potential’. Artificially inflating the price
share of GameStop was a golden cocktail of righteousness, opportunity and
banter; it also offered the chance of profit. They were sticking it to the big
guns of the traditional financial market, sending a financial crisis their way.

 Crucially, it was, in the view of WallStreetBets, very funny. A fictitious
campaign of money and power utilising the sort of absurd, egregious
procedures that usually cause financial disasters such as the 2008 crash,
working for the benign purpose of saving an early millennial shop.
Mainstream media outlets were running meme-filled live feeds reporting
on the hot frenzy of investing by regular folks. From the outside looking in,
the picture was that of a beautifully formulated, hilarious direct action,
getting one up on the corporations while creating enormous profits for the
players of the game. Regulators eventually barged in to introduce an
extraordinary ban on Robinhood trading. This fuelled further indignation
and the impression that procuring money through stock trading by a mass of
average Joes is somehow illegal, though the big trading conglomerates are
allowed to demolish each other in such exchanges all the time.
The aftermath and the impact of this financial and media phenomenon
was, in the end, a sad one for the little guy. WallStreetBets broke the page
view records due to the short squeeze, receiving 73 million page views in
twenty-four hours.25 It became the fastest-growing subreddit at the time.
The community surged by more than 1.5 million users overnight (to a total
of 6 million members) on 29 January 2021.26 Millions wanted to get in on
the action after reading the accounts of people who had invested in
GameStop early and were urging others to join (increasing their profit in the
meantime). At the peak of the trading, this effectively defunct business was
worth over $30 billion: as much as the hugely profitable videogames
conglomerate Electronic Arts or the leisurewear giant Adidas. It wiped out
billions from sophisticated investment management firms, notably Melvin
Capital and Citadel LLC, and the former shut down operations entirely in
May 2022.27 Executives at GameStop cashed in $22 million in stock,
greatly increasing the personal wealth of the board of directors.28
Although the short squeeze was initially believed to have been instigated
by individual investors, it was later revealed that large hedge funds played a
significant role in the market activity revolving around GameStop and its
associated securities. Wall Street’s giant asset management firms, such as
Morgan Stanley and BlackRock, reaped massive profits from their holdings,
as well as by lending stocks to short sellers.29 Institutional investors had a
significant hand in the trading activity related to the short squeeze. The
internet ended up littered with heartbreaking stories of the meme-affected

 latecomers who bet their life savings and lost most of them to the large
funds in the process. The house always wins.
The choice of the name Robinhood for the platform alludes to the
mischievous legendary character who took money from the wealthy and
distributed it to the poor. There’s a reason why. In the McCarthy era, there
were calls to ban Robin Hood from the schoolbooks for perceived
communist connotations. The self-righteous use of this rebellious imagery,
pitting David against Goliath, is remarkably effective, even among
individuals who espouse socially conservative views. Co-opting a figure
that was indeed rallying against the capital-owning class to make him a
‘disruptor’ who not only fits within the capitalist means of production, but
enhances their worst traits, is a tactic all too familiar to seasoned activists.
The speed and deceptive nature of the GameStop short squeeze illustrate
how an influencer class of the subreddit sold a profit-making exercise as the
communal experience that so many are craving. As the media reported on
this financial meme, probably themselves lost in the weeds of the numbers
and the strange language of it all, they convinced many, myself briefly
included, that some sort of redistribution of wealth was taking place. The
idea that a small group of gamers was taking on the big guns of capitalism
was a story too good not to tell. The reality, however, was the opposite of
the myth of Robin Hood.
Gamers as Activists
Gamers are transforming themselves into political subjects in a variety of
ways and with differing levels of intensity. They forge in-game alliances,
invest in advancing their allegiances, and sometimes turn that energy into
attempting to influence the architects of the platforms that occupy them.
Bolstered by their successes, or simply having found a community in what
is an increasingly alienated world, they direct their powerful swarm towards
real-life issues and subjects.
In December 2018, a World of Warcraft player wrote a post on the game’s
official web forum titled ‘When Did the WoW Community Get So
Political?’30 The post itself reads: ‘It’s on Guild Chat, it’s on Trade Chat,
it’s on Group Chat. It seems everyone is complaining whatever is
headlining that week or going back to the old classics like Feminists, SJW

 or Political Correctness. What is going on?’ In the hundreds of comments
underneath this post, passionate players offered their explanations for the
politicisation of the game, blindly refusing to acknowledge the political
subjectivity they have had all along.
Games are now bursting with politics. Some expressions are subtle and
have more to do with self-organisation, but increasingly, these spaces are
filled to the brim with people of varied ideological beliefs. That is a lot of
kinetic energy available to be directed and charted. In contrast to members
of the right, who are fully awakened to this fact and are engaged in active
manipulation and exertion of that energy, the left is late to the party.
Individuals doing the serious political work for social change – electoral
politics, non-governmental organisations or organic, alternative forms of
activism – are apt to rule games out of the realm of progressive activism.
Some nerds, possibly in their parents’ basement, typing away on their
keyboards in order to move animated pieces in the virtual world? The
aesthetics may seem less than inspiring, but to disregard this massive
activity and dismiss its potential eliminates a powerful tool and limits the
left’s range of tactics. After all, the same techniques are notoriously used for
political activism and gains on the opposite side of the political spectrum.
The ability of gaming communities to form into potent political groups is
well noted by the neoliberal forces that build them. This swarm of
consumers, enticed by the possibility of changing the world beyond their
favourite game, is a powerful tool for shaping policy.
In Brazil, influential industry figures understood that power. So, when in
2017 a bill was proposed to regulate multibillion-dollar esports, the
stakeholders knew that their one means of resistance was the crowd. In
2019, the #TodosContraPLS383 campaign (“All Against Bill 383”) began
trending, driven by regional gaming influencers and led by their employers.
The new policy threatened to create an official association to supply the
kind of governance and compliance found in real-life sports. Citing fears of
a reduction in future investment, the profiteers of Brazil’s multibilliondollar games industry rallied the industry actors and the players themselves
to oppose the legislation.31 The hashtag began appearing on social media
and the streams of regional gaming stars. The lobbying and the pressure
succeeded in delaying the ratification of the bill until its final approval in
mid-2023 by a new left-wing government led by Lula da Silva.32
Admittedly, the legislation was not perfect, with few insiders consulted. But

 its opponents’ attempt to move the conversation from industry corruption to
state corruption was deeply disingenuous to say the least. Executives in
their boardrooms, anticipating a loss of profits, passed on talking points to
gaming influencers, who in turn rallied gamers to put political pressure on
legislators. A barely regulated market, squeezing every last penny out of the
players, convinced those same players to become its foot soldiers. In this
case, strong regulation by the state reined in a market usually able to evade
oversight. Still, the political fight put up by the masses against their own
interests was notable and is important to acknowledge.
Videogames are an arena of constant political expression and a
battleground for the popularity of ideas, where gamers have the ability to
actively create, enact, organise and manipulate situations or even entire
contingents of people. Again, few other creative spaces grant this sort of
access to tactics. Besides, the entire industry owes a debt of gratitude for the
organisational power, cheek and rule-bending tendencies of game
communities. File sharing, aka piracy, the free distribution of games
organised by communities online and offline, heavily influenced the speed
and spread of computer games. People without access to physical stores, or
the money to purchase expensive games, got hooked by playing their illegal
copy on a floppy disk, then evidently grew into faithful consumers.
The spectrum for these activities could not be wider – the games
themselves became merely a palette with which to paint radically different
pictures. Little is inherently political about the game Minecraft itself – it is
designed to be a playground, a space for people’s imaginations to take
over.33 However, in 2022, a British teenager was jailed for three and a half
years for sending a bomb manual disguised as a Minecraft game guide to
his fellow players. He was a member of a Telegram group called ‘English
Only’, where he posted Islamophobic remarks. As part of the trial, the court
was shown pictures of the teenager posing with an imitation rifle and doing
Nazi salutes, as well as a picture of his dagger, which he had nicknamed
‘Jew Smiter’.34
The neo-Nazi network on Minecraft is much wider than this singular
example – for a while, entire structures of forums and systems of
influencers existed for making Gestapo buildings out of the blocks, creating
miniature Hitler sculptures and luring young kids to explore these spaces.
As mentioned, Minecraft is the most popular game on YouTube, with an

 eye-watering trillion views on the platform at the time of writing.35 Who are
the most popular creators of gaming videos? YouTubers like PewDiePie and
Ninja have often got into trouble for using racist slurs.36 Unmoderated hate
speech is sadly a regular occurrence on this platform, which still holds
enormous power over its teenage demographic.
On the other side of the political gamut of Minecraft playership lie
inventive political actors who employ the game for egalitarian purposes. In
territories where political expression is policed and attempts to speak freely
put activists at risk of persecution or worse by the state apparatus, Minecraft
comes to the rescue. Until his Putin-sanctioned murder, Alexei Navalny was
the leader of the opposition in Russia, known for his anti-corruption
activism online. Just before his imprisonment in 2021, Navalny released a
video exposing President Vladimir Putin’s vast undeclared riches, including
the so-called Putin’s Palace – an enormous, vulgar estate on the shores of
the Black Sea. This gold-clad residence of opulence and corruption includes
gilded ceilings, baths the size of an average London bedroom, a lap dancing
lounge and a videogame arcade room.37
Not every youngster finds themselves trawling the internet for anticorruption videos made by politicians. No, they spend their time on
Minecraft. Thankfully, some ingenious souls found a way to challenge the
homogeneous presentation of the news and recreated Putin’s Palace in the
game, copying every detail, down to virtual masseuses and crystal
chandeliers.38 Streamers also exist to teach kids how to rebuild the palace in
The Sims and question the taste and the material sources of this bizarre
estate.39
In 2021, the non-profit organisation Reporters Without Borders mapped
nations that score low on their World Press Freedom Index on those with
high usage of Minecraft, according to Google data. Based on the results,
they constructed a huge building, inspired by the New York Public Library,
in Minecraft. Inside, players can virtually access books and articles that are
banned in countries such as Egypt, Mexico and Russia.40 It took twentyfour people from sixteen countries and more than 12 million Minecraft
blocks to create the virtual space, which also includes a plug-in that
converts Word documents into books, so that users can add their own. Since
it uses blockchain cloud storage, the library cannot be monitored by
oppressive governments. Once downloaded, the contents can be uploaded

 again, allowing the library to grow as it is shared and reshared. Currently,
there are over 200,000 copies of the project, making it impossible to shut
down, even for the creators.
Videogames as Political Platforms
The actions of communities inside Minecraft prove not simply that the
entirety of the videogame space is a contested political territory, but also
that singular games can accommodate an entire political spectrum of
opinions and movements. This array of political expressions inside one
game suggests that we view these online multiplayer games less as objects
and more as spaces, closer to social media networks than to linear singleplayer games. Just as social media is utilised to organise protests and to
express and exchange ideas, online games are an arena of constant flux.
Home to activism during the Arab Spring, and for the #MeToo movement
and Black Lives Matter campaigns, these spaces have also nurtured
#Gamergate, the election of Donald Trump, the massacres of Muslims in
Myanmar and the right-wing riots of 6 January 2021.
Games have the potential to enrich the fight for liberation and social
justice, and they can equally be co-opted into tools for spreading hatred
towards marginalised populations, trolling innocent people and propagating
straight-up fascist conspiracies. This subversion demonstrates that
videogames are a politicised sphere, which should have been absolute
catnip for the organising left. Sadly, with aesthetics unfamiliar and
unattractive to our camp’s rigid taste, gaming is dismissed as unattractive or
baffling and is ultimately abandoned. This is a grave loss of opportunity and
– worse – leaves these spaces wide open to co-option by the extreme right.
As the left still fails to take gaming communities seriously as political
subjects, the right is making successful inroads. Roblox (2006) is a game
creation system whose popularity exploded during the COVID-19
pandemic. The platform features a wide range of user-generated games,
referred to as ‘experiences’. Some games on the site have millions of active
players each month, with around 5,000 different small games receiving over
1 million visits, and a select few surpassing 1 billion visits. The customer
base of Roblox is almost exclusively tweens and teenagers, which made it
even more disturbing when, in 2019, an investigation by NBC News

 revealed a network of over 100 far-right and neo-Nazi groups affiliated with
the game.41 After the report came out, the Roblox Corporation removed
these accounts, but inappropriate radicalising content, including numerous
neo-Nazi networks, continues to thrive on this incredibly popular and
influential space.42
Right-wing influencers engage in grooming and building armies of
young, impressionable kids. Innocent role-playing games suddenly carry
heavy connotations when they are based on the Confederacy or set on the
US–Mexican border. One’s identity becomes formed according to prompts
by the vigilant carers of these radicalising spaces. This sense of community,
of fitting in, may even inspire the desire to help out and become a recruiter
oneself. Players may perceive the hate speech as banter at first, but the
infrastructures around the game – such as Discord servers or other chat
spaces – are gates to deeper exposure and ideological indoctrination. That
desire to belong, to feel looked after, causes kids to engage in behaviours
that benefit the wider group. Players alter their behaviour to fit the social
dynamics and change their language to mimic that of the popular members
of the community, however demeaning; they begin to follow the groups that
the other members follow, even if it is QAnon.
Gaming companies should bear responsibility for the type of social
interactions that take place within their spaces. The tolerance with which
the Roblox Corporation, the creators of the game, seem to treat the
platform’s Nazi problem may suggest a certain curatorial choice. While I’m
arguing that games companies provide these vast public squares, loud
marketplaces of ideas if you will, with their winners and losers, the
developers are not entirely powerless. Their choice of how, or indeed
whether, to moderate the interactions in their game, the severity of
punishments or the lightness of touch – these dictate which part of the
political spectrum gets to express themselves on their servers.
Take the multiplayer first-person-shooter franchise Overwatch (2016), for
instance, whose developers Blizzard Entertainment enforce a relatively
strong code of conduct. While the methods are by no means perfect, and
plenty of hate speech still circulates, the level of criticism, accountability
and response is also relatively high. It kind of has to be. From the outset, the
game was marketed as a non-stereotypical shooter – the cast of playable
characters offers a diverse selection of race, gender, age and size options. In
order to retain its playership and customers, Blizzard Entertainment is

 investing seriously in moderation. By contrast, games such as Call of Duty
or Counter-Strike, wise to where their gains are made, may care less if their
marginalised players receive frequent abuse. Chances are they are, after all,
in the minority.
Game developers provide platforms where amid interaction, cooperation,
trolling and competition for social capital or in-game currency, there
happens to be play, too. Social media companies operate in a similar way,
creating platforms within which a myriad of themes are invented. These are
currently under scrutiny for their role in harbouring radicalising
movements. At present, websites operating within the United States are
shielded from legal responsibility related to user-generated material, thanks
to section 230 of the Communications Decency Act. However, momentum
is growing within the legislative class to amend this outdated law due to
clear manipulations by social media companies to raise engagement, even
when the content bringing in the views results in real-life harm.
The condition of the Muslim communities in Myanmar, who have
suffered from violence stoked by propaganda mostly circulated on
Facebook, demonstrates the dangers of this hands-off approach.43 Groups
looking after young people are also witnessing an epidemic of self-harming
and are calling politicians to take action against the social media companies
deliberately targeting them with damaging content. We must ask whether
game companies are mere platforms or active publishers of harmful content.
Should the rights reserved for free speech and expression really be
extended to networking spaces where harmful content is built with the tools
provided by the creator of the game? These questions ought to be
increasingly brought forward in order to foster more healthy digital spaces,
in all their forms.
Yet there are also examples of pioneering gamers communicating
progressive politics in videogames. The Sims provides an obvious example.
In contrast to many other multiplayer games, The Sims has always attracted
a generally more progressive crowd. The game’s early adoption of
homosexual relationships as a norm boosted its name as a space welcoming
of users who were not stereotypical gamers. The game’s potential for
concocting strange, surreal scenes and its almost-ironic presentation of
commodities (soft furnishings of any kind!) resulted in a community of
players who took subversion seriously. So it was no surprise when the
imaginary streets of The Sims became a territory for protest. As people

 around the world were turning up in their thousands to the Black Lives
Matter demonstrations highlighting police brutality against Black
populations, not everyone had the ability to travel to rallies in city centres.
With that in mind, streamers in The Sims community organised a virtual
Black Lives Matter rally, complete with placards and slogans. It was a
beautiful sight – masses of individuals who for one reason or another were
unable to attend real-life events, crowding the servers of Electronic Arts
with a clear political stance. The Black influencers in The Sims community
had already taken the battle to the developer by demanding, or sometimes
themselves sourcing, more diverse skin tones, fashions and other mods that
would fit non-white characters.44 Now these communities around the world
united to stand for an important cause in their own passionate way. ‘I was
surprised to see players from Brazil and Germany and Korea, as well as the
UK and USA, participating and promoting the rally,’ said Sims modder and
streamer Danielle ‘EbonixSims’ Udogaranya, the organiser of the rally.45
This and other protests or actions show that gamers with well-formed
political ideologies have infiltrated these spaces to widen the reach of their
message.
Gamers as Performers of Immaterial Labour
Gamers form themselves into political subjects – sometimes in game,
sometimes in the real world. The calculus used by the far right to create
spheres of influence within gaming must be studied and contested by
progressive forces. Theirs are brittle structures that rule with impunity and
offer little material solutions to the problems currently facing players in real
life. However, politics in gaming communities begin with the foundational
act of becoming a consumer of a product. Any progressive project that
scrutinises the games industry and its practices must question and offer
meaningful improvements to the very act of play itself, while under the
current mode of production. So what are the politics of the communities
booting up a game, even before they form themselves into explicitly
political entities within it?
An alternative to the current state of power relations within games could
begin with challenging the immaterial labour performed by players for the
profit of the owners of these platforms. Certain parts of the gaming industry

 have become deeply dependent on fan-created material. Coined by the
Marxist philosophers Maurizio Lazzarato and Antonio Negri, the term
immaterial labour was first used to describe forms of work that produce
intangible products, such as knowledge, caring responsibilities and
information, rather than material goods.46 In the context of the digital age, it
also began to encapsulate processes of content creation, such as blogging,
posts, videos and other content that may appear stripped of a material
relationship, but still ends up generating value, chiefly for the owners of the
hosting platforms.
New players of blockbusters such as World of Warcraft, Dark Souls
(2011) or Planetary Annihilation (2018) are completely reliant on online
forums and videos made by veteran players for learning about the
techniques and strategies of playing the game. The majority of these
tutorials are created voluntarily (and for free). Workers in the gaming
industry, as well as consumers, derive little benefit from this form of
bleeding-edge capitalism, where hard and necessary work to support a
product is not only unpaid, it is actively marketed as a community-building
project that the players are meant to be grateful for.
The relationship between employer and worker is becoming more and
more blurred – much of what is currently perceived as leisure in fact
produces value, which is paramount for the medium’s existence. The
consumer is not just a passive terminus, but a complicit and creative relay in
the production of profits.
While some single-player, offline, linear videogames still have only a
single point of retail engagement for buying the game, the emergence of
network technologies and always-online games, which continuously draw
data, invites more continuous interaction. An analogy can be drawn with
shifts in the world of fine art. Until recently, the relationship between the
artwork and the viewer was fairly one-directional. But with the emergence
of performance art and, more recently, relational art, the public’s interaction
with the piece has become imperative; the piece simply cannot exist without
it.
Sony’s EverQuest (1999) perfected this formula. The publishers created a
platform, profiting from many post-launch add-ons, but it was the players’
creativity and the in-game intrigue that kept people coming back. Activities
such as raids and group quests are an integral aspect of EverQuest’s
gameplay mechanics. Successfully coordinating these endeavours demands

 a considerable degree of teamwork, diplomacy and various forms of social
labour. Guild leaders, for example, often invest unpaid hours overseeing
group dynamics, organising events and ensuring a seamless gaming
experience for their members. A multitude of fan sites, guides, and forums
for fan art, while often a labour of love, added significant value to the game
and its community. Players dedicated extensive hours to farming or
‘grinding’ for rare items and in-game currency, or enhancing their
character’s levels and abilities.
In some cases, this enabled individuals to earn virtual wages from
engaging in such activities and then selling these assets for real-life money.
This practice has now turned into a huge global industry.47 The margins are
covered from so many sides. A relatively thin platform is forged, getting a
player to pay for any add-ons and subscriptions. The players themselves
spend time to foster the communities that lure more players in. It turns out
to be a pretty perfect model for the giant corporation Sony Online
Entertainment.
Some did decide to challenge such monopolies, albeit with limited
success. In 2000, a class-action suit was initiated by an Ultima Online
player who claimed that in volunteering as an in-game community leader,
answering questions and offering guidance to novices, she had unwittingly
been performing a full-time unpaid job. Though her challenge was
ultimately unsuccessful, it highlighted the degree to which MMO
management depended on the cooperation of its ‘playbouring’
populations.48
Other intellectual property (IP) holders, in opposition to the supposed
material interests, treat communities of their games as a mere
inconvenience. Nintendo and Capcom are known for imposing IP licensing
requirements on community events, such as competitive grassroots
tournaments for Capcom’s Street Fighter.49 Organisers of all tournaments,
regardless of their size, were warned to obtain a community or esports
licence from the company.50 Otherwise, they could be liable for breaching
the confines of the IP. Members of a game’s community sadly must oblige if
they wish to maintain a peaceful relationship with the creators of their
favourite pastime.
It’s similar to Uber. Someone creates the platform, but what’s exercised
within it, the main source of attraction, is purely a function of the

 interaction between the users – the drivers and passengers. Fan fiction,
machinima videos, and frag films are all derivative works that were at first
prohibited by companies and framed as copyright infringement until the
owners realised that, in fact, such activities add value to the brand. Modders
forge new creative ideas and players fill these platforms with meaning, joy
and activity – often barely curated by the platform holder.
Gamers modify or introduce new content, features or game mechanics,
often driven by their enthusiasm for the game and their commitment to its
community. They do this without expecting compensation, improving the
gaming experience for others while simultaneously extending the game’s
lifespan and appeal. This unpaid labour adds value to the game and may
indirectly benefit game developers and publishers by maintaining the
game’s relevance and drawing in new players.
Consequently, gaming can be viewed as a form of immaterial labour
transforming a computer game into a cultural artefact.
Gaming as Political: A Space for Communal Imagination
In a plethora of instances, gamers have consciously or unconsciously
arranged themselves into political formations, perhaps while also expanding
the definition of politics. For anyone who wishes to be called progressive,
politics must maintain an open-ended and experimental edge, where
attempts are made at reimagining the world beyond the current
circumstance. Games are uniquely placed to offer this, by requiring
interaction and participation and being themselves ‘places’ where new rules
can play out. Let’s examine this through two very different phenomena:
Pokémon Go (2016) and the culture of modding.
Pokémon Go brought gamers into our city squares and broadened
expectations of what a videogame might look like. In this mobile game, the
player is invited to collect the Pokémon that are situated in various real-life
geographical locations. Augmented reality effects on a phone app create the
impression of a Venusaur sitting on top of that fountain, or a Rattata lurking
in the grass in that park. Is that a cheeky Blastoise behind that grubby trash
bin? Finding a Pokémon is followed by a short gameplay sequence for
capturing it and adding it to the player’s collection.

 ‘Gotta catch ’em all’ was the slogan of summer 2016. Many have fond
memories of deliriously chasing these strange augmented-reality creatures,
phone in hand, exchanging knowing glances and awkward, friendly smiles
with strangers on the same hunt. It is difficult to engage with this game
without having some sort of social interaction with other people, and
pokéflirting was definitely a thing.
The concept of dérive (or ‘drift’) was first introduced as a revolutionary
tactic by Guy Debord, a founder of the Situationist International, in his
1958 work, ‘Theory of the Dérive’.51 It involves an impromptu exploration
of a landscape, typically in urban settings, where participants abandon their
daily routines and allow themselves to be guided by the area’s allure and the
experiences they encounter. Although not a perfect analogy, Pokémon Go
shares some similarities, despite its ties to the economic and commodity
systems the Situationist International vehemently criticised.
Pokémon Go encourages players to engage with the city in unexpected
ways, subverting the intended functions of streets and reimagining the
nature of a location and our mental connections to it. As Debord stated,
chance plays a smaller role in this activity than it seems; cities possess
psychogeographical features, including constant flows, fixed points and
vortexes that deter entry or exit from specific areas. Anyone who has played
Pokémon Go can attest to this experience – the app compels users to reevaluate their environment and perceive it from an entirely new perspective.
A Pokéhunt may create moments where our surroundings are transformed,
and we can rediscover elements of our everyday lives, under different
names and even in complete, glorious ignorance of the situs.
The Reddit user SlothOfDoom recounted this cheering story about the
urban politics of Pokémon Go:
Couldn’t sleep so I downloaded the game and took a 3 am walk. There
is a little park a few blocks from me that had like three pokestops and a
gym, so I wandered over there to see what the game could offer. Picked
up an Evee outside my house and a couple of trash pokes on the way to
the park. So I get there and wander around a little checking out the
stops and rustling around in the tall grass, then decide to go a few
blocks away to see a couple more stops when I hear from the darkness a
‘Yo, my man!’ Turning I see two sketchy looking dudes sitting on a

 bench in the dark. I must have walked right past them without noticing
them. Great. One of them waves. ‘My man, check over by the blue
truck over there we got an Onyx [a valuable Pokémon] earlier.’ So I
wander over by the truck and sure enough there’s a fucking onyx there.
Awesome. So I end up chatting with the guys for a bit, told em where I
got my Eevee, they convinced me to join red team when I hit level five
so we could ‘lock shit down’ in the neighbourhood. Then the cop shows
up. Yeah, so it turns out two twenty-something black dudes and a forty
year old white guy chilling in the park at 3 am looks strange. It took a
bit of talking to convince the cop we weren’t doing a drug deal, and a
bit longer to explain the game. Then the cop downloaded the game on
his phone and asked us how to get started. Go red team.52
The scenarios and commonly agreed scripts as to what can or cannot take
place on a street are exposed by a gentle warping of these expectations. In
this case, gaming serves as a tool for introducing an astonishing variety of
new purposes to our social and urban experiences. Similarly to Situationist
writings (minus the corporate angle, of course!), this app does turn a
lamppost into a meeting place, or a random car park into a sought-after
destination; a straight road can now offer a variety of meaningful stops and
the pavement a map of treasures. To many of us who are radically inclined,
interested in viewing the world through a historical-materialist lens, the
game’s commodity form, intertwined in a complex relationship with cellular
reception mechanisms and device-making strategies, has little revolutionary
potential; but with the current disappearance of poetry from our urban
environments, we can sometimes find inspiration in the unlikeliest places.
Perhaps not explicitly political, but disarming, with a divine emotional
weight, are the mods created mostly anonymously by members of gaming
communities. Mods are alterations and additions to rules or contents of
existing games, essentially using commercial games as material for readymade or home-brewed art. While some are extensions of fan fiction or
simple adaptations of a game for a local language or personal taste, others
achieve an eerie sense of atmosphere and disjuncture that beats even the
offerings of some of the most prestigious contemporary art forms.
Pokémon Go met modding in an accidental manner when it first launched
in Russia. Ramblers around the Red Square in Moscow, which neighbours
the Kremlin, noticed that the app (coded to correspond to GPS coordinates)

 was malfunctioning. The signal showed that they were in fact located
around the Vnukovo Airport, thirty-two kilometres away.53 Further research
prompted by the players’ experiences uncovered a complex GPS spoofing
operation utilised by the state’s operators. The findings were taken one step
further when some players used the misdirections to manipulate the game
and catch the rarest of creatures from the comfort of home.54
As of the time of this writing, an average of 100,000 people are watching
Grand Theft Auto V streams on Twitch on any given day, with around 2,000
channels dedicated to a singular game title. One of them, however, is not
like the rest. The artist Brent Watanabe modded the game so the human
protagonists were replaced by an AI-controlled white deer, which wanders
the fictional streets of Los Santos radiating an otherworldly, majestic spirit.
Modded to be invincible, the deer couldn’t be harmed by bullets, no matter
how many hit it. Sometimes the deer appears, looking regal, on the edge of
the chaotic city in the evening dusk. Sometimes it moves awkwardly
alongside the dirty walls of warehouses, aimlessly falling over steps and
bumping into random objects. The deer runs away from police or
confidently walks the sunlit downtown streets. At times, it stretches the
environment to the limit by diving into the sea.55
The trapped nature of this sublime animal, with its apparently selfharming tendencies and its grace, as well as the contrast of its natural
elegance to the superficiality and grime of the game’s miserable
surroundings, have captivated the community. Struck by this subversion of
the game, they have left dozens of comments on the stream. The deer is
performing a multi-layered dérive: challenging structured movement
through cities, the human-centrism in both urban and game design and even
the norms and practices of streaming culture.
Many mods are not only deeply creative, transcending the medium in
their depth and grace, but crucially, they are almost universally free and
accessible, a gift from often-anonymous creators who are simply passionate
about the community they belong to. Such a refusal to participate in the
feast of social and material capital that propels today’s cultural-industrial
complex is unique and refreshing.
Get in the Game

 Gaming is not easy to characterise within the binaries of what is politically
wasteful or useful. It holds a spectrum of meanings and functions that need
to be called into question. However, when gaming is put under the
magnifying glass by those attempting to find civic productivity even within
its escapism, it stands up to the challenge. Numerous studies suggest a
positive correlation between immersion, gaming, motivation and civic
engagement, as well as political participation.56 As people learn to associate
communal cooperation with both communal and individual benefit, they
become more willing to work with others in their communities. Having
stronger ties to a group encourages people to consider communal needs in
addition to their own needs, and this can logically nudge them to participate
in their community. When people with a shared interest come together in a
multiplayer game, there is the potential for positive, pro-social interaction
among them, both in the game and outside it.
Gamers who develop the attitudes and behaviours that are part of
belonging to a gaming community are likely to display these attitudes and
behaviours in other areas of life. This sense of connectedness to others can
lead people to form face-to-face bonds and get involved in their real-world
communities. The implication is that there are now multiple pathways for
people (especially young people, who are often less engaged in civic life
than their elders) to become better citizens.
Those seeking to improve civic engagement would do well to embrace a
broad range of media, including online media and videogames, when
communicating the importance of participation in civic life. At a time when
voter turnout, publicly registered volunteering, charitable giving, political
party membership and union membership are in decline, we must look for
potential places where that energy is being channelled. The right is equally
capable, and more willing in gaming, to spawn such groups. We have a
choice: to sneer and ignore, or to at least attempt to create attractive forms
of coordinating and formulating the ideas and ideals that bring people into
our fold.
When a person’s role in the control of their surroundings is diminished,
then the allure of role-play becomes very strong. Isolated, alienated by
capitalist means of production, reduced as entities to simple consumers,
some gamers are desperate to find an identity under a banner where they
can claim to be subjects. What kind of politics those banners declare is up
for negotiation and contestation. The fight is twofold: existing real-life

 political communities desire to recreate their allegiances and aesthetics in
their hobby spaces, in this case, gaming. Those then get solidified and are
given credence and validation. By extension, they fuel or culturally enrich
movements.
Unbeknownst to many on the left, enormous numbers of people value
their in-game virtual experiences just as much as their real-life ones. The
lack of curiosity about and acknowledgement of these populations creates a
void in the left’s capacity for mass mobilisation and material change.
Alienation is not only what we are subjected to by the capitalist classes, but
also an energy that we emanate towards members of circles we deem
unworthy of our time.
The esoteric belief evinced by many on the left regarding what
constitutes a ‘correct’ political subject can be at times suffocatingly narrow.
This attitude causes the left to not only lose ground, but push people away
and over to the other side. Sometimes I wonder if we are not doing this on
purpose – acting like some political artisans, it feels ever so good to pretend
that we hold a secret, as if our knowledge of all the injustices somehow
justifies our doing so little about them. As if having more people accepted
into our circles would mean relinquishing our sense of being special. It may
sound ridiculous, but if anything, it’s desperate.
I see a beautiful medium morphing into something quite dark, and if we
do not fight to save it, our collective sneering will mark another failure in a
long list of lost opportunities, especially when it comes to technology and
its relationship to culture. How might gaming be a tool in the fight against
our current state of oppression? How might gamers become active agents in
the improvement of our material conditions? Many have attempted, with
mixed results, but the possibilities remain endless.
OceanofPDF.com

 Level III: Efficacy

Although gaming communities and the politics brewing in them are underappreciated subjects, the potential of authored standalone games and their
ability to invoke social change is just as great. Such games have the
capacity to inform, to subvert, to challenge what is acceptable and round up
troops to fight for a better tomorrow. But how?
Unfortunately, the answer is complicated. Many game creators will claim
that they are developing socially conscious games. Games concerned with
equality, climate change, and other progressive themes are abundant. But
apart from being exactly that – socially conscious – are they there to signify
certain social attitudes or to change them? Socially aware games are indeed
very in vogue. There is no lack of social capital in the field – having a
civically concerned theme in your game is catnip for various accolades and
overall prestige. ‘Games for Impact’ and ‘Games Beyond Entertainment’
have become awards categories in the most reputable gaming competitions.
Games for Change is a nonprofit organisation, handing out influential
annual awards in a variety of do-gooder categories. Games like Papers,
Please, dissected in Level I, and numerous other ludic projects imply that
our ways should be changed, but never quite push the boundaries beyond
the comfort zone. These are beloved by games media as a moral palate
cleanser, unlike their usual press release copy-pastes and reports on the
more unpleasant news from the industry.
Plenty of self-proclaimed political videogame makers genuinely see the
primary mission of their work as an appeal for a fairer, kinder world.
Presumably that means planting the seeds of change in players’ minds,
inspiring them to become agents for progressive values. Since this result is
hard to measure, it remains unclear to what extent videogames help achieve
that goal. Too many of them end up as PR exercises for the artist – at best.
And at worst, their message can be co-opted, merely sharpening the
cynicism around art’s potential for social good. Can progressive games

 effect actual positive political transformation? What properties should such
endeavours require? And what questions should we confront in the search
for efficacy – to create games that truly change somebody’s mind? Or to
steer them from inaction into action?
That is not to say that all art must do that – change minds. A great deal of
exquisite art reaffirms our beliefs through new forms, enhances our
horizons or simply offers temporary relief. These works are not self-defined
as political, though, and don’t sell as such. Political awareness can be a
form of currency in the market, but the results of spreading that awareness
are much trickier to quantify. Due to its inherent subjectivity, it is not easy
to determine what exactly changes an individual’s mind. At what point does
someone encounter a piece of art and change camps politically? While
much discussion of videogames in the media is around their perceived role
in turning players into reactionary violence machines, the potential for
games to introduce more egalitarian ideals is ignored. What type of social
relations are being produced by explicitly progressive games? Who are
these games made for, and why? What would it mean to, instead of making
political games, make games politically? This level explores examples of
political art in the wider culture, as well as offering a rich theoretical
grounding.
The Punchline Is Gonna Be Real Good: Social Capital and the Arts
The concept of social capital is important to this level. The extent to which
a videogame has the potential to truly effect social change is not necessarily
proportionate to the level of social capital the game’s creators are set to
gain. The games industry is market-led, after all, and what becomes popular
within this sphere can often complement trends which tend to reproduce
current conditions rather than truly challenge them. A political videogame
preaching to the converted is likely to receive more praise than one that
catches the player off guard. When the French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu
defined the term social capital, he was interested in exactly these dynamics
– it is seemingly much easier for people to gain material capital if they are,
essentially, liked. Social capital is a property of the individual, rather than
of the collective, and is derived primarily from one’s social position and
status. It is an accrued actual or virtual resource, linking social connections

 and one’s ability to then use them for advancement.1 In other words,
someone who enjoys prestige and social popularity also tends to achieve
economic advancement. People who are affable and talk in a language
already familiar to their audience are generally deemed more likeable.
In gaming, as in any cultural industry, such connections are also evident
and in constant play. In the absence of actual material artefacts resulting
from cultural signifiers, the drive touching on those narratives is incredibly
strong. Instead of getting involved in the boring, unpredictable and
unrewarding world of policy-making or grassroots movement building,
game developers are much more likely to receive social capital by simply
tackling a troublesome theme. The games industry’s arbiters, tainted by
their own, often nefarious procedures, can conveniently absolve themselves
by granting prestige to games that signal values antithetical to the industry’s
own modus operandi, so long as this signalling is safe and contained, of
course. This set of conditions nurtures a progressive videogames climate
where the material celebrated is acceptable, palatable, familiar and obvious
to those in the know. A bit of representation here and a touch of a political
story there (usually without an actual twist) – games comfortably confirm
the player’s politics rather than subverting their existing set of beliefs.
A powerful collection of essays called Art, Activism and Recuperation
raises tough questions about the insular, multi-beneficial and vitally
important relationships and power play between art, activists and cultural
institutions.2 What are effective strategies against recuperation – the process
by which subversive ideas, oppositional to the status quo, are co-opted or
appropriated by the dominant market-led culture, effectively voiding their
original disruptive potential. Could recuperation, the filtering of the
challenging to the palatable, sometimes be the goal, not just an unintended
consequence? In the collection, the curator Nav Haq discusses the 2004
book by his Swedish colleague Maria Lind, This Is Going to Be Really
Funny: Notes on Art, Its Institutions and Their Presumed Criticality. Here
Lind neatly exposes the futility of many contemporary socially aware
cultural practices.3 She crafts a simple yet effective analogy between the act
of telling a joke and the declarations inherent in much political art. If,
before telling a joke, you say, ‘This is going to be really funny!’ then the
listener will most probably not find it funny at all. Something about the
initial declaration defuses the humour. The surprise factor is removed, and

 the listener can prepare in advance for the punch-line.4 This analogy
extends to critical or political games: proclaiming that one’s work is
profoundly critical can instantly strip away that intended effect. In fact, a
certain ambiguity about the artist’s intentions empowers a more potent
critique – as with funnier jokes.
Should we engage with and judge political art in the same way? What is
our mission here? If the aim is to inform, then explicit declarations stand a
chance of succeeding. The emphasis will be placed on the new information
learnt. But if the objective is to explicitly change the thinking of people who
are not already invested in the cause, artists are likely to fail with this
technique. Too often, in arts, games and other cultural realms, the goal
remains within the reassuring boundaries of our existing beliefs. Staying
inside the bubble is safer and, crucially, more profitable.
Playing with Politics – Who Wins?
As a creative medium with similar aesthetics and a possibility for
interaction, games can learn from the fine arts, which have been challenged
and tested in all kinds of ways. Despite their different methods of
production, both media are made by creatively ambitious people who probe,
promote and occasionally fall short in somewhat similar ways.
What can games developers learn from the fine arts about the difficulties
of cultural production? Consider Wheatfield (1982), a six-month installation
by the American artist Agnes Denes. With the support of the Public Art
Fund, she planted a field of golden wheat on two acres of a rubble-strewn
landfill near Wall Street and the World Trade Center in lower Manhattan.
The field was open to the public, and the harvested grain was distributed
across the globe. Beautiful, certainly. And if the piece did little to reduce
world hunger, it undoubtedly helped to gentrify the neighbourhood and
increase the artist’s social and material capital.
In Idol Worship (2007), Laura Keeble replaced the normal tombstones in
a British cemetery with stone sculptures of brand logos such as
McDonald’s, and the local church gained a stained-glass window with the
Chanel fashion house logo. Beyond the brazen gesture, it is unclear what
the intentions of this ‘brandalism’ were. Mark Coreth created a life-sized
sculpture of a polar bear at the COP 15 climate summit in 2009. Just how

 much energy was required to freeze nine tonnes of ice or to create the 500kilogram bronze cast of the skeleton is unknown, but the World Wildlife
Fund, which funded the sculpture (along with consumer electronics
manufacturers Panasonic and Nokia), still advertised it as ‘art in service of
the environment’.5 Similarly, in 2019 the beloved and self-congratulatory
eco-artist Olafur Eliasson ripped up and transported tens of kilogrammes of
moss from his native Iceland for his exhibit at the Tate Modern in London.
He also presented huge ice cubes at the entrance to the gallery. This was a
baffling waste of resources that made little to no point other than that the
artist cared about the issues of the environment, and he benefitted from
major production budgets as a reward.
In 2022, the Finnish pavilion at the Venice Biennale hosted Pilvi Takala’s
work Close Watch. It follows Takala’s journey to be part of the common
people by working as a security person at a shopping mall. She then sides
with the management when one of the workers is reprimanded for making a
sexist remark. She observes the workers with scant empathy, but rather
passes judgement. The other security staff presumably received no material
reward for their involvement, but the piece brought maximum exposure to
the artist. Crucially, the power and the audience’s sympathy lie with the
artist and the management, not with the workers. Viewers are asked to side
with the white middle-class Finnish artist rather than with a poor migrant
worker, whose politics may be slightly less refined. They are invited to
appreciate the profound artist, who took an actual job for a few months, and
to shake their head at the moral failings of working-class mall security
guards.
Crudely speaking, this is art for the sake of its own spectacle and the
artist’s material gain, rather than for a change of heart. Equivalents in the
gaming world are regrettably numerous. To support their efforts in raising
awareness about our planet’s dwindling natural resources, the band Linkin
Park, in combination with Kuuluu Interactive Entertainment, created LP
Recharge (2013) – a game where humans and robots battle for the earth’s
remaining ores and minerals. Players are tasked with fending off the
androids while creating new and sustainable energy sources. The extent to
which LP Recharge ‘brings attention to energy poverty and clean energy
solutions’, as its PR campaign suggests, remains a mystery, but the game
was certainly an original way to introduce a new single for the band – even
National Geographic covered it.6

 Another game, called Get Water! (2013), puts the player in the role of an
Indian girl who wants to study but keeps getting interrupted by the need to
go and fetch water. Developed by a Montreal-based start-up, the game
launched on World Water Day and drew accolades from the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations. Alba: A Wildlife Adventure (2020) by UsTwo
Games invites the player to traverse a Mediterranean island, documenting
wildlife, solving challenges and rallying the community to preserve nature
against a harmful construction project. Themes of ecology, climate change
and the preciousness of nature are woven into a moving story of
perseverance. While the ecological themes of the game were undoubtedly a
profitable selling point, the studio also committed to planting real-life trees
for every sale of the game. To date, reportedly over 1 million trees have
been planted on behalf of the studio – a fine result which no doubt also
assisted the title in receiving the Apple Design Award for Social Impact in
2021.7
Darfur is Dying (2006) was a flash-based browser game about the crisis
in Darfur, western Sudan. Made by American designer Susana Ruiz as an
undergraduate project at the University of Southern California, it was
partially sponsored by the popular channel MTV. The game puts the player
in the role of a displaced Darfurian living in a refugee camp. The objective
is to navigate through the challenges faced by refugees, including finding
water, avoiding militia attacks and maintaining the camp’s well-being.
Some critics, such as Ian Bogost, brought up the fact that sometimes, selfdescribed activist videogames have a greater impact on the game maker’s
career than on the cause being championed. Although more than 1 million
people had played the game by April 2007, Bogost found little evidence that
the game engaged with the issues it was raising in a particularly productive,
effective or innovative way. He wondered if MTV’s involvement was
anything more than a marketing ploy, and whether the funds could have
been spent on a more useful cause.8
Art critic Claire Bishop’s seminal work Artificial Hells: Participatory Art
and the Politics of Spectatorship is an astute, empathetic critique of
participatory fine art. In it, Bishop carefully dissects the victories and
failures of recently fashionable contemporary art in ‘involving the
community’, ‘creating dialogue’ and ‘inviting to participate’. A few lines

 perfectly illustrate the necessity for art and games to grow beyond the
attitudes criticised here:
The urgency of this social task has led to a situation in which socially
collaborative practices are all perceived to be equally important artistic
gestures of resistance: there can be no failed, unsuccessful, unresolved,
or boring works of participatory art, because all are equally essential to
the task of repairing the social bond. While sympathetic to the latter
ambition, I would argue that it is also crucial to discuss, analyse and
compare this work critically as art, since this is the institutional field in
which it is endorsed and disseminated, even while the category of art
remains a persistent exclusion in debates about such projects.9
Similar framing can and ought to be applied to games. Art is at risk of being
segregated into the liminal space of perpetual commissions, interpretations
and a loop of projections and normalisations of conditions.
Though they may have the best of intentions, these kinds of artistic
practices fall into the category of mundane preaching, leaving the audience
feeling talked down to rather than empowered. Or, in the worst-case
scenario, used purely as a tool in promoting equally oppressive structures.
Surely, that kind of artistic creation does not possess the charge the artist
wanted for it. My aim isn’t to determine definitively that these projects have
failed, but to question why failure never seems to be an option in the
defensive and linguistically confined spaces of videogame reviewing.
Still, even less consistent are the practices of games developer and author
Jane McGonigal. She has become known as a proponent and creator of
games with a so-called higher purpose, but in the introduction to her bestseller Reality Is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better and How They Can
Change the World, she demonstrates a discomforting hypocrisy.
Eventually, as a result of my research, I published several academic
papers proposing how we could leverage the power of games to
reinvent everything from government, healthcare, and education to
traditional media, marketing, and entrepreneurship – even world peace.
And increasingly, I found myself called on to help large companies and
organizations adopt game design as an innovation strategy – from the

 World Bank, the American Heart Association, the National Academy of
Sciences, and the US Department of Defense to McDonald’s, Intel, the
Corporation for Public Broadcasting, and the International Olympic
Committee. You’ll read about many of the games I created with these
organizations in this book – and for the first time, I’ll be sharing my
design motivations and strategies.10
Collaborations with institutions such as the World Bank, McDonald’s and
the US Department of Defense for the purpose of ‘change for good’ must be
viewed with suspicion. McGonigal then becomes an agent for regressive
forces. She speaks the language of kindness and goodness, with no other
purpose surely than whitewashing some shady business practices.
Consider this quote from art curator Nicolas Bourriaud:
One should never mistake good intentions for strong art. Political
commitment is a beginning, not an end, as generous ideas can
sometimes lead to a reactionary artwork, contradicting those original
intentions. Art has to start changing the world through questioning its
own conditions of production and diffusion.11
Bourriaud, best known for coining the term relational aesthetics, has
observed that many contemporary fine artists choose to incorporate
interpersonal interaction as part of their pieces. Beyond performance art, a
variety of happenings, events, social actions and spaces for meeting are now
a common artistic offering.12 This exposes another space for potential
convergence between arts and games, with the latter providing ample
settings for interpersonal participation, communication and interaction.
Artists working within the constraints of a gallery, but who approach
their practice critically, often acknowledge the limitations of such
engagement. Should we expect the same of game developers? Only by
vocalising those boundaries can we challenge them and nurture more
ambitious processes. We should try to avoid the mistakes of the art world,
such as street art transforming graffiti into capital without addressing the
demands of the social classes who birthed the movement. Likewise, in
relational aesthetics, social relations are folded into a look, rather than
galvanised into a productive exchange.13

 Perhaps the words play or games are holding the medium back, infinitely
dictating that videogames ought to be about fun, joy and gratifying rewards,
even if the aesthetics are gruesome. Feelings of discomfort and disgust, of
being challenged, confused or called upon to take action, are much more
cumbersome investments. Demanding the efficacy of games is a tall order,
but unless they are interrogated in this light, they risk getting stuck in the
realm of social – and, by extension, material – capital.
Political Art Politically Made
One redeeming feature of a game like Papers, Please is its ability to
interrogate our sense of guilt. The player is confronted with moral dilemmas
as the game progresses. For example, players must decide whether to allow
the supposed spouse of an immigrant through, even though they lack the
correct papers, at the risk of accepting a ‘terrorist’ into the country. As
guards, players occasionally take bribes in order to feed their own family.
The game not only creates simplistic, symptomatic social commentary, but
also forces players to admit that they are part of the problem, making them
feel actively responsible.
Brenda Romero, the spouse of the id Software Doom legend John
Romero, and a hugely successful and influential game designer and
educator in her own right, created a similar piece in the form of a board
game called Train (2009). In it, the players transport passengers along a
railway. Ultimately – spoiler – it is revealed that the final destination is a
Nazi concentration camp and that the player has been unknowingly
complicit in the atrocities of the Holocaust by moving the train in that
direction. The previous examples may awaken the players’ feelings of
complicity, especially if used as educational tools for younger players, but it
is questionable whether they would be effective for adults with diverse
opinions. After all, presumably the consumer’s choice of the product signals
that they already have a certain level of empathy for the subjects of these
games.
So, the problem besetting the progressive games scene – beyond the
cursed modes of production, which are discussed further in Level IV – is a
misalignment between its stated mission and the results. Games for good is
a great ambition, but often the execution falls into the most obvious

 trappings of the spectacle, and the information provided simply does not
add up to efficacy. Though the art world certainly suffers from the same
issue, a few contemporary examples that use innovative angles stand out as
ambitious attempts at finding ways to inform a viewer of a new perspective.
Examining the practices of these artists could hopefully provide new
conceptual frameworks for how gaming – already an influential and potent
medium – can deepen its impact.
Papers, Please and Train are somewhat reminiscent of how the Spanish
artist Santiago Sierra uses complicity to explore the intricacies of migration,
class and guilt. For instance, he presented a performance in 2008 at the Tate
Modern in London where he paid homeless women the price of a one-night
stay in a hostel to stand facing the wall of the gallery for an hour at a time.
In other performances, he paid migrants minimum wage to sit inside
wooden boxes, get tattooed, or dig and fill holes in the ground. Although
these performances have been publicly denounced as exploitative or
otherwise problematic, viewers quickly understand that the real injustice
lies not in how these subjects are treated within the exhibition walls, but in
the fact that they are treated much more harshly in the outside world and
mostly ignored by the general public.
During his artistic career, Sierra has received frequent criticism for
‘unethical treatment of his subjects’ and for presenting what some
ungenerously see as ‘poverty porn’. Some viewers were concerned that he
used the individuals involved in his art as props. Ironically, this line of
reproach enhanced the social capital of these viewers who had
fundamentally misunderstood Sierra’s project. He explains:
At the Kunstwerke in Berlin they criticised me because I had people
sitting for four hours a day, but they didn’t realise that a little further up
the hallway the guard spends eight hours a day on his feet … if they
think it’s a horror to sit hidden in a cardboard box for four hours, they
don’t know what work is … The museum watchman I paid to live for
three hundred sixty-five hours behind a wall at a gallery in New York
told me that no one had ever been so interested in him and that he had
never met so many people. I realised that hiding something is a very
effective working technique.14

 The type of experience Sierra curates reveals the hypocrisy of the
exhibition-visiting population. I linger on this because this type of
discomfort is even less appreciated within the games realm. Comfort,
safety, a transaction of convenience and resistance to arduous experiences –
those are the favoured parameters of my beloved playful medium. In other
words, Sierra does not preach and say, ‘Oh, you should know better’; he
says, ‘We should all, as a society, know better.’ He leaves himself
vulnerable to a very particular and painful critique, just to return to the point
of the issue. In contrast to Pilvi Takala, who also uses working-class figures
in her art, Sierra creates an environment in which the viewer becomes part
of the problem of the current conditions. Takala presents herself as an
archiver, a saviour, an unbiased martyr, a hero. The workers are subjects,
some more deserving than others, and the viewer is a silent witness to the
artist’s genius and sacrifice. Sierra’s themes are, in contrast, unambiguous
about art’s relationship to wage labour, the monetisation of the art world
and the displacing of value and exploitation within it.
In one of Sierra’s more controversial pieces, only individuals carrying a
Spanish passport were allowed to enter his pavilion at the 2003 Venice
Biennale, effectively highlighting the plight of millions who have lost out
on the passport lottery from birth and find it difficult to cross borders. Once
again, Sierra created a space for friction and self-evaluation.
What Sierra does so effectively is to confront the viewer in an
unexpected manner. In a videogame, the barrier to being actually surprised
is incredibly high. Consumers must seek out a particular videogame with its
own set of files and install it onto their machine before playing. Artists
working in the public realm have many more opportunities to surprise the
viewer, and they do so in ways that could inspire socially conscious games
developers.
Now I wish to present a tapestry of contemporary fine art works that, in
parallel, are going through exactly the same journey – attempting to find
efficacy. The following examples present pieces that are succeeding in
terms that have the potential to inform games.
Hank Willis Thomas and Dr Baz Dreisinger explore the notion of
catching their viewer off guard with their ongoing study titled Writing on
the Wall (2019). This travelling installation is composed of essays, poems,
letters, stories, diagrams and notes written by prisoners around the world.
The installation has appeared on the streets of various cities – New York’s

 High Line was the most prolific and centrally located thus far. In contrast to
Lucas Pope (author of Papers, Please), Thomas made sure that
representatives of various criminal justice reform organisations were invited
to be part of the public events programme supporting the exhibition. A
subtler project in the same vein is the restaurant and art project in Pittsburgh
called Conflict Kitchen (2010), which served traditional meals from
countries the United States was then at war with. What would be an
equivalent attempt in games to highlight such an issue? Perhaps a game that
is only available for play in countries that the US is currently at war with?
We must attempt these kinds of audacious changes to how we offer and
deliver games if we are to spur the medium to maturity.
Videogames are often hailed as a successful tool for presenting
information and data to new audiences in an unexpected way, but the effect
and quality of that encounter in an open games market are rarely studied. Is
anyone particularly surprised when they learn more about a certain theme,
however sensitive, given the amount of store blurbs and reviews we read
before even loading the game? On the other hand, few were ready for what
was about to transpire when they accepted the invitation to visit one of
Hans Haacke’s art show openings. For his seminal piece Shapolsky et al.
Manhattan Real Estate Holdings, A Real Time Social System, as of May 1,
1971 (1971), Haacke collected the documented evidence of corruption and
insider dealings of New York City’s slum landlords. Photographs and a
meticulously curated paper trail were to be arranged on the walls,
confronting the viewer with evidence of bribery, money laundering and
fraud committed by the real-estate magnate Harry Shapolsky. The piece was
due to be shown at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York, but
the exhibition was cancelled six weeks before opening.15 The museum’s
trustees, many of whom had connections to the New York property market,
protested the work and even had the curator, Edward Fry, fired for
supporting it. In his subsequent pieces and exhibition openings, Haacke
often returned to the investigative format and surprised the viewers with the
results of that research. Visitors were often unaware of the information they
would encounter.
Mark Wallinger also used his platform – in this case, a 2007 exhibition
slot at Tate Britain – to raise uncomfortable awareness of the case of Brian
Haw’s camp, which once sat outside of Westminster Yard. The UK’s
draconian anti-protest laws include the Serious Organised Crime and Police

 Act (SOCPA), which prevents any protest from being held within a
kilometre of the Houses of Parliament. A special injunction was granted to
peace activist Brian Haw, who built a ramshackle tent city and protest camp
on the lawn opposite Parliament. He snagged passers-by with posters of the
numerous human rights violations committed by the British soldiers and
government against the Iraqi people during the 2003 invasion. Haw finally
passed away in 2011, after years of residing in the camp, and the police
dismantled and destroyed it.
Partially located within the designated SOCPA circle, Tate Britain was a
perfect place to reinstate this important piece of British protest history. An
immaculate reproduction of Brian’s camp was built inside the neo-baroque
halls of this pompous gallery, with the addition of graphic images of
deformed babies representing the threatened and terminated pregnancies
that have resulted from the war’s atrocities. Some visitors to this
conservative art institution may have been confused to see a meticulous
reproduction of a camp they’d been used to looking away from in the street,
or stepping over on their way to an exhibit. Something that had been
repellent to most passers-by was now confronting the gallery viewers. Haw,
with little to no social capital, could not bring in the crowds that Wallinger
was able to attract. But it was the displacement of this crucial information,
from the space of the ordinary to a fetishised space of the extraordinary –
crucially, to a space that is more known for its sixteenth-century paintings
of royalty than for contemporary political protest – that was most perfect.
Comedian Mark Thomas put himself even closer to action when he
organised the Mass Lone Demos campaign in 2006. During the campaign,
Thomas encouraged members of the public to apply for their own
individual permits to hold a demonstration within the SOCPA zone all at the
same time, causing a logistical nightmare for the police and, in the process,
highlighting the ridiculousness of the law. Nearly 2,500 people turned up to
Parliament Square at an agreed time one day, possibly breaking the world
record for the highest number of demonstrations in a limited space within a
day. This work is an excellent example of performance artist Tania
Bruguera’s observation that political art should be ‘made when it is
unfashionable and when it is uncomfortable – legally uncomfortable,
civically uncomfortable, humanly uncomfortable’.16
Another question often haunts me, even before political videogames that
are executed in an original manner: aren’t games a terribly inefficient way

 to make a point? Consider the dozens of people who work on a game for
hundreds of hours and all the hardware and the stores necessary for its
production and distribution. Fine art has a certain agility that is often
unattainable for videogames.
While Wallinger created an anti-war message in an optimised manner,
Chris Burden’s 1971 piece of performance art reduced the amount of time
needed to make a point to one second. In a crowded white cube gallery in
California, Burden instructed a friend to shoot him. Burden stood against a
white wall in a white T-shirt and jeans and barely flinched upon receiving a
.22-calibre rifle bullet to his left shoulder from four metres away. Some
photographs were taken and initial wound dressing applied. Burden chatted
calmly with the show participants before being taken to a hospital for
medical assistance. This was a well-done anti-war statement, but it was
even more effective as a seething critique of police brutality, racism and gun
violence. The fact that the shot took place inside the pristine walls of a chic
art gallery shielded the subjects from intervention by the police and the
state. The same act committed outside of this setting would have had
completely different consequences, especially if Burden hadn’t been a
privileged, hip white man.
Such graphic and wonderfully minimal performance pieces exude an ease
that games cannot. The hardware, lengthy planning stages, production and
distribution of the game are all burdensome processes that sometimes take
years and cost millions. Similarly, Tehching Hsieh dedicates himself to fine
art that is much more involved and could hardly be called efficient. In his
performances, Hsieh commits to spending exactly a year in extreme
circumstances. In one instance, he spent a year in New York City without
entering any space that had a roof. In his artistic collaboration with fellow
artist Linda Montano, they spent a year connected to each other by a twoand-a-half-metre piece of rope – after which the two never spoke again. In
his most pivotal and extreme performance to date, Hsieh photographed
himself putting a card into a punch clock every hour for a year. That meant
he could never sleep longer than fifty-nine minutes at a stretch or go any
distance beyond an approximate thirty-minute radius of the punch clock.
This dedication can be compared to the months and years game
developers spend crafting their creations, sometimes for themselves in the
case of an independent career, sometimes crunching unbearable hours for a
boss. Perhaps the lack of a romanticised tortured artist is just one more

 barrier for members of the game industry to being taken seriously, not just
for the hours worked, but also for their creative process – think of van Gogh
or Pollock.
Finally, games are not an industry that has ever been interested in
creating work referencing its own failures. The compulsion to create the
next big thing, inspired by Silicon Valley, stifles any tendency to look
inwards and assess whether our work is useful or legitimate. A healthier
industry might embrace such self-critique and have a market for it. Game
creators who do question the limits of how the medium is framed remain at
the margins, and the more deeply they critique the methods of production
necessary for enjoying games, the more they are sidelined.
A confident medium that did not perceive itself as being particularly
harmful would not feel the need to justify its own merits. For all gaming’s
faults, it is at least free of some of the ailments of the art world! For
instance, gaming does not suffer from the preciousness and the inequalities
that come with the fetishism of the aura of an art piece, that is, the
insistence that it evokes a unique and distinctive feeling or atmosphere
simply by existing in a particular time and space that are exclusive and
unrepeatable. This in turn results in a market of scarcity – the more
uncommon a piece is (or is praised as such by various fine art PR agencies),
the more expensive it is, and in need of security, of course. Such
commodified protection of the aura culminates in masterpieces being
locked up in temperature-controlled safes, utilised for tax dodging and
money laundering, and rarely shown in public.17 Games are much more
democratic on that score: accessible to many and increasingly to most,
easily pirated, and free of the grandeur, or the speculative scarcity, of the
arts.
Yet the art world, for all its complacency, excels in institutional critique,
a subgenre concerned with assessing and judging the arts industry itself. For
instance, Andrea Fraser’s performance pieces shedding light on the
hypocrisy of the very structures that will inevitably uplift her – something
rarely seen in videogames, even in the more radical designs. For Museum
Highlights: A Gallery Talk (1989), Fraser played a museum docent giving a
tour of the Philadelphia Museum of Art’s collection. But instead of
discussing the art, she talked about the museum’s budget, the salaries of its
staff and the role of corporate sponsorship in funding exhibitions.

 In Official Welcome (2001), Fraser, at the opening of her own exhibition
in Hamburg, parodied the inflated language used to describe contemporary
art and the absurd prices that collectors pay for it. During the performance,
she was charismatic; her humour and jibes at the contemporary art industry
were canny and self-aware. She stripped her clothes off and put them back
on, and she was visibly moved to tears by the end of the performance –
exposed, powerful, stuck in a wonderful dialectic of adoration and disgust.
In 2003, she took the art world by storm by holding a mirror up to it with
her Untitled performance. Arranged by the Friedrich Petzel Gallery, Fraser
entered into an agreement with an anonymous art collector and got paid
$20,000 for a sexual encounter with him in a hotel room. The liaison was
filmed. Five copies of the sixty-minute DVD were produced, three of which
are in private collections, including that of the collector she had the fling
with. The piece caused a furore within the art scene for her radical methods,
although Untitled simply put many of the transactions and relationships of
the art world into another form.
But Will They Get You Banned?
This sort of urgent self-examination rarely happens, or is encouraged, in the
games industry. While many games reference themselves and the medium,
very few dare to truly challenge the games industry as an institution in any
meaningful way. The ones that do, however, are frostily received by
industry insiders. For example, Italian game developer Molleindustria’s
practice has been one of the longest running projects of explicitly countercultural, leftist game making. The artist behind the project, Paolo Pedercini,
created numerous pieces critiquing various aspects of capitalism, like
Tamatipico (2003), based on the life of a worker, produced in support of the
2003 Italian referendum on workers’ rights, or McDonald’s Video Game
(2005), which portrays the inner workings of the fast-food industry.
But it’s Pedercini’s Phone Story (2011) that provides the most impressive
and lacerating example of a game confronting its modes of production and
distribution head-on. This mobile game is composed of four distinct minigames, each tasking the player with a different activity related to the
exploitative process of producing the mobile devices on which videogames
are played. They include forcing children in developing nations to extract

 coltan, and preventing suicides at a Foxconn manufacturing facility. The
Phone Story website contains extensive information about the issues
portrayed in the game, and all profits from the sale of the app go to labour
charities, including a donation of over $6,000 to a girl injured in a suicide
attempt at a Foxconn factory. Within days of Phone Story’s release, Apple
banned the game from its digital shopfront. The game still exists on the
larger Android stores, which do little to alleviate the brutal work conditions
that the game critiques. This game correctly cuts close to the bone of these
insecure institutions, which do everything in their power to hide their
vicious methods of operation.
It is not easy for such subversive videogames to reach their audience. In
2018, Valve Corporation announced that they would remove games that
were deemed ‘offensive, illegal, or straight-up trolling’ from Steam, the
world’s largest online store for PC gaming, which they own and operate.
While this rule is somewhat understandable in online spaces that carry so
much obscene, unregulated content, especially on social media, it is less
relevant to a curated store. A platform showcasing the best of gaming
should not be afraid to accommodate content that could be termed illegal –
just look at the practices of street artist Banksy or performance artist Tania
Bruguera. In 2009, Bruguera invited famous art critics to her exhibition and
presented them with lines of pure cocaine – all to highlight the terrible
plight of those involved in the making of the drug, which members of the
art scene so frequently indulge in. Technically, doing graffiti and giving out
class A drugs are illegal acts, but in the right context, they provide an
excellent and necessary reflection of the society we live in. Granted, public
areas and institutions are spaces much more open for negotiation than
private digital storefronts. But if game makers are serious about their
ambitions to push cultural boundaries and create groundbreaking art with
their games, they must engage in a critical conversation about where those
games are hosted.
The habit of banning games from storefronts applies not just to illegal
materials, but also to controversial games or games that engage in mocking
critiques – what Valve called ‘trolling’ – a very broad parameter which
covers much art (and most trash, for sure). What is deemed ‘offensive’ can
be interpreted differently by marginalised communities and by the elites,
and critique of the latter can be neatly disallowed under such rules. Unless
new definitions are drawn up, game shops can systematically erase dissent

 and the work of creators thinking outside the box. For instance, there was
an understandable outcry when Apple’s App Store banned Danish game
studio Lovable Hat Cult’s creation La Petite Mort (2016), which invites the
player to simulate sex on a series of abstract vulvas in order to bring about
an orgasm. What should have been an educational game exploring the
physical satisfaction, sensation and performance of people with vulvas
became a detonator of moral panic for the conservative storefronts seeking
to curate the safest collections possible.
Among other apps swiftly removed from the App Store is I Am Rich
(2008), which had little to no function, but was priced at a plum $999.99
(equivalent to more than $1,400 at the time of this writing). The game
simply acted as a sort of status symbol, a grotesque extension of the
iPhone’s status itself. Eight copies of the app were sold before being pulled
from the store. This reflects in some way the work of the artist Carl Andre,
who also played around with the concept of price and on one occasion,
decided to sell his works for 10 per cent of the buyer’s income. ‘I’m
disappointed that artists do not try to play with the market that way.
Everybody is letting the dealer set the price. In that respect, I think the
artists have given up a role they might play,’ commented curator Ralph
Rugoff on Andre’s work.18 Due to their proximity to their clients, enabled
by digital storefronts that let creators control pricing, independent game
creators have been creative in this sphere.
LAZA KNITEZ!! (2014) is a fast-paced jousting death-match game for up
to four players. At eleven megabytes, it is tiny, but makes a grand statement
with its purchasing model. The team had been discussing the labour and
other sacrifices involved in making games and decided to price it at $100,
marked down with a 98 per cent discount for the first five years. In 2019,
the game that used to cost $2 went up to the originally intended price of
$100, making a satirical comment on the state of game longevity, or lack
thereof, pricing and sales practice.19 The labour, the hours and the emotion
invested in crafting a game are rarely reflected in its price or in the profits
gained – the realities of the market are such that the vast majority of
released games flop, and the successful ones have their profits pocketed by
the few who hold the rights to them. LAZA KNITEZ!!, then, simply gambles
with the state the industry is in.

 Like Carl Andre, the authors of Oikospiel Book I (2017), a game about
‘fevered landscapes, classic literature, operating systems, opera and the
need for dog-based unions’, also had a self-aware, clever pricing system.20
Players had to fill in a form revealing their income and the number of
members in their household in order to generate the price they would pay
for the game. Potential customers were then invited to spin a seemingly
pointless two-dimensional wind turbine, using their cursor, to reduce the
suggested price by pennies. Both LAZA KNITEZ!! and Oikospiel Book I
were feted by the gaming press, unlike the minimal and more vulgarpresenting I Am Rich. The latter was covered more by the mainstream press,
but only in terms of its attempt to adjudicate the bizarre digital app
economy.
The history of modern art is punctuated by a constant tension between the
artists who pushed boundaries and were considered immoral or
uncomfortable, and the gatekeepers of cultural morality and dominant
ideology. In games, that sentiment thrived in the early days of the internet,
and is now more institutionally enabled by smaller indie online retailers
such as itch.io. Introducing and widening this selection into the mainstream
will be beneficial for games in the long term.
Still, it is worth underlining that critical practices like Sierra’s and
Fraser’s are nowadays not just tolerated, they are specifically invited to be
part of the elite art scenes, international biennales and global high-end
gallery circuits. The critique they level is almost entirely contained within
the medium, nurtured and celebrated, posing little danger to the art world
that coddles these exhibits. Most such practices are part of lofty art
collections and are coveted by most reputable curators. Self-critical, selfreferential and critical in an aesthetically pleasing manner – these practices
are folded into the art world and increase the prestige of the arts industry.
Games like Phone Story, on the other hand, are actively shooed away
from the market-facing fronts of the medium. They remain unpromoted,
seen as an abomination rather than a clever invention. Very few in the
games media or distributors would rate such work as anything more than a
token novelty or a nuisance, rather than as valuable staples of institutional
critique. And therein lies the kind of subversive potential that seems to have
been neutralised by the all-accepting art world.
One game that effectively questions the form necessary for playing it is
Send Me to Heaven (2013). The game uses the accelerometer of the device

 (usually a mobile phone) that the audience is playing the game on to
measure a score, calculated by how high the player throws it into the air.
People with this app compete against each other by seeking to throw their
phones up higher than anyone else, at the risk of damaging or even
destroying their devices. Apple once again demonstrated its thin skin by
banning the app from the App Store. It is currently still available to
download on Google Play, where it has garnered a devoted fan base.
In a similar vein, Lose/Lose (2009), a shoot-em-up art videogame
released for Mac OS by the American designer Zach Gage, invites the
player to control a spaceship and shoot an alien in their path, with little to
no difficulty. However, with every felled alien, the game permanently
deletes a random file on the player’s actual Mac machine, resulting in a
potentially corrupted operating system. The game became notorious for its
Russian-roulette-type mechanic and the coveted leaderboard: how long
could players last before their computers were permanently disabled?
These examples represent art at its most intriguing – subversive,
dangerous, risky, generous with varying interpretations and outcomes. But
such extreme or abstract experiments are not all that could be interesting
about the intersection of games and politics. Untitled Goose Game (2019)
stars a pesky goose that wreaks havoc in a traditional conservative English
village. The game lures the player in with relatively safe and cute aesthetics
and an unassuming protagonist. Its sudden turn into subversive mischief
may intrigue players, who perhaps were not prepared for anarchist
scheming and the cheeky inducement of chaos. A percentage of the game’s
profits have funded indigenous resistance campaigns in Canada. The goose
quickly became a leftist meme, most notably around the Brexit issue.
The Estonian-British studio ZA/UM’s 2019 megahit Disco Elysium is
cited as one of the most powerful and successful current political
videogames. With a reportedly gruesome years-long development process
involving no fewer than nine writers, this indie endeavour embraced
dialogue and role-playing mechanics in order to tell a story defined by its
breadth and nuances. While controlling the protagonist, Detective Harrier
‘Harry’ Du Bois, the game invites players to empathise with non-playable
game characters from all walks of life and with a variety of political
leanings. Players from both political extremes were able to find something
in this game and to meet their opponents in the process. The creators dripfeed deep revolutionary communist politics throughout the various plot and

 subplot lines, but this is never done heavy-handedly or with an intention to
only talk to their own camp. This game deals primarily with the player’s
own political and spiritual discovery, so the sense of being capable of
making a choice steers the narrative here, rather than a projection of the
creators’ own values. The game design and narrative tricks make space for a
fluid, noncommittal and steady persuasiveness.
As one player describes it: ‘Disco Elysium deals with fascism by showing
not why it’s wrong, but why it’s appealing. It shows it from its strongest,
not the weakest side. This makes for a much more honest antifascist
game.’21 It also includes a glimpse of the institutional critique sorely
lacking in games – at one point, the protagonist is confronted with the
failures of a fictional indie games studio, partially referencing the early days
of the real studio, but also foreshadowing the infighting between, and
ultimate dramatic exit of, some of the real-life creators of the game.22
Culture as Tools, Not Just Signifiers
Presenting information in innovative ways is one of the key methods
political games use to justify their existence. A Hand with Many Fingers
(2020) attempts to do that in a manner not dissimilar from Hans Haacke’s
aforementioned practice. Here, the player is invited to delve into an intricate
plot involving real-world CIA conspiracy and corruption, advancing the
narrative by sifting through real documents, pinning notes and revealing
buried secrets. The game provides a stimulating journey through themes of
authority, secrecy and institutional involvement. Again, one might question
the efficiency of such presentation, but having the players go through the
material by themselves and uncover the secrets does make them more
invested in the information discovered. In 2018, Vice and other outlets
covered a little text adventure gem by Kris Ligman titled You Are Jeff
Bezos, where the player receives a variety of virtual purchase choices, such
as the latest iPhone, jewellery, lifetime subscriptions to various covetable,
cars, and mansions. It rapidly becomes apparent just how much of a chore it
is to spend all this money. Many clicks later, barely a dent has been made in
the billionaire’s wealth.
Ever since I first saw coverage of the game, the most intriguing example
of a political videogame for me has been The Uber Game (2017). The plot

 is essentially that of an Uber simulator: the player is put in the shoes of a
freelance driver, who spends their day taking sometimes difficult passengers
around town, making money on the Uber app. Clever writing tricks allow
players to form an emotional relationship with the main character, all in the
space of a quick ten-minute game. The numbers look relatively healthy until
after a few days – spoiler – it’s time to address fees for car maintenance,
petrol, insurance, repairs and Uber’s cut. A tiny fraction of the total take,
representing only half of the minimum wage, remains in the driver’s pocket
Albeit well-made, the game’s content is no more fascinating than that of
the games I usually critique – these are hardly revolutionary gameplay
mechanics, right? The kicker is the location of the game: it was
commissioned by, and is playable for free on, the website of the Financial
Times – a prominent centre-right publication. By fostering a sentimental
bond between the player and the character, then sneaking in a progressive
message through that bombshell ending, the game holds a substantially
larger chance of actually effecting a change of heart. Crucially, it targets
players who might not naturally feel solidarity with an Uber driver. In other
words, the developers skipped the ‘this is going to be really funny!’
moment. The average FT reader was probably unprepared for the punchline,
which is precisely why it’s so powerful.
The Uber Game and Phone Story spotlight the question about whether it
is really the design, aesthetic and mechanics of a game that create a
persuasive political argument, or could the method of distribution be key
here? The Uber Game would be way less effective if it had been presented
to already centre-left Guardian readers or simply left on a neutral game
store, where it would be picked up mainly by progressive gamers who need
no convincing that Uber drivers deserve a better deal. Could it be, perhaps,
that among the many other techniques outlined here, the modes of
dissemination and the sophistication of marketing are among the strongest
factors in actually changing minds?
Alternatively, how can games become tools for social change, rather than
mere statements or pieces of propaganda? Again, I am reminded of a fine
art practice. The Polish artist Krzysztof Wodiczko turned ordinary shopping
carts into storage spaces that unfolded into beds. He then distributed them
to the unhoused residents of New York City. In 2005, Argentinian artist Judi
Werthein set up Brinco, a brand of trainers, and gave them away free to
people attempting to cross the border illegally in Tijuana, Mexico. The

 shoes featured a torch, a compass and pockets to hide money and medicine.
Printed on a removable insole was a map of the border area around Tijuana.
At the same time, just over the border in California, she sold the shoes as
limited-edition art objects for $200 a pair. Part of the money generated went
to a Tijuana shelter helping migrants in need. The shoe is part of the
permanent collection at the Tate Modern. Such pieces provide real-life
means for solidarity and the implementation of moral values. Rather than
being mere signifiers, they become objects devised and effectively
mobilised for change.
In principle, nothing prevents games from doing the same thing,
especially given their deep digital footprint and capacity for original
presentation. But somehow, little to no effort is genuinely invested here.
Yes, the computerised aspect can be seen as a limitation, but there is no lack
of space for innovation, or perhaps the digital facet can prove to be more
powerful in some ways. Instead of mining money-laundering
cryptocurrencies, could cleaner computer power be utilised for the
automation of some digital activism? Time and levels of creativity in this
area will tell. The axis for efficacy should be examined also, not just the
political affiliation, to assess the scope for drawing action from inaction.
To be clear, other media also often fail to be very useful or practical.
Claire Bishop notes as much about parts of the art world. She detects that
the perceived social achievements of a piece of political art are never
compared with those of real-life social projects. Instead, they derive their
critical value in opposition to more traditional or abstract art, which is not
concerned with saving the world. Socially aware art validates its own
existence precisely because it doesn’t present as ‘artistic’. The aspiration is
always to move beyond art, but never to the point of comparison with
similar projects in the social domain.23 Instead of inquiring about efficacy,
the tendency is to compare artists’ projects with those of other artists on the
basis of ethical one-upmanship. Contemporary art, as outlined at the
beginning of this chapter, can absolutely ooze mediocrity, too. However, the
capacity for experimentation and inquiry, rather than just product-crafting,
is still much more extensive in the art sector.
Few examples are needed to expose the corruption and intricate
hypocrisies that taint socially conscious fine artists and the galleries and
biennales exhibiting them, funded by money from the darkest parts of the
contemporary economy. The Tate galleries and the British Museum run

 large-scale public relations campaigns around their work in diversifying the
cast of artists they exhibit, while simultaneously taking money from the
oligarchs who immiserate the oppressed classes of the world.
Even so, there exist enclaves of artists who forfeit social and material
capital in the pursuit of sustainability or purity, in some sense. Although the
anthropologist David Graeber dedicated most of his career to examining
forms of economy and history, his thoughts on the sovereignty of the artist
also ring true:
Artists and those drawn to them have created enclaves where it has
been possible to experiment with forms of work, exchange, and
production radically different from those promoted by capital. While
they are not always self-consciously revolutionary, artistic circles have
had a persistent tendency to overlap with revolutionary circles;
presumably, precisely because these have been spaces where people can
experiment with radically different, less alienated forms of life …
Many artists are deeply cynical about what they do. But even those who
are the most idealistic can only feel they are pulling something off
when they are able to create enclaves, however small, where they can
experiment with forms of life, exchange, and production which are – if
not downright communistic (which they often are), then at any rate,
about as far from the forms ordinarily promoted by capital as anyone
can get to experience.24
What Would Adorno Say?
Surveying the pitfalls and successes of the art world’s political efficacy may
be a useful exercise, but games hold some unique challenges, too.
Something about games and many of their designs points to more
fundamental flaws. My conflicting feelings about the medium continue
when I observe that their design is so often fundamentally tied up with
competition and accumulation, justifying and validating many experiences
under capitalist systems. Always chasing, panting to get ahead, needing to
grind to succeed, to win or simply to survive. Even the more wholesome
games, stripped of all such mechanics, tend to subdue us into inaction. The

 theorist Theodor Adorno would remind us here that much of entertainment
is a ritual in which the subjugated celebrate their subjection.
As a leisure activity, the Frankfurt School philosopher Adorno would no
doubt insist, gaming merely underpins and highlights our own position as
permanent commodities in the labour market. It offers a few hours given
over to relaxing on purchased products, with money given to us, so we have
less time to actually express ourselves and play. Free time is nothing but a
shadowy continuation of labour.25 Screenwork and leisure bleed into each
other. We complete tasks on pieces of hardware that fundamentally create
more work for us, and every second of our engagement with it boosts the
profits which will be used to make our lives even more miserable.
Adorno is not alone here. Modern thinkers offer a similar critique:
Games may offer a sense of order and control, a moment of
recuperation and a sense of escape from the insecurity, inequality, and
tension caused by capitalist systems, but these very same qualities also
have a potential to trap the player within game spaces that are less
about the creative powers of play and more about soothing citizens’
anxieties within sanctioned commercial leisure spaces.26
Workers with discretionary leisure income pay to be entertained, to be
compensated for the boredom of their working lives. Collectively
hallucinating and preoccupied with survival instead of overthrowing the
structures that engender our suffering, we are stuck in pockets of culture as
the only space we have any chance of controlling. In the absence of material
autonomy, enclaves of entertainment and popular culture stand in as arenas
where irrelevant people can get at each other or command the admiration so
often lacking in our everyday alienated experiences.
Even the once relatively private activity of play has been commodified
beyond recognition. Every sort of image imaginable – still, moving, and
capable of being played with – are now commercialised, consumed and sold
for the benefit of the owner, by third parties that make a cut on the deal.27
With the rise of market-driven artificial intelligence apps, one does not even
need to own the image in order to control, manipulate and benefit from it.
Images have taken precedence over the real, creating a pseudo-world that
obscures the real one. Games are a collection of images to be interacted

 with, morphing an individual into at once a passive spectator and a
consumer.
In such a surface culture culture, the representation of an artist or an
artwork is often more significant than the work or the artist themselves. An
artist with more social capital might have a larger, more influential public
profile. And again, leading to more success. This type of image supremacy
means that gaming marketing campaigns, public relations efforts and even
the social capital of developers or studios play a major role in shaping
consumer expectations and reactions. Progressive videogames are not
excepted from this spectacle machine, with their efficacy measured more by
how many people downloaded the product and what awards the author wins
than by the real-world changes they inspire.
The cultural theorist Walter Benjamin warned that it is not enough to pass
something off as having ‘revolutionary content’ while still utilising
contemporary relations to production. In his seminal work ‘The Author as
Producer’ (1934), he argued that it is essential for the author, artist or
activist to become a conscious producer, one who considers and evaluates
their own work, and their relation to the formal means of production, in a
‘truly revolutionary way’.28 This becomes critical when taking seriously the
methods involved in making games (that will be the battle of Level IV).
Any product with ethics as its selling point can never truly be valid if said
ethics negate the conditions necessary for that product to exist.
Furthermore, the game risks appearing sinister if it insists on its own value.
This should not be a controversial take – if an artist or a game developer
is serious about the efficacy of their work, and is selling it on this merit,
they must be equally invested in demonstrating a level of awareness
towards the methods by which it has come to exist. I personally have been
reproached for suggesting that collaborations with institutions or products
that promote inequality and destruction, while attempting to sell their own
progressive cause, are wrong.29 A necessity for social capital, rather than
systematic and institutional solving of injustices, still rules too much of this
industry. The hope is that this is a temporary tussle as we work to find new
and reliable methods of restructuring how we make games and signal
politics in them. In the meantime, however, it can certainly be a dispiriting
and exhausting path.
Even within the high-end art milieu, very few practitioners are driven to
cohere with much of Benjamin’s guidance. Hito Steyerl comes to mind –

 the filmmaker and moving image artist is keen on producing carbon-neutral
work and shows, as well as limiting the buyer pool of her works according
to their ethics.30 Steyerl often cites historically materialist literature as a
frame of integrity for her that provides a challenge and a sense of security.
While she does not pretend to work to reach audiences outside of the
sophisticated art scene, Steyerl attaches importance to nurturing an ethics in
the actual processes of her artistic expressions.
Videogames are a classic expression of the capitalist modus operandi:
seizing play, a part of a human’s cognitive growth and basic interaction, and
appropriating it for speculation, exploitation and all that an obsessive lunge
for profits results in. An activity that in and of itself should not be moralised
– playing on digital displays – currently relies on exploitative routes to
make those products, almost automatically rendering them tainted. With
little to no choice, we are locked into a relationship of passive consumption,
entertained in a circus not only while the world burns, but as we – with
every push of the button – burn it ourselves. ‘Humanity’s self-alienation has
reached such a degree that it can experience its own destruction as an
aesthetic pleasure of the first order,’ Benjamin wrote.31 Videogames are
extremely good at this. Are there alternatives for the medium beyond that?
OceanofPDF.com

 Level IV: Modes of Production

After reading Level III, my partner turned to me and made a grimly spot-on
remark: ‘You do know that all of the games you’re dissecting in this Level,
plus all of the games like them, put together, are probably bringing in just a
percentile of the revenue of a single high-end waifu game?’ He is
devastatingly right. The kind of circles I move in as part of the Western
indie, arty, politically aware games scene make up a tiny speck in the global
videogames industry.
A waifu is a fictional character, especially popular in anime and manga,
whom a player regards as a romantic partner. It is typically a non-playable
character of a given game whom the player can interact with; waifus have
oversexualised features and their attraction to you, the player, is directly
linked to how good you are at a game. How good you are, however, in
games centring this type of interaction is usually determined by the amount
of real-life money you have invested into loot boxes, an in-game gambling
mechanic where items and improvements are given (or not given) at
random. So the impact of a gambling mechanic that uses waifus or
husbandos (yes, this is a real term) in a mobile game like Genshin Impact
(2020), which has garnered more than 50 million monthly players and a $4
billion revenue in its four years of existence, is most definitely larger than
the entire serious or artsy games milieu.1
The top ten mobile games, clogged with microtransactions around
purposefully unchallenging themes, are substantially more profitable ($12
billion revenue in 2022) than the narrative-driven releases for PC and
console. Dungeon Fighter Online (2005), a game with unexceptional
graphics, scantily clad characters and seriously addictive mechanics, has
had more unique players than the entire population of Europe.2 The vast
majority of digital gaming is currently preoccupied with profiteering gacha

 mechanics,* rather than with aspects of culture that resist domination and
extractivism.
Level IV presents the toughest challenge yet. In order to encourage the
brilliant parts of this fascinating field – digital gaming – and to begin to
eliminate other parts, we must understand how games themselves are made.
Not only the assembly line behind them, but the complex finance and
income models that shape the videogame culture. Only by dissecting the
layers of production and inspecting the various cogs in this massive global
machine can we hope to steer it in another direction. As this chapter
demonstrates, there are many parts to the creation, storing and selling of a
videogame; a range of pressure points can and should be adjusted, and the
industry should be completely reimagined. The single item of a videogame
– depending on its size and scale – can reach like an octopus far and wide
into many adjacent industries. One solid product has various levels of
questionable politics and points of resistance. How are games made? Which
parts of this global machine can be justified and which must be bravely and
immediately brought to game over?
Creation
From the very first moment of opening of a New Game Project file on a
computer, game developers are already part of the process of profit
extraction and cost-benefit relations with other products. Most games are
crafted on pieces of software called game engines, computer applications
that a game creator (or a team) can use, layer by layer, to build graphics,
code, design and audio systems that will bring a videogame into existence.
The ways these engines are sold varies. The most advanced engines are
available through hefty licensing deals, complicated crediting and profitsharing mechanisms. Those utilised by independent game creators can have
a less involved pricing system, but, by the same token, a more basic tool set.
Large game engines such as Unreal and Unity are not only major pieces of
commercial software in themselves; entire large-scale independent
companies now base their business on crafting middleware, the numerous
plug-ins that tie into these engines, creating mini-industries that orbit the
big hitters.

 Huge productions like CD Projekt’s Witcher series (2007 onwards) and,
until recently, Cyberpunk 2077 (2020) work on their own custom-made
proprietary game engines, and some independent game creators craft them,
too.3 However, the majority of games are built with commercially available
tools whose influence is growing ever greater. Unreal, for example, is one
of the largest commercial game engines (developed by Epic Games, the
creators of the mega-hit Fortnite) and is now being used to build many of
the visuals around us in more than just games. Game engines have become
the backbone of production in movies, television, advertising, construction
and architecture. Prized not only for their visual aspect, but also for
simulations of physics, they play an intrinsic role in modelling many reallife cultural, engineering and infrastructure projects.4
Game engines are also the base of the software which holds considerable
information about players and their habits. This includes session time, at
which point during the game they decide to stop, behavioural patterns,
length of play and other game-related data. Depending on the game, some
engines may also hold much of the player’s private information, such as
their bank details and social contacts.5 Much of this data is used by the
engine companies themselves or by third-party contractors, who package it
into an interface for those who’ll pay to access it. Such practices have
caused international outrage. For example, Western players distrust
products from Epic (owners of Unreal Engine), as 40 per cent of the
company is owned by the Chinese conglomerate Tencent. In 2019, the CEO
of Epic, Tim Sweeney, did his best to refute the accusations that Epic
Games Store was spyware for the Chinese government.6 European and
American regulators nonetheless demand that game studios operating in
subsequent territories box their databases so that no one from Tencent is
able to access them. Game makers are therefore mired in global geopolitical
tensions and are in relationship with major influential software corporations
at the point of booting up the tools they use to craft their art.
And yet, the prominence and relatively easy access of these engines have
had some democratising effects, too. By the late 2000s, teams as small as
one or two were able to deploy these tools on simple computing machines
to build impressive and deep game worlds, birthing the indie games
movement. Game engines – the access, the variety, ownership and
implementation – are often cited as a shorthand for indicating how games

 are made, sold and even perceived. Built on Unreal? Probably large, AAA,
big-budget and spectacular, with detailed graphics (for example, the
BioShock series). Unity? More economic graphics, great for mobile games,
used for building cherished indies as Firewatch (2016) and megahits such
as Genshin Impact. Disparate approaches to drawing up a game emerge at
the software level. Capital inserts its profit-seeking tentacle already at this
nascent stage.
What type of people make games and how do they assemble together?
Work conditions in the AAA (large) studios were brought into the
sunlight with the aforementioned ‘EA Spouse Letter’, describing the
gruelling conditions at one of the biggest and most profitable game
companies in the world:
The current mandatory hours are 9 am to 10 pm – seven days a week –
with the occasional Saturday evening off for good behavior (at 6:30
pm). This averages out to an eighty-five hour work week … And the
kicker: for the honor of this treatment EA salaried employees receive a)
no overtime; b) no compensation time! (‘comp’ time is the equalization
of time off for overtime – any hours spent during a crunch accrue into
days off after the product has shipped); c) no additional sick or vacation
leave.7
In the period since 2004, when this pervasive industry-wide problem was
publicised, matters have barely improved. In 2010, the industry was again
presented with an open letter, this time from ‘Rockstar Spouses’.8 Workers
at Rockstar Games, the creators behind Red Dead Redemption (2010), LA
Noire (2011) and Max Payne 3 (2012), all reported engaging in crunch at
their San Diego studio. Anonymous employees of Epic Games later
described work weeks that stretched between eighty and 100 hours in the
run-up to the release of Fortnite Battle Royale (2017).9
According to a 2019 survey, 40 per cent of game developers experienced
crunch at least once that year. Only 8 per cent reported receiving extra pay
for their additional hours. The survey was conducted by the International
Game Developers Association, which mainly represents Global North
workers.10 One can assume that matters are even worse in the regions such
surveys don’t reach. Studio workers say that crunch is increasingly factored

 into production schedules: it is becoming the rule, rather than an exception.
Developers rarely complain – their passion for games and game making is
taken for granted. The presence of table tennis, foosball tables and beer
fridges in the offices, as well as occasional free merch for the title they
worked on, are meant to keep the workers feeling special and in no need of
protection from the darker parts of the industry.
Crunch is probably the most intensely discussed problem, but it is not the
only one affecting games studio workers. Sexism and other forms of
discrimination are sadly still a persistent issue in this male-dominated field.
To give just one well-reported example, Jessica Price was unceremoniously
fired from her position as the narrative designer for ArenaNet, the creators
of the Guild Wars series (2005 onw.), upon challenging a sexist fan on
Twitter.11 Sexual harassment at industry events, or male bosses abusing
their position and dating their subordinates at work, is a common and
mostly tolerated occurrence. The dark cloud of misogyny that was made
cool by Atari back in the 1970s still casts a shadow.
In 2022, Riot Games – the team behind huge titles such as the League of
Legends franchise – agreed to pay out a whopping $100 million to settle a
class-action lawsuit brought by its women employees. Unwanted sexual
advances by male colleagues, pay disparity and lost promotions due to their
gender were just some of the alleged offences.12 The payout presumably
barely made a dent in the corporation’s coffers, as its main performer’s
League of Legends revenue reached $1.6 billion in 2015.13 Also in 2022,
Activision Blizzard settled a lawsuit, paying $18 million to its women
employees, and ‘agreed to take steps to prevent and address discrimination
and harassment.’ In one of the most notorious and bizarre breaches of
conduct at the studio, men employees allegedly stole breast milk from the
office fridge.14
Sudden and mass layoffs are also commonplace in the industry. The
following are just a few examples. In 2018, Telltale Games, the studio that
crafted The Walking Dead (2012), abruptly fired 250 employees without
any severance. That same year, Capcom shut down its Vancouver
subsidiary, leaving 158 people jobless. In February 2019, Activision
Blizzard cut nearly 1,000 workers’ jobs.15 In 2023, EA fired 800 people
weeks after reporting a $7 billion revenue. And 600 people working on the
Unity game engine were fired in 2023, heightening fears that Unreal

 Engine, owned by Epic Games, would soon become a monopoly. Embracer
Group, which spent billions buying up game companies, most actively in
Scandinavia, proceeded to then shut down numerous studios, leaving
thousands of employees without work and unfinished games that will never
see the light of day.16
Job insecurity is an everyday reality for the majority of people working in
the videogames industry. Severance pay is a rarity, and fighting to get it can
be hard. Crucially, though, game makers are often working under strict
NDAs (non-disclosure agreements) that prohibit any discussion about
unannounced projects. If a project is halted mid-production, game
developers are not credited and cannot show their own work to potential
future employers, regardless of the number of years they spent on that
project. I personally know many unlucky game developers who have
worked in the industry for more than a decade, but struggle to find new
employment, since their projects have been randomly cancelled –
experience is measured by the number of releases worked on, rather than
years in the job.
Quality assurance (QA) workers, who bear the brunt of strenuous,
repetitive and undervalued work in videogames – making sure they actually
run – usually endure the most intense crunch and enjoy few rights and little
appreciation. Playing a game hundreds of times and discovering and filing
bugs before the release of the game can, unless managed properly and
ethically, lock workers to a desk for days. QA is the most frequently
outsourced part of game making, often passed on to invisible workers in the
Global South and Eastern Europe. Working in QA is often the most
accessible path into the games industry for people who were unable to study
it at university or find another way in.
Writer Ian Williams describes it this way:
When we see a presentation given by a game CEO at PAX (a
prestigious games industry summit), we look past that lone figure and
see the toil and love of the dozens who made the platform he or she
stands on.17
A general class disparity exists within the industry. In the UK, for instance,
game developers are twice as likely as the population at large to have

 parents in managerial positions. Similarly, British game devs are twice as
likely to have received a private-school education.18 Certainly, individuals
who are a minority in the industry – be they women, migrants, or people of
colour or from poorer backgrounds – can be tokenised and made to feel
unwelcome within a dominant group that has never worried about security.
In contrast with the perceived glamour and growth of an industry full of
Twitter celebrity game developers and successful boutique studios, the
workers who truly hold this industry together are underpaid, outsourced,
alienated and constantly overlooked. The inability in the gaming industry to
understand poverty is a problem not only within corporate board meetings,
but also among its core workforce. Romanticised though they are, indie
companies can be even more culpable in this regard. Structured as an
opposition to the major company structures creating AAA games, with
hundreds of people in dozens of teams building one major release, indie
teams were supposed to have a more horizontal structure and offer
developers more choice as to how and when they wanted (or didn’t want) to
work. They operate with a smaller gap between the creation of the game
and its release. Employee salaries in indie set-ups are usually lower than the
industry standard; moreover, the insecurity is greater, so that people
working in indie studios are perhaps already more materially stable.
Working for an independent company may require employees to practise
more than just their craft; since indie employees often need entrepreneurial
skills, the positions are more accessible to those who have been to business
or private school.
Although the ethos of indie studios is meant to be the antithesis of big
game company cultures, sadly they too are mired in issues that only
underline the need for a more universal safeguard. Any for-profit company
structure, no matter how small and cosy, has its problems. A more
institutional solution was needed. In 2017, game workers began looking
into establishing trade unions. These historically tested structures ought to
assist studios, both large and small, in bringing ethical considerations into
this largely unregulated field.
The dozens of local unions which have sprung up in numerous countries
under the Game Workers Unite umbrella movement since 2018 offer a hint
of optimism. They have their work cut out for them – still, numerous
victories have already been achieved. Of course, this didn’t happen without
a fight. Company bosses sang the same tune previously heard from Silicon

 Valley tech bosses: we’re special, we’re different, we need bespoke
solutions. The self-narrative of those in positions of power in the games
industry is one of uniqueness; it claims that the usual structures for holding
employers accountable are unsuitable for the world of technology. Gaming
is different from an assembly line and the old ways of organising a
workforce. This shroud of tech mystique cannot be pulled away without
trade-union support.
Not all unions are the same, and it is worth noting that their effectiveness,
as well as their political affiliations, form a broad spectrum. Some, like
STJV in France, are horizontally run, radical unions that fight for their
workers tooth and nail. Some sense a financial opportunity, with those game
dev salaries filling up the coffers of union dues so they gather game workers
into unions with scant care for their specific needs. Some are more
interested in retaining a clean social media profile among upper-class games
industry influencers, and even bosses, than in protecting their vulnerable
members. They are keen to appear mature and non-confrontational, so as to
fit in with the comfort-seeking parts of the industry, instead of embracing
class antagonism, which is likely to lose them friends in high places.
On the other hand, publicly facing unions are more exposed than ever.
They are often seen by game workers as a service rather than a space for
solidarity or for building a movement. So when something bad happens
within the union space, the urge among many in an industry attuned to
neoliberal values is to call the manager rather than work together to shape a
better tomorrow. The activist Alex Fernandes describes the dynamic as
follows:
Every time a union does a perceived Good Thing or Bad Thing there’s a
flurry of people joining or leaving as with BFAWU/UNISON at the
moment and I can’t stress enough how that’s not how any of this works.
Stop treating trade unions like they’re clubs, please, for fuck’s sake.19
The games industry union movement is young and at times clumsy; it
should be allowed to make mistakes and grow. A rising number of gaming
employees are now part of solid, tried-and-tested union movements that
consistently deliver for ordinary workers. New generations of potential
union organisers are getting involved in the movement, and, overall, it is

 truly astonishing. I had the privilege to witness this burgeoning movement
from up-close and, although my personal story in the movement ended in
burnout and sadness, I am still in awe of the incredible people around the
world pushing this crucial, hopeful part of the industry forward.
Unionisation is an essential tool in resisting what’s to come: an everaggressive, powerful and consolidating industry with little restraint or
supervision. The top five games companies in the world made a whopping
$90 billion in revenue in 2021.20 In 2023, Microsoft bought Activision
Blizzard for nearly $70 billion, successfully adding huge catalogues of
games onto their Xbox – a subscription-based game sales platform driving
gamers to a single closed system.21 The largest company in the world, with
a $30 billion revenue – the Chinese giant Tencent – has been buying up
studios, and studios that own many other studios, all over the world. The
monopolisation of the industry is ongoing and, with tens of billions sloshing
around in consolidation deals big and small, it is increasingly difficult to
exert any influence over power of such magnitude. The future of games is
decided in pristine board rooms, with little to no input from those who
actually craft the games or from the masses of those who play them.
And while people from ever more diverse demographics are developing
more varied games, this centralisation is still likely to shrink the choice of
games overall. Bigger and bigger companies are busy working on a smaller
catalogue of old intellectual property assets, or even on a single, financially
evergreen game. At the same time, most app stores are steadily removing
old games from their digital shelves. Other IP never sees the light of day –
projects are discontinued mid-production, and the IP is bought so that
another company cannot profit from it. This echoes the wastefulness
currently rampant in the film industry, where big-budget projects are
scrapped before release. For example, the Batgirl film cost $90 million to
make yet will never be screened or streamed.22 In 2023, Disney Plus
completed production of the Nautilus series in Australia, involving
hundreds of cast and crew members, only to axe the show before its
release.23 With marketing budgets now rivalling actual production costs,
merely completing the shoot meant that half of the budget remained to be
spent, not to mention the savings on reshoots and royalty payments.
The small number of conglomerates, which own vast amounts of IP,
stifles creativity, too. The decision as to what to do or not to do with frozen

 projects, which is made by fewer and fewer people, creates a morphed
picture of what’s on offer. Some projects are propelled, and versions of
them are released and re-released. Others are stuck in limbo. For example,
the beloved manga legend Sailor Moon, involving a cast of Tokyo-based
students with superpowers (adored by this author!), only had a handful of
gaming adaptations in the early 1990s and nothing since. The muchanticipated Disco Elysium sequel is looking to be canned due to corporate
IP disagreements. Huge IP projects are bought up and teams moved to other
projects, but without advocates to root for them (apart from the players, of
course), quality games IP can die a slow death.
Yet similarly to the Marvelisation of Hollywood, some gaming IP is
being made into every form possible, for every device that will hold a
videogame. Super Mario has been spun into the Mario Kart series, Super
Smash Bros, the Yoshi series and so on, which are available in every format
imaginable. The Pokémon, Metal Gear and Warhammer series have been
similarly franchised. As a result, it is much harder for new ideas to break
through; if they do, they must have a sequelisation or prequelisation plan
lined up. Centralisation results in larger budgets – the only way big
machines operate – which result in higher risk factors.
Seeking to lower the risk, conglomerates avoid new ideas and lean on
their existing fanbase. Again in contrast to the arts, where pieces are
relished for their singularity and where intellectual property is less
protected, with a clearer history of ‘inspiration’, in games, creativity is
framed in terms of profitability and re-envisioning previous products with
small differences, rather than true trail-blazing. At the same time, smaller
studios, which do not own established IPs, may struggle to compete with
the financial and marketing resources of larger companies, leading to fewer
opportunities for the emergence of new and innovative game concepts.
A complete market dominance by very few actors will obviously affect
the workforce, too. Similar to what was cited by film industry workers
during the 2023 writers’ strike, owners of these organisations will be able to
claim content overload when the workers actually making these products
demand better conditions. Not only are potentially interesting releases being
ditched, but strikes also impact on the teams that were perhaps working on
projects that were about to go into production. Overcommitment and the
sudden shocks dictated by the monopolisation of the industry result in mass
layoffs and devastating life changes for the employees.

 While much of the prevalent moral discourse around videogames is stuck
in banal anxieties about their potential to turn people violent, a much more
urgent and consequential movement is taking place. The consolidation of
game companies into a few mega conglomerates will affect consumers and
creators alike, but – most importantly – it will fuel all of the dodgiest
practices already cultivated by this industry. The PR and lobbying
campaigns behind the 2023 Activision Blizzard buyout by Microsoft have
been effective in convincing regulators to accept this move. The European
Commission in charge of competition policy actually stated that Microsoft’s
ability to enhance the cloud gaming services economy was the main reason
why the deal was allowed to go through.24
Curation
Publishing a game is also steeped in politics. Historically, the industry was
similar to book publishing: game creators approached publishers with a
proposal or a semi-finished product, looking for funding for the rest of the
project and negotiating profit sharing. Publishers then arranged the logistics
of the game, identifying its audience and reaching the consumer.
With notable exceptions – studios that are too big or too small – most
videogames currently on the market result from a deal between a studio and
a publisher. Most often, game companies receive regular payments from
publishers in order to complete their game, and a revenue split is set up.
Usually this is meant to support game creators who lack the resources or
knowledge to deal with marketing and distribution of games, and are unable
to fund the entire production upfront.
Depending on the agreement, this can result in majority or absolute
control by the publisher to dictate the schedule and even the content of the
game. Under this pressure, crunch and creative corner-cutting are common.
Publishers often retain ownership over the IP; if they don’t do a good
enough job promoting the product, creators may find themselves limited in
how much they can do for the marketing of the game, as the rights to their
own game simply don’t belong to them anymore. Layers of NDAs and legal
tie-ins may bar them from mentioning the product altogether.
And while that is still overall the standard relationship, the
monopolisation of the games industry has allowed for large studios to look

 into self-publishing, thus getting rid of the middleman and consolidating
even more power. Companies such as Sony or Microsoft, possessing the
holy trifecta of necessary tools for game releasing and consumption –
hardware, game development and game publishing – are almost invincible.
They can print money within the closed ecosystem, then grant themselves
obviously beneficial deals to conjure up the product on the said hardware.
Given the internal emails within Microsoft musing about buying out a giant
like Nintendo, it seems like the consolidation game has only just begun.25
Unlike the game makers, who are more often driven by creative
ambitions, publishing is mostly a numbers business. Here again, the
analogy with the film industry fits – churning out yet another Call of Duty
game is more profitable than investing in smaller, more experimental titles.
That lean into the familiar is what drives the bulk of publishing deals, too.
Most game pitching decks now contain selling points such as ‘X Familiar
Game meets Y Familiar Game’, or ‘X Familiar Game Mechanic meets Y
Familiar Game Mechanic’; the familiarity is often seen as a plus. ‘Dark
Souls meets Star Wars’, ‘Grand Theft Auto meets The Walking Dead’ or
‘Street Fighter meets Slay the Spire’ are examples of pitches that are likely
to secure funding. Reduced consumer choice is justified as simply
presenting players with what they want. This limited view of what gaming
can or should be is baked into the financial modelling, and certainly affects
how the industry is shaped.
More broadly, publishers are also at the mercy of the online app stores.
Steam – the largest distributor of PC videogames – has more than 400
million sales annually.26 That’s hundreds of millions of sales of games, with
prices ranging from a few pence to thousands of dollars for collector’s
editions. For each game, Steam charges the publisher or studio a
commission of 30 per cent from the first $10 million in sales. For all sales
between $10 million and $50 million, the commission is 25 per cent. For
every sale after the initial $50 million, Steam takes a 20 per cent cut.
Additionally, Steam charges $100 for any game that is put on the platform.
So, just being a digital storefront with few expenses apart from some server
space is incredibly profitable – in 2021, for example, the platform generated
$10 billion in revenue.27
Steam’s revenues are only a tad bit smaller than those of Ticketmaster
(part of Live Nation), say, who own nearly 80 per cent of the online ticket

 purchasing business for live events.28 Ticketmaster is close to a monopoly
for analogue events, at least in the US. Steam, however, shares business
with other huge stores selling games to other platforms – consoles and
mobile games. Sony owns PlayStation console and Microsoft owns Xbox
console; both have their own stores and report revenues in the many
billions.
The field where gaming is dominant, however, and is forecast to grow
even more substantially, is mobile gaming. It is set to completely eclipse PC
and console gaming in number – the revenue of mobile gaming reached $98
billion in 2021; dwarfing the revenue from PC and consoles at $37 billion
and $43 billion, respectively. Google Play’s revenues stood at around $40
billion in 2022.29 One mobile game – Candy Crush Saga – brought in $660
million in revenue in the United States alone, placing it between giants like
YouTube ($770 million) and Max (formerly HBO Max; $580 million).30
Mobile games made up $110 billion of Apple App Store’s $167 billion
revenue throughout 2022, proving that mobile is king now, and will
continue to be so.31 Again, these are not people making or publishing
games. These are simply digital storefronts.
Currently hosting tens of thousands of games, it would be a mess of a
platform without the all-important shopfront curation. Similarly to Google,
which puts favourable (mostly paid-for) websites at the top of its page,
Steam also utilises a sophisticated algorithm and personal preference
models that shape which games appear at the forefront of the store when it
loads up. With this digital real estate making multimillion-dollar swings in
either direction for game publishers and game makers, the task of getting
the attention of game store owners is a make-or-break moment for any
game. A similar thing is happening in other digital storefronts, like the
Apple App Store, Epic Store, GOG, Xbox Store and others; a slight bump
of any title to their front pages can have a huge influence on sales, as well
as on which parts of the industry receive recognition. Naturally, then, entire
side teams and mini industries exist to game the algorithms, as well as to
shmooze the executives curating these stores.
Of course, curation is not just a matter of store shelves, but is also driven
by influencers and journalists. In this case, the sometimes curious
relationship between game reviewers and game makers also contributes to
the sense of fakeness in the industry. The common phenomenon of game

 critics donning branded clothing and merchandise for the game they are
reviewing and openly declaring their love of a certain game brand, a studio
or its creatives, exposes the imbalance between criticism or even honest
consumer reviews and blatant fandom. Reviews are aggregated in websites
like Metacritic, whose unwavering power dictates which games receive the
hype.
What this entire process exposes (and we’re nowhere close to seeing the
end of it) is the layers of compromise, alienation and loss of control that
most creators experience when working within this medium. It’s not some
grand conspiracy; it’s just the repetition of a familiar process. An activity
that does not by itself have to be politicised – digital gaming – can still
propagate high ambitions for innovation and artistic, cultural and political
integrity, but these are diminished or killed by a thousand cuts of
commercial interests. The act of playing football is very different to the
global football industry. Gaming is similar in that sense, but that moral
distinction is barely ever made by the mainstream media, and most certainly
not by dedicated progressives.
Reach
Gaming has its tentacles everywhere. Sports? Electronic sports are a
multibillion-dollar industry, with major leagues of players competing for
multimillion-dollar prizes. Some competitive games have been part of the
digital realm for decades, such as the Tekken series (1994 onward) or my
beloved Quake III Arena (1999). Some, like FIFAe World Cup, are
offshoots of existing sports, repurposed in digital format.
The size of the competitive gaming scene is fluctuating – sometimes
overpitched due to large injections of venture capital, inflating its size
artificially. In 2021, the largest esports gaming event for Dota 2 – a
multiplayer online battle arena game – had a prize pool that reached an eyewatering $40 million. This plummeted to $19 million in 2022, exposing the
shakiness of this strange periphery of the gaming world.32 Still, with tens of
millions on the line across many different titles, esports academies and boot
camps have flourished across the world. The first Olympic Esports Games
were held in 2023, so despite the slump, it is possible that the heyday of this
peculiar, fascinating competitive space is yet to come. Professional esports

 by themselves are a wonderful pursuit. Sadly, as with many good things in
life, this field is also mired in corruption.
Match fixing, nepotism and doping are the other obvious issues. Team
ownership can sometimes be opaque, with the same invisible conglomerate
owning several teams, which will then compete against each other –
guaranteeing that the prize money pot goes back to the owner regardless.
The Overwatch League’s competitive teams have become notorious for
recruiting professional players into their mix using fake identities.33
Esports players are pumped with energy drinks, and use of stimulant
drugs is barely ever tested – unfair disadvantages are seldom controlled.
With multimillion-dollar prize funds, the willingness to risk a competitor’s
health to get that money is on the rise. Gamers allegedly regularly use drugs
like Adderall, Vyvanse, Ritalin and other medications to stay locked in
during a long day of training.34 Increasingly, though, players taking
performance-enhancing amphetamines are caught during the actual
competitions with money at stake. While fines and bans are then issued,
testing is still very rare.
Major banks such as Barclays are investing heavily into esports and other
gaming initiatives. They will fund LGBTQ+ initiatives within the
influential Western gaming milieu with one hand and with the other
collaborate with brutal dictators in the Global South who legislate
oppressive laws for the same community. Depressingly, money talks and
suggestions of pinkwashing and greenwashing are met with derision by
people dependent on the corrupt organisations.
Consciously espousing a particular look, the professional esports
aesthetic is both poignantly masculine and exclusionary, seemingly
oblivious to the potential for broadening its reach and diversity. While the
in-game characters and players themselves are increasingly diverse, the way
competitions are presented continues to be incredibly homogeneous. From
uniforms to stage design, stream editorial choices, music, sponsors and
casters (commentators),* the ruling aesthetic mimics those of non-digital
sports, with an added layer of pubescent imitation of a man-cave, adorned
with plastic and neon lights. Almost without fail, professional tournaments
feature individuals wearing highly synthetic ‘uniforms’ – clothing that is not
there for reasons of enhanced movement, but more of a loose-fitting space
for sponsors to place their ads. Tournaments are held indoors, where cabling
of various computers will be served best. For some reason, players are

 surrounded with hardcore dubstep remixes and given high-density
caffeinated beverages.
For an entertainment strand so varied and so full of distinctive
personalities and traditions, it is regrettable to see it reduced to a hypercapitalist image of heavy electronic music, energy drinks, booth babes and
adverts, adverts, adverts.35
Esports tournament organisers might believe that the artistic choices in
their events will attract maximum popularity with their ‘neutral’ or
‘universal’ aesthetic, but these events simply maintain the status quo, rather
than provide a well-researched, nuanced approach on how best to showcase
skill, speed and grace. There is a particular joy in spectating an athletic
event – the participatory thrill, the communal experience – but the styling of
such events is often exclusionary and directed at a very limited audience.
Certainly, promotion and generation of income for multinational
corporations such as Blizzard, Riot and Valve has become the primary
function of esports, but the grassroots esports communities have always
bent the expectations of how such scenes must look. In Eastern Europe,
university halls were filled with both BA and PhD students, Thermos bottles
of tea in hand, attempting to trounce each other over local area network
(LAN) parties. Fighting games tournaments held in the back garden of one
of the organiser’s parents’ houses is another example of this community, in
contrast to business-driven events. The corporate insistence on the
infantilisation of esports at a professional level is a conscious choice.
Localised stories, exploration of cultural differences and diversity are no
longer seen as an exercise in losing capital. The very diverse multiplayershooter Overwatch, with its deliberately wide-ranging character cast, like
the Rihanna-owned make-up brand Fenty Beauty and Teen Vogue magazine,
which constantly churns out lefty content, have all proven that expanding
the reach of a product brings in monetary rewards. New kinds of
representation create new communities and ways for people to relate to one
another. For me, that gives them a possible relation to politics, if only at a
level of forging communities among the already like-minded. While onesided products are usually a response to a particular political reality,
communities that form around them have the opportunity to share the
reality of the future.
While this book describes the intersection between videogames and
politics, in sports (football, for instance), political expression has a long

 history. The St Pauli Football Club (FC) in Hamburg was a progressive
response to skinhead-led, right-wing football hooliganism. Anti-fascist
organising became a key tenet of the club’s existence and has inspired many
sister clubs around the world. The St Pauli FC, the Glaswegian Celtic FC
and my own beloved Clapton Community Football Club in London have
established, or are enthusing about creating, electronic sports teams under
their brand to maintain and support an anti-fascist presence within the
digital realm, too. These clubs are not there necessarily to change minds,
but by god are they a great space for a respite after a hard day’s work
building a better tomorrow.
To those in the know, esports is a dazzling, delightful part of games,
thrilling in its creativity and sportsmanship. Watching a professional League
of Legends player navigate a keyboard like a grand piano, with subtlety and
prowess, is a sight to behold! The magnificent banter and beautiful
connections made through independent matches in fighting games, for
instance, are a component of humanity worth cherishing. Wholesome
stories within the field are numerous. In a tiny local restaurant called
Yumine in Seoul, the parents of a famous League of Legends player, Han
‘Peanut’ Wang-Ho, transformed the space into a proud shrine to their son,
with the memorabilia for the team covering most of the walls. This serves
as an inspiration and a visiting place for many beginner esports players
attempting to convince their sceptical parents that they are making a serious
career choice.36 Overwatch’s Homestand Weekends are learning from
analogue sports to embrace community-building within a physical area and
are organising tournaments in arenas close to where the players grew up,
adding city-specific activities and celebrating local culture. Teams like
Silver Snipers, composed of Counter-Strike players above the age of sixty,
are a lovely redefinition of who videogames are for!37
At present, though, this great source of entertainment is increasingly
lacking in creativity and a creative source of direction. It is untrue that
esports have not found their own identity yet, it’s just that the prevailing
identity is so lazy and tedious. Run by crypto-related transactions or other
investments lacking in transparency, the look and reputation of esports
definitely reflects that shadiness. It does not have to be this way, but again,
unless there is resistance to the current political and practical modus

 operandi, the medium will end up stifled rather than liberated and engaged
with as creatively as it deserves to be.
The winds of change may be blowing in a different direction soon,
however. Now that many venture capitalists are seemingly exiting the
space, perhaps esports will find healthier, more organic ways to grow. For
instance, the Saudi Arabian sovereign fund that invested heavily in esports
decided in 2023 to pivot to supporting a games industry in Ryadh, and
investing a staggering $38 billion (or 20 per cent of the overall games
industry size) to develop, publish and acquire top-tier games.38 So the
future of gaming is not only stuck with the bulk of current problems and
injustices, but parts of it will now also be at the behest of regions that jail
dissenters for decades for the crime of posting a tweet.
Cryptocurrency? To be honest, few industries didn’t tie themselves to this
bizarre boom in one way or another. Crypto ads were heard during Super
Bowl games, and celebrities such as Matt Damon and Tom Brady sang their
praises. Even the travel sector was accepting crypto payments during the
short-lived crypto-mania of the late 2010s and early 2020s. In games, they
are mostly encountered as a form of micropayment. Non-fungible tokens, or
NFTs, also made their debut in games, the crassest example of which is
Dookey Dash (2023), where the player is tasked with swimming through –
you guessed it – digital excrement to find a key in a Bored Ape’s bum.
Bored Apes are a famous example of NFTs, a trademarked, randomly
generated asset group portraying an animated ape. The apes appear with
different accessories and surroundings. As a digital art asset they went viral
in 2021, with variations owned by A-list celebrities like Justin Bieber and
Paris Hilton. Only the lucky few who possess a Bored Ape or Mutant Ape
NFT are eligible to obtain the ‘sewer pass’ that grants them entry into
Dookey Dash. Despite the exclusivity, the game has already raked in nearly
$40 million.39
In fact, there is vocal opposition to the introduction of NFTs into the
gaming sphere. Social media posts boycotting titles or entire studios
including NFTs and other cryptocurrency products in their games regularly
went viral during their peak popularity in 2021. It appears that all sides of
the political spectrum are finding reasons to loudly protest. The progressive
community in games detests the speculative nature of NFTs and their
staggering contribution to CO2 emissions – at the time of writing, the global

 Bitcoin-mining CO2 emissions (excluding other cryptocurrencies) per year
were nearly as high as those of Greece – a country of more than 10 million
people.40 Libertarians and right-wingers object to yet another way their
rights as consumers are being toyed with, by employing microtransactions,
so it appears that everyone is upset with the crypto world attempting to
dock in games.
The paths of cryptocurrencies and gaming also converge in how parts of
them are produced. The rising popularity of microtransactions to wring
revenue from otherwise free games has spawned an industry in click farms.
These are real-life spaces, predominantly in the Global South and Eastern
Europe, where low-paid workers are expected to click through thousands of
combinations on computers and mobile phones. For other industries, this
practice can be used in manipulating website traffic, posting and liking
comments and giving a semblance of life to otherwise senseless bots. In
games, it can be in the service of ‘mining’ loot boxes.
Some games encourage players to buy loot boxes – in-game items that at
random generate (or don’t) certain rewards – an unregulated gambling
mechanic. Click-farm bosses make their workers open tens of thousands of
such boxes each day in order to then sell any loot directly to wealthy
players online. There is a similar market for buying artificially boosted
player statistics: more gold results in higher ratings and so on. Some
MMORPGs require hundreds of hours in order for players to ‘level up’,
sprouting secondary-market click farms where workers play a game without
a break, improving the position of a paying account holder, who will then
perhaps sit down for an hour a night simply to enjoy the spoils of the
conquest made by others on their behalf.41
Similarly, the entire economy of cryptocurrencies has armies of workers
synthetically boosting the hype for this industry, facilitating pump-anddump schemes and generating fake transactions and scarcity. Click farms –
an unregulated and secret part of our everyday digital worlds – are shadowy
and annoying at best, and part of human trafficking, slavery and torture
networks at worst, with numerous accusations of brutal work conditions in
Cambodia and the Philippines. This is nothing new. As early as 2013,
Microsoft and Symantec shut down a botnet of nearly 2 million personal
computers that were being used to generate an average of 3 million clicks
per day for various purposes of upvoting, recommending and similar.

 By 2023, click farms had become common, even in war operations. For
example, the Russian paramilitary Wagner Group used a bot factory to
achieve their goals. Few leaks from the sites and people engaged in this
work exist, but investigative journalists report brutal conditions and
abysmal pay, even while the profits for the people setting up click farms are
soaring.42
Weapons industry? Videogames are there, too. Arms manufacturers and
computer games with realistic weaponry are engaged in a symbiotic,
mutually beneficial relationship. Suppose a game depicts or allows the
player to engage with a realistic-looking branded weapon, as many do. In
that case, the manufacturers are entitled to a licence fee for brand
placement. A single game like Call of Duty could have hundreds of such
licences, meaning that a purchase of this videogame will likely profit
numerous real-life weapon manufacturers.43 As mentioned in the Tutorial,
game makers have had prolonged partnerships with the arms industries,
directly or indirectly receiving obscure funding from state departments
interested in games that promote their military agenda. Similar licensing
deals are maintained with the car industry or sports organisations licensed
within games. FIFA, the NFL and superstar skateboarder Tony Hawk all
boast lucrative gaming deals, but it’s important to establish a sliding scale
as to how nefarious these can be.
Gamification – another buzzword to explain the conditions around us – is
also a process, informed by videogames, that has now extended into many
parts of our lives. Gamified methods of encouragement like badges and
awards originate in the military or Scouts movements, but games have truly
brought this trend into a digital age. Apps for language learning or exercise
have clear gamified objectives and rewards. Point-collecting systems will
get users discounts with, say, Starbucks or Nike. More alarmingly, Amazon
uses gamification in its warehouses to have employees ‘improve their
efficiency’ and compete against others for digital rewards such as virtual
pets.44 Uber presses its workers to reach goals and has crafted an interface
of comparison for all drivers. This encourages them to spend more time at
the wheel without taking breaks, leading to concerns about driver welfare
and safety. The financial speculation app Robinhood also employs game
systems, promising bigger wins to get users to spend more money.45

 Culture? Apart from the highbrow galleries now curating respected
exhibitions dedicated to the craft of making games or even to the skill of
playing them and social affinities around them, a more mainstream, allencapsulating trend of gaming is also taking shape. NPC streaming is
netting its creators thousands of dollars a day. In this subculture, the (almost
always) good-looking performer will swing in a particular manner, up and
down, or sideways, recreating the aesthetic of the awkwardly positioned and
cheaply animated non-playable characters that can be encountered in most
videogames.46 Cosplay (short for costume play) has fans recreating every
stitch and surface of an existing fictional character costume, usually
highlighting the sexual undertones of the character at the same time.47
All this influence, all these trillions of hours spent by billions of people
gaming, forming communities, getting inspired to change the world for
better or for worse – all of it stands on incredibly flimsy foundations. The
infrastructure of the World Wide Web on which this huge industry relies is
relatively fragile and unpredictable. A very few landlords own the vast
majority of the edifice on which this entire domain is built. The researcher
Daniel Greene has presented extensive evidence of the underbelly of datacentre logistics holding the internet together.
Although some top players in the software industry, such as Google,
Amazon, Meta, Alibaba and Microsoft, have built their own data centres or
bought them out, the majority of the internet is owned by a network of
corporations with questionable stability. According to Greene’s extensive
research, the physical assets at the core of the internet, the warehouses that
store the cloud’s data and interlink global networks, are owned by
commercial real-estate barons who compete with malls and property storage
empires. ‘Under their governance, internet exchanges, colocation facilities,
and data centers take on a double life as financialized real estate assets that
circle the globe even as their servers and cables are firmly rooted in
place.’48
Equinix, Digital Realty, NTT Global Data Centers, OneAsia, 165 Halsey
Street, Eurofiber and another 250 such companies are the more silent
owners of the flimsily assembled tapestry that is the World Wide Web.
Almost without exception, videogames, big or small, are automatically
clients of these digital landlords – indebted, commercialised, bent towards a
disaffected, alienating relationship from the outset.49

 The thickening lines of fibre-optic internet cables bringing the speed, the
ever-smaller hardware delivering ever-more powerful image and
performance capabilities are inevitably pushing this industry towards
grander, hyper-realistic graphics. But do these graphics elevate the play
experience? Or are they merely serving business interests? It is debatable if
any other fighting game has had a bigger cultural impact than the relatively
basic-looking (but complex in mechanics) Street Fighter II all the way back
in 1991. Shooter games from the 1990s such as Doom and Quake continue
to be influential. At no more than a couple of hundred megabytes in size,
they are a thousand times smaller than some of the largest, heaviest game
releases today, with one title, Call of Duty: Black Ops (2010), reaching a
quarter of a terabyte.
This bleeding-edge highest-possible-definition realism, the fight to cram
the maximum amount of pixels into the digital experience – one more
eyelash can always be added to a character – is a chase that can never end.
Enhanced visual fidelity creates an opportunity to increase a game’s price
tag, with some now costing upwards of £120. More visual and game design
tricks call for more capable (and expensive) hardware with more complex
chips, running the games on more power. Mobile gaming and more
democratic sharing of games among PCs have allowed games to be more
accessible than just the middle-class signifier of having a console at home,
as it was in the 1980s, but justification and audience for merch or
collector’s items are also booming.
Steve Jobs himself, upon introducing the 2010 Retina display, said that
‘the magic number for optimal perfect digital display is 300 pixels per inch,
that’s when you hold something around ten to twelve inches away from
your eyes, is the limit of the human retina to differentiate the pixels.’50 But
these biological limitations do not stop hardware manufacturers from
selling us 8K displays and raking in the profits from the price tags that
come with them.51 Buying hardware that would be able to run the latest
hyped title is inconvenient to the consumer, who probably would have been
happy to pay less money for a game with simpler graphics but with a rich
story that felt meaningful, and is now having to throw eighty quid at a
similarly impactful story with better graphics. The sectors of the industry
that are having the best time with that are, of course, the hardware
manufacturers – the true underbelly of the gargantuan videogames industry.

 Destruction
No single factor in the production, circulation and consumption of the
global videogames industry is as crucial and as harmful as the centre of it
all – the physical devices on which we get to make them, enjoy them,
critique them. The truth is that the conception of a videogame begins well
before a game engine software is booted up on a screen. It’s the piece of
hardware onto which one is about to craft a game that carries the heftiest of
politics within it, dark secrets that underpin and reinforce so much of the
brutality of current capitalist landscapes.
This sin, this fundamental injustice and crime begins in the south of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) – in the Lualaba and HautKatanga Provinces, or the so-called Copperbelt. The mines of this region
are the world’s primary source of several rare metals that are essential to the
manufacturing of high-end electronics. Siddharth Kara, author of the crucial
book Cobalt Red: How the Blood of the Congo Powers Our Lives,
evocatively describes the conditions experienced by people in and around
these mines:
Hundreds of thousands of people have been displaced because their
villages were just bulldozed over to make place for large mining
concessions. So you have people with no alternative, no other source of
income, no livelihood. In many cases, armed forces are pressuring
people to dig, for a dollar or two a day, parents having to make a
painful decision, ‘Do I send my child to school or do we eat today?’ So
in the 21st century, this is modern-day slavery.52
Mass casualties of collapsing mines, child trafficking and sexual terror, rife
across the region and in the mines themselves, are all accepted as normal.
These constitute an unforgivable, undeniable and yet completely normalised
part of videogame and tech production. The silence around it is staggering.
These mines are the key to the trillionaire success of the contemporary tech
conglomerates. They are established with recourse to local militias that do
the dirty work for the establishment and provide the upkeep for resource
extraction. Valuable and toxic minerals are pulled out of the ground with
bare hands for pennies and sold to the companies, which then transport the
goods to the manufacturing plants where this corrupt, brutal business enters

 the next stage. The DRC should be one of the wealthiest countries in the
world thanks to its mineral-rich soils, but local and international corruption
is sure to keep the prices of these indispensable extracts low, costing
thousands of lives and creating endless human misery in the meantime.
The crux of the matter is that no other cultural medium as influential as
games has its roots so deep in the blood-soaked soil of this extractivist, evil
supply machine. To be sure, films are now increasingly shot on digital
rather than film cameras, increasingly enjoyed on laptops rather than in
cinemas, and much postproduction is done on computers, but there are still
alternatives. Films can be shot entirely on relatively low-tech devices or
using sustainably levied visual effects. In the culture of cinema, change is
easier to imagine because there are precedents in the medium’s history. The
same goes for music. These minerals are indeed found in aspects of music
hardware, production and reproduction, but again it’s not utterly pervasive,
there are ways to escape. For videogames, however, this has been the mode
of operation since their cradle days, and it’s getting more relentless. Few
speak up about the dirty, dark implications of it all.
The heinous production line of modern hardware continues with the
extracted raw materials being assembled into the devices we use and
cherish, in invisible, barely regulated, gloomy mega-factories in another
part of the Global South. In 1974, Taiwanese Terry Gou, aged twenty-four,
borrowed $7,500 (the equivalent of $45,000 today) from his mother to start
a business. Foxconn was born.53 The company, first based in Guangdong
Province in China, but now with factories all over the world, has been
manufacturing tech for Western clients since the 1980s. But it was its
collaboration with Apple in the late 2000s that caused an explosion in size
and influence. When Foxconn began its operations in the 1970s, Shenzhen
was a fishing port outside Hong Kong with a population of 300,000. Today,
it is a megalopolis of 12 million people that produces 90 per cent of the
world’s consumer electronics. Pretty much all gaming hardware companies
have or have had a relationship with Foxconn – Atari, Dell, HewlettPackard (HP), Microsoft (Xbox consoles), Nintendo, Nokia, Samsung
Electronics, Sony (PlayStation consoles) – and all are assembled under
questionable conditions.
The commute to and workday at a Foxconn factory do not follow the
usual schedules; the work hardly ever stops. Foxconn is known for building
entire cities – housing some 300,000 people – in order to satisfy the

 demands of its production. Workers are brought in from surrounding towns
and villages, some from as far as 700 kilometres away, to live in one of
these mega-factories for weeks on end, sleeping in large dormitories, eating
and socialising in these facilities. The work hours average at eleven a day,
with shifts sometimes lasting from 6 a.m. to 10 p.m. in the windowless,
loud assembly halls. Weekends and holidays are not a thing. The workers
are granted just a day off every month, but in the peak season they may go
several months without one.54
Vertical integration – the technique of production that Foxconn is revered
for and the reason for it getting all these contracts – consists of thousands of
workers each engaging in a tiny task, repeatedly. Workers may be asked to
simply insert or tighten a single screw, then the product moves along the
assembly line and the next tiny job gets done by the next worker. A lot of
devices can be made very quickly this way and crucially cheaply, as the
labour costs are negligible. In the mid-2010s, Foxconn workers were
earning as little as just over $1 an hour, or about $200 a month.55
Contrary to what their PR might parrot, the genius of Apple and the
driver of its profits is less in its elegant design than in the clever outsourcing
of the manufacturing process that actually builds their products. The profit
margins are stark. Research shows that an iPhone retailing for $1,000 costs
between $150 to $455 dollars to make; the rest are Apple’s outstanding
profit margins, placing the company as the most valuable in the world.
By the 2010s, it began to emerge that not all that may be materially
genius is necessarily ethical. PR cracks were showing up. Before 2010, two
workers took their own lives at the Foxconn campuses. Mr Hou hanged
himself in a company bathroom in 2007.56 In 2009, Sun Dan-yong threw
himself from an apartment building after he lost an iPhone prototype.
Before death, he reported that Foxconn employees had beaten him and
searched his residence. In 2010, fifteen Foxconn workers attempted suicide,
with two of them remaining alive; details about three of them were never
released to the public. All but a few jumped off the buildings of the
workplace. The company has since installed extensive netting systems
around its premises to prevent others from following suit. Seven more
suicides are known to have occurred since the peak of 2010.57
Outrage reverberated across the world. Even some of the tech companies
had to justify their collaborations with Foxconn, although of course none

 severed their contracts. In response to the pressures by unions and protests,
mostly in Hong Kong, Foxconn bumped the salaries of their Shenzhen
workforce and brought in Buddhist monks to conduct prayer sessions. They
also swiftly demanded that employees sign no-suicide pledges, preventing
their families from suing in case of a death. Unverified reports also persist
that Foxconn uses forced labour from the Uighur people.58
Riteng Electronics factories in Guangzhou are even worse offenders. On
average, Riteng workers are on the job for nearly twelve hours a day for an
average hourly wage of $1.30, well below the still-meagre average hourly
wage of Foxconn workers of $1.62 in the early 2020s.59 Half of Riteng
workers rated the company’s safety and health provisions as ‘bad’,
compared to just 2 per cent of workers giving this rating to the Foxconn
factory.60 Notably, Riteng are the main mass manufacturers of modern
arcade cabinets, fighting game sticks and other gaming paraphernalia. So,
the assembly line for gaming gear is even more brutal and has fewer
protections in place than equivalent item production in mixed technology
sectors.
The trendy, well-off game devs of the Global North are seemingly the
only cohort considered to be worthy of the prestige, security and salaries
that come with working in games; the silenced populations of gaming
hardware manufacturing workers, whose blood, sweat and tears enable
game creators to enjoy their hip and profitable careers, are systematically
overlooked. Even in the incredibly important game workers unionisation
movement, few express solidarity with and recognise the crucial
contribution made by the teams of people in mines in DRC or factories in
Foxconn – as the colleagues who deserve our support and attention – not to
mention take any action to collaborate with them in unionisation efforts.
Although underreported by the Western media, resistance towards these
awful conditions is widespread. Instances of industrial action (i.e., factory
strikes) were being counted in the hundreds in the first half of 2022.
Thousands of protests take place in China every year. Unions are working
under incredibly difficult conditions, but victories are achieved. In 2012 and
2013, after protests at Foxconn factories that manufacture Xbox and PS4
consoles, an improvement of the conditions from absolutely abhorrent to
slightly better ensued.61 Wages are increasing in the China-based Foxconn
factories, but the improvement in conditions is unstable. Reports of stripped

 wages and benefits come in regularly.62 Capital is sensing weaknesses in
the business model, though, and assembly lines are being moved to Taiwan
and India, where they can get away with even lower pay.
With the news that Foxconn manufacturing plants will now be opened in
the US, too, it’s tempting to believe that better conditions are on the way,
but as long as profit-making is placed above the manufacturing workers and
their well-being, little hope remains for a substantially better future, unless
we entirely rebuild our industry. Besides, one only needs to look at the
treatment of workers at America’s Amazon warehouses distributing gaming
hardware to know that the story there is barely better.63 If we want to enjoy
our beloved hobby of gaming guilt-free, the entire production line has to be
abolished and rebuilt from scratch.
All this gaming tat ends up somewhere. The games industry is also
responsible for an enormous amount of plastic and electronic waste, from
consoles, PCs and subsequent paraphernalia. Ben Abraham wrote a book all
about the games industry’s carbon impact and carried out other
investigations in the same realm. His estimation boggles the mind:
For the three main living-room consoles we have data for, the weight of
just the plastic game discs from 2000 to 2018(ish) comes out to 97,301
metric tons. For a sense of the scale of that, a fully laden 747 weighs
around 412 metric tonnes. So that’s plastic game discs equivalent to
236 fully loaded Boeing 747s planes. That’s just plastic discs! How tall
would a stack of those discs be? With each one 1.2 mm tall, our
hypothetical stack of over 7.4 billion discs would be almost 9
kilometres tall (5.6 miles). Granted, it’s a skinny stack, but yowza. The
Burj Khalifa is only 892 metres tall, so our stack is over 10x taller than
the tallest building on the planet. And what about the plastics in game
consoles? Keeping in mind that this is a much less accurate estimate, it
came out to a similarly impressive 251,817 metric tons of plastic. Not
quite an Empire State Building worth of plastics, but close to 2/3rds.64
The production of all these items – ephemerally played with, so much of it
quickly ending up in landfills – adds up to another wave of violations this
industry is imposing on the world around it. The games industry’s carbon
footprint is barely calculated and considered by the industry as a whole, but

 it’s no doubt growing at alarming rates. Few journalists and researchers are
interested in taking on this work, and even fewer are funded to do so. Lewis
Gordon, who writes for The Verge, is one of a handful of people tackling the
topic. He cites that the electricity use of gaming devices themselves is
estimated to sit at thirty-four terawatt-hours of energy each year, or the
equivalent of 5 million cars. That is the equivalent emission of all cars in
Austria or Saudi Arabia, just from gaming devices.65 Here is another
illustration of this stark statistic, from Alex Hern writing for the Guardian:
Take Elden Ring (2022), the current star of the zeitgeist. According to
analytics site SteamSpy, the PC version has between 10 and 20 million
owners, with an average total playtime of 77 hours, drawing (let’s say)
500W per player. That means the game has consumed, in its first six
weeks on sale, between 385GWh and 770GWh of electricity. Just on
the PC version: it’s also out on Xbox and PlayStation. For comparison,
in the same period, Hornsea One, the largest offshore wind farm in the
world, can output 1,200GWh of electricity – if the wind is blowing just
right the whole time.66
In conversation with Lewis Gordon, this time for Wired magazine, Ben
Abraham tells it as it is: ‘This is the only game in town now. How do we
prevent our planet from being boiled alive?’ He says that industry insiders
must agitate for change, but that we also need more direct action, protests
and substantial grassroots pressure to turn things around.67 It is astonishing
and utterly depressing that for a cause so important – the survival of the
planet Earth – only people like Gordon and Abraham are ringing alarm
bells.
There are undoubtedly some green initiatives here and there. But they
amount to trying to soak up the sea with a towel. For example, the United
Kingdom Interactive Entertainment (UKIE – a British industry lobby
organisation) Green Games Guide delivers well-meaning, but ultimately
futile, symbolic advice for games studios that would like to be greener:
reduce waste and recycle, reduce staff commute and business trips, optimise
games, consider offsetting your CO2 emissions.68 In the meantime, postclimate-disaster fictional scenarios and the survival skills that will be
necessary for living through them are becoming popular aspects of

 contemporary games. UKIE also suggests, not at all cynically, making
games with climate change themes in them as a method of resistance to said
climate change.69
So we’re at a full-circle moment. The games industry – a giant polluter
and a substantial factor in the climate upheaval – is now profiting from the
emergent themes around it. Lewis Gordon writes astutely for ArtReview
about the Battlefield 2042 game in 2021:
A game that simultaneously utilises the climate crisis as a gameplay
hook while perpetuating intensive resource extraction and energy
consumption (including the electricity used to actually make and play
it). The kicker is that its weightless take on extreme weather, which will
set computer fans whirring across the world, is so inconsequential that
it ends up as nothing more than a graphical showcase. Battlefield
2042’s spectacle isn’t just hollow, it’s also deeply cynical.70
In Level III, I suggest that games with politically engaging topics can
certainly inform an already interested gamer and play an educational role,
but whether they have the power to convince a climate denier into suddenly
springing into action to save our world is debatable.
As Ben Abraham points out, it is unlikely that the necessary reduction in
the CO2 emissions in the games industry will come from the software
development field.71 Yes, optimising and contraction of the decadent energy
consumption in games studios will have to take place, but they’re a lesser
culprit – most of the toxicity emitted by the industry sits within the
hardware. The crux of the problem is, sadly, that the big manufacturers of
the games hardware – Sony, Microsoft and Apple, to an extent (mobile
gaming is massive, after all) – are also the big funders of games publishing
deals, the two hugely interlinked. Xbox, PlayStation and Apple Arcade
subsequently offer lump sums to game studios to produce games for them
and their hardware. Imagine if the vast majority of all films were funded by
companies making cameras or owning cinema chains – the ability to enact
change in such an industry would prove that much more complex.
So expressing an opposition to the money-making exercises of the
companies of which studios are then asking said money from is currently
not the wisest plan. Crucially, companies like Nvidia, which just hit a

 valuation of $1 trillion, are being boosted by a new surge for chips driven
by the artificial intelligence industry, and have little incentive to change
their practices.72 It may be all too easy to believe that gaming is only a
small fraction of overall computational hardware production, but experts
would disagree. According to The Verge, which comprehensively covers
this theme, there has been a huge increase in gaming gear at the consumer
electronic shows (CES and others). They are predominantly gaming
hardware shows with other utilities attached.73
As this Level demonstrates, as much as progressive game makers may
desire to make a difference and convince their players of a better tomorrow,
the fundamental gluttony that underlines much of the games industry tends
to win out and overshadow any positive change. The acts of resistance and
political engagement within the games themselves, or even among their
communities, are trumped by the sheer weight of the annihilation of lands,
communities and livelihoods.
We are allowed to pour attention into games and enact our fights within
the safe corner they create, but all of it is so utterly irrelevant, given the size
of the problem. Even if our videogames were all built around some fictional
Barbie Land where everything is peaceful and everyone agrees with each
other and is kind, empathetic and generous – in game and out; even if we
abolished all of the violent, sexist, xenophobic and highly addictive
videogames, even then, the carnage would be barely lessened. It is
paramount that we not get distracted by in-game intrigues and injustices –
as important as they can sometimes be – but instead focus on the big prize
of abolishing this guilty, calamitous material reality which is flourishing
right now, and rebuild something much less reprehensible.
* Gachapons are capsules sold in vending machines that contain random toys. A gacha game,
then, is a videogame that implements the gacha (toy vending machine) mechanic. Similar to loot
boxes, gacha games entice players to spend in-game currency to receive a random in-game item.
* Shoutcaster (aka caster): another name for a commentator, who will speak over the action to
engage, inform and entertain the viewer (British Esports Association definition).
OceanofPDF.com

 Final Boss: Conclusion

In 1958, the economics educator Leonard E. Read wrote an essay titled ‘I,
Pencil’, which chronicles all that goes into the making of a single pencil –
the laborious timber-felling, shape-cutting, graphite-acquiring and glueing
processes; the numerous countries, factories and dozens of materials
required, including cedar, lacquer, graphite, ferrule, factice, pumice, wax
and adhesives.1 This complicated choreography results in complex chains
of operations to source the components and a huge amount of labourers,
including a sweeper in the factory and the lighthouse keeper guiding the
shipment into port. In 1996, the essay was reprinted with a foreword by the
neoliberal economist Milton Friedman championing unfettered free trade,
ignoring the labour and climate disasters created by such unregulated,
unsustainable global trade systems.2 Although these industrial procedures
should be seen as a marvel of cooperation and innovation, under the current
circumstances, they are a monument to waste and exploitation.
A single modern videogames console, or a game itself, is a product a
thousand times more complex than a single pencil; consequently, these
products contain that many more spaces for negotiation. The industrial
design of a game console – sketching and 3D modelling, picking out specs
– is done in shiny headquarters, served by corporate benefits, with
Michelin-starred canteens and assistants galore. The user interface and
software architecture are crafted by highly remunerated engineering teams
with corporate gym subscriptions and in-house masseuses. The most
important items within these products are chipsets – CPU (central
processing unit), GPU (graphics processing unit) and other crucial chipsets,
such as ones used for power management, video and audio decoding, or for
connectivity to wi-fi or Bluetooth. Most of these contain minerals obtained
from poor states under appalling work conditions.

 For instance, the semiconductor contractor for the PlayStation 5, AMD
(Advanced Micro Devices, Inc), outsources the manufacturing process of
the chips to TSMC (Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company
Limited), which owns factories around the world that have varying levels of
labour protections. The locations and processes of these plants are also
subject to ongoing power shifts and geopolitical manipulations, with trade
wars and sanctions distorting the field. In hermetically sealed, sterilised
rooms, ultra-pure water, air, argon and nitrogen are ferried around through
tubes and pipes for the procedure of crafting chips.3 The toxic waste and
pollution caused by these manufacturing processes are immense.
Electromechanical components, such as cooling systems, power supply
units, hard drives and structural components involving plastic casing and
metal shielding, screws and fasteners, are all made with components such as
oil that are harmful to the environment.
Furthermore, the human trafficking of the labour force is so widespread
within the field that gaming corporations are having to issue statements
decrying it. HDMI, USB, Ethernet, and other ports, buttons and LEDs,
cables and connectors are all assembled, installed and soldered into a piece
of hardware by armies of workers who labour for poverty wages. The units
are tested, packaged, sent off, driven, placed into warehouses and shops and
sold by a huge, alienated workforce, who are pressured to refrain from
unionising and are otherwise abused. In an age of unprecedented decadence,
gaming is yet another industry that has built itself on the back of powerless,
muted populations subjected to ever-deepening misery. Behind every shiny
game studio in Los Angeles, London or Shenzhen housing top-end
developers, there exist armies of workers in mines outside Kolwezi in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in warehouses in Longhua subdistrict in
China and in click farms in Phnom Penh, Cambodia, or in the Russian
provinces.
The process of making a videogame involves a wider range of conditions.
The majority of game studios make hyper-casual, casino-style games, with
intensely data-driven approaches and addictive mechanics that require
minimal creativity, and generate swathes of low-paid, dead-end jobs. On the
other end of the spectrum lie art-house, boutique and independent
videogame studios that invest in their workforce more, but are trumped in
influence by major AAA studios, where work conditions are tough and
insecurity almost constant.

 Even if you’re lucky enough to be able to develop your own game
independently, you’ll still struggle to bring it out, not to mention to make a
living from its publication. With publishing deals and store space in the
hands of only a few important decision makers, unless you work for one of
the hardware-wielding giants like Microsoft, Sony or Nintendo, precarity is
the norm. The time frame during which developers have the funding to craft
the now-obligatory bloated productions has grown shorter and shorter, and
few games succeed. Those that succeed and also hold some true cultural
value are exceptional.
Artificial intelligence, which is likely to define much of arts and
production in the next century, is seeping into the game development
process with unstoppable speed. In China, jobs related to game creation are
already being axed and replaced with machines.4 Artists in two-dimensional
art, voice acting and no doubt more disciplines are being replaced; unless
substantial protections come into effect immediately, this chipping away of
labour costs and consequent increase in mediocrity will only continue.
While automating certain repetitive, mundane tasks like level blocking or
asset creation for marketing campaigns can free workers to learn and pursue
more complex, creative, strategy-building tasks, managers tend toward
short-term thinking in the form of cost saving and headcount reduction.5 In
this climate, the positions of even software engineers, programmers and top
artists begin to look precarious. Who will fight for the level designers,
producers, and staff working in quality assurance, localisation, community
management and distribution? Or the people cleaning their offices? AI is
killing the game experiences themselves, too, with bots outnumbering real
players on servers in multiplayer games, creating a loop of artificiality and
eventual rejection by real communities.6
Games are then branded and advertised to reach audiences that often
create unmoderated communities of hate and exclusion. In 2019, a selfproclaimed gamer massacred fifty-one people and injured forty in
Christchurch, New Zealand, with a weapon clad in gaming meme stickers,
referencing PewDiePie and leaving behind a manifesto with numerous
gaming references and jokes.7 A racist attack at a Walmart in El Paso,
Texas; another in Bærum, Norway; an aborted synagogue shooting in Halle,
Germany; a devastatingly effective one in Poway, California – all were
perpetrated by people employing videogame references and elements, and

 all occurred within a few months of each other. No doubt there will be
more. Game companies, incentivised by profit and little else, make minimal
efforts to curb far-right organisers who prey on and cultivate gullible
communities to create division and encourage heinous acts. And these
behaviours are on the rise – the proportion of players encountering toxic
behaviour increased from 68 per cent in 2021 to 74 per cent in 2023.8
In digital spaces, which until recently were void of any progressive links,
the task of energising disillusioned populations and galvanising a political
project has grown easier. While the Arab Spring of the early 2010s
demonstrated the importance of social media in political organising (a
lesson that the Western left soon picked up, with Occupy demonstrations in
many cities across the world), gaming spaces, where political
disillusionment is expressed, were left to be groomed by reactionary
influencers. Progressive organisers and collectives, usually quick to branch
out to new social and logistical spaces, somehow managed to ignore this
one, with excuses ranging from ‘this technology is irrelevant’ to ‘this
technology is evil’, until the results began dictating the rules themselves.
In the absence of robust opposition, much of gaming has become a tool
for the darkest part of the capital accumulators to entrench their influence –
this is where crypto bros launder money and arms manufacturers fill their
coffers. It’s a space for testing political communications methods on
millions of unassuming players, leading to those communication methods
gaining influence in the wider digital world and producing real-life effects.
Culture now abandons aspirations to innovation and puts itself in the
corner of conformism and profitability. Amusement under late capitalism is
the prolongation of work. It is sought as an escape from the mechanised
work process, to regain one’s strength and be able to cope with work again.
Culture, as it is now conceived of, exists because freedom does not.9 Even
the once relatively private and innocent activity of play has been
commodified beyond recognition. Every possible activity is now
commercialised, consumed and sold for the benefit of the owner. Images
and gesticulation take precedence over the real, creating a pseudo-reality
contrasting with the real one.
These forces may appear unstoppable, unchangeable, too large to
comprehend and influence. And yet, in the words of the late David Graeber,

 the ultimate hidden truth of the world is that it is something we make, and
could just as easily make differently:10
If we can extricate ourselves from the shackles of fashion, the need to
constantly say that whatever is happening now is necessarily unique
and unprecedented (and thus, in a sense, unchanging, since everything
apparently must always be this way), we might be able to grasp history
as a field of permanent possibility, in which there is no particular
reason we can’t at least try to begin building a redemptive future at any
time.11
Games don’t have to be this way. In fact, in many parts of the industry, a
movement toward real change is stirring. Now is our opportunity to
strengthen it.
I am inspired by how an alternative could look, in a miniature way, when
an online acquaintance sends me pictures of their set-up of a solar-powered
Raspberry Pi (an ethically sourced and manufactured computer).12 What
would a mass version of such manufacturing ethics look like? How could
we have computer operating systems and other software that would
somehow not perpetuate capitalist practices? These are momentous
questions without easy answers; the aim must be to shift gaming and many
other digital practices away from their participation in the whirlpool of
harm.
The scale of the problem only creates a wealth of openings for
involvement. If, in the making of a pencil, there exist numerous parts of
production and hence numerous points for sabotage, in games and their
cursed hardware, there are that many more! The avenues for impact,
revision and subversion are ample, and many are revelling in them.
Glimmers of hope exist in the hardware manufacturing business. In 2023,
Namibia announced a policy which may bring about a sea change: a ban on
exports of unprocessed lithium, cobalt and other minerals crucial for the
manufacturing of electric batteries. Together with Zimbabwe, Namibia is
beginning to profit from the growing global demand for metals used in
clean energy technologies, instead of sending all profits to the owners of the
private companies operating within them. Processing these metals at home,
regulating better conditions in the mines and taxing the sales of essential

 minerals may turn around the brutal practices existing in these industries
today.13
The US Inflation Reduction Act (2022) may also bring a wind of change
to the industry. The act ushers in subsidies for manufacturing computer
chips in America, diversifying where and by what means the chips can be
obtained. This may make hardware manufacturing processes easier to
initiate in economic areas with higher wages. Of course, one should not be
fooled – such policies obey protectionist imperatives, not a concern for the
greater good. They will still benefit the oligarchs who own the local means
of production and proprietary barriers will go even higher. Still, the current
bottom-of-the-barrel production processes are perhaps about to be
overhauled.
Toxic modes of production have led to toxic brands. Hardware
companies are beginning to take notice that their current way of operating
requires paying lip service, at least, to the contrary. In 2019, the United
Nations Environment Programme founded an initiative titled ‘Playing for
the Planet Alliance’, which saw twenty-one major game companies,
including Sony and Microsoft, promising to share best practices for
becoming more environmentally friendly. While laudable, the initiative thus
far displays slow progress – its crowning achievement was securing
commitments from 60 per cent of the Alliance to achieve net zero or carbon
negative status by 2030, a goal unlikely to be met.
We can deplore this UN initiative as the space where all substantial
conversations about climate change and games get sucked in and processed
into nothing. However, it is important to note even the emergence of this
discourse. The fashion industry, for instance, has gone way further in
approaching sustainability and manufacturing processes, at least at the high
end, but the shift took time. Thrifting, faux leather and fur goods and entire
micro industries centring around sustainability are now a cornerstone of the
Fashion Week experience.
Under increased pressure from the gamer consumer base and caring
individuals within the industry, with further transformation of the overall
geography and incentives in the assembly lines, perhaps change will gather
pace and the recycling process will involve more than just plastic, for
starters.
On a modest scale, this is already happening in gaming. The Finnish
Game Developers’ Association, for instance, built a model for Finnish game

 companies to estimate their carbon footprint.14 The Danish indie company
Die Gute Fabrik provided a carbon footprint report as part of their 2023
release, Saltsea Chronicles.15 Such examples will change the status quo.
The global trade union movement is providing plenty of reasons to be
optimistic. These bodies will push for modifications in how games and their
hardware are made. Healthy game worker unions exist in the UK, South
Korea, Australia, Brazil, Argentina and many EU countries, and they are
springing up in China, India and parts of Africa. In the US, the Campaign to
Organize Digital Employees – a branch of Communications Workers of
America (CODE-CWA) – have been unionising numerous companies,
winning them compensation and ensuring dignity at work. With more than
4,000 members nationwide across many different technology and gaming
sectors, the union has built an impressive and sustainable foundation for
challenging oppressive company structures.16
For example, with the union’s support, Raven Software quality assurance
employees (testers for games like Call of Duty) built a Game Workers
Alliance with the following goals:
[We] focus on improving the conditions of workers in the video game
industry by making it a more sustainable, equitable place where
transparency is paramount. Additionally, we advocate for our
disenfranchised and minority workers by creating a diverse space to let
their voices be heard in solidarity.17
Studios that have reached collective bargaining agreements are appearing
like mushrooms after rain, and there is now no question that our industry
will finally have the strong union structures it deserves.
Also in the US, the powerful SAG-AFTRA screen workers union
announced in 2023 that they will work to secure better contracts for their
colleagues in the videogames voice acting industry.18 Warehouse handlers
of the American gaming hardware company Corsair have formed into a
union, hopefully influencing their manufacturing plants in Taiwan. What if
they follow suit? Board game workers are unionising.19 Escape room
workers are unionising.20 Wonderful collaborations and solidarities exist

 between the game worker chapters of a union supporting a cleaners union or
being supported by sex workers union branches, and so on.
An exquisite ecology of solidarity and cooperation is blooming with the
help of the industry unionisation efforts. The message is loud and clear – no
game worker is alone. Increasingly, game workers are seeing themselves as
economic subjects and by extension educating their fans – the players – to
understand that our material conditions should be improved by collective
organising rather than by othering and oppressing already vulnerable
communities. A network of resistance is being created to curtail the current
vertical studio structures and the practices they impose on the workforce.
Some firms are pushing the organisational structures of game making
even further. The hugely popular rogue-like platformer Dead Cells (2018)
was made by the French studio Motion Twin, who describe themselves as
an anarcho-syndicalist workers cooperative with equal salaries and
decision-making powers.21 Games by the studio are incredibly well
received and have won multiple awards, proving that great-quality games
can be successful when made under alternative formations to top-down,
profit-extracting structures. Matajuegos is an Argentinian cooperative
games studio formed in 2021 during the pandemic that has been releasing
beloved titles. Imagine an industry with producers of expertise, rather than
mere managerial hierarchies. That is not to say that cooperatives are the
only answer – of course, toxic work practices can emerge even there – but
the diversity of experimentation with work forms currently underway in the
games industry illuminates a path forward to a bright future. Notably,
games companies are also pioneers in the four-day work week proposition
thanks to numerous studios large and small (including Crow Crow Crow,
Kitfox Games, Splash Damage and Blackbird Interactive). With
multimillion-dollar budgets, these not-insignificant players are
demonstrating what a more humane work–life balance could look like.
Noma, the Copenhagen-based three-Michelin-star restaurant, announced
it would close its doors at the end of 2024. The owners will run a high-end
culinary products business instead. How could this closure possibly be
related to the tendencies in the games industry, you ask? Four months
before the announcement, Noma (where dinner for one could set you back
$1,000) started paying its armies of interns for the first time. This was
presumably driven by an important exposé in the Financial Times about the
toll of high-end dining on its staff, who experience bullying and burnout.22

 Similarly to gaming employees, people working in fine dining are exploited
due to their general passion for the craft. We are now reaching peak gamemaking team sizes, peak complexity of mechanics and peak graphics
fidelity, and thankfully the welfare of game devs is more scrutinised than
ever, with sites like Polygon and YouTubers such as Jimquisition doing
investigative work and critiquing labour practices. Now, will high-end AAA
studios finally decide to scale down and work on smaller, more sustainable
projects? Who knows? One can only hope, but the end of the baroque in
games would be welcome.
Policy makers are slowly familiarising themselves with the loopholes that
enable the more pernicious consumer-related practices within the industry.
In 2023 alone, the Dutch government began looking into banning loot
boxes, equating them to gambling; Microsoft, EA, Activision, Ubisoft and
Epic Games faced game addiction lawsuits from plaintiffs in the United
States; arrests were made in France regarding sexual harassment
investigations at Ubisoft; pressure and calls for robust contracts with esports
competitors grew; and the South Korean government charged the Game
Rating and Administration Committee with embezzlement.23 Predatory
practices are increasingly challenged, and pressure from the game makers
and the people enjoying them is set to continue.
Perhaps a new conceptual framework could appear in which we reject
splitting media according to their genre and instead embrace grouping them
according to their mode of production. The operations of an independent
film production company such as A24 have much more in common with
those of an artistic games studio like The Chinese Room or many of the
gems that Annapurna Interactive publishes than with the studios that make
Hollywood action blockbusters and lowbrow reality television. Mobile
games stuffed with micro-transactions, addiction-inducing mechanics and
stupefying writing are on a par with C-list Russian propaganda films or the
senseless television series churned out by mediocre streaming services.
In terms of intentionality or quality of engagement, somebody loading up
Candy Crush or another casual game will receive the same reward as
someone loading up a deliciously tawdry reality series. A reactionary
streamer upset by the option to choose one’s pronouns in a game is the
equivalent of a prejudiced football hooligan; similarly, there should be a
kinship between an indie game connoisseur and an indie film buff. Still, as
long as all games and their hardware are made under the current conditions

 of exploitation, such a recalibration of categories will not be enough to halt
the crimes committed by the games industry’s way of operating.
Many have written of the beauty and necessity of videogames, even those
made under the current venal conditions. Simon Parkin wrote this about
Elden Ring in the Guardian, underlining the best of gaming:
Video games can be all kinds of different things, representing all
manner of artistic ambitions. Most, however, share a common goal: to
conjure a compelling fictional reality, filled with beckoning mysteries,
enchanting secrets, and enriching opportunities to compete and
collaborate. They aim to provide a liminal space in which a determined
player can fix that which is broken, order that which is chaotic … Its
final gift is the assurance that, whatever monsters lurk in a broken
world, with perseverance and cooperation, they too can be overcome.24
According to the videogame artist and researcher Mary Flanagan and the
media theorist Helen Nissenbaum, ‘All games express and embody human
values. From notions of fairness to deep-seated ideas about the human
condition, games provide a compelling arena where humans play out their
beliefs and ideas.’25 Many of us engage with videogames to a smaller or
larger extent, many are curious, and many understandably don’t want to
touch them due to their ethically compromised ways.
And yet games can inspire the best in us. They portray and reflect values
that shape and construct our collective identities. Games save lives,
sometimes from helping players find meaning in their content or
commonalities with millions of other people who enjoy the same pastime.
With enough ambition and ingenuity, the design of a game can prevent
fatalities, quite literally. Foldit (2008), available online, is a digital game
focused on the intricacies of protein configuration. Originating from a
pioneering research initiative by the University of Washington’s Center for
Game Science and its department of Biochemistry, Foldit invites players to
meticulously arrange given protein structures using gamification-inspired
tools. Researchers evaluate the top-performing arrangements to identify any
natural structural patterns that could be applicable to actual proteins.
Insights from these arrangements have assisted scientists in addressing
diseases and developing biological advances.26

 Games allow us to face our biggest fears. In Still Wakes the Deep (2024),
players confront themes of isolation and losing loved ones in a Ken Loach–
inspired 1970s Scotland.27 On the flip side, titles like Unpacking (2021)
sprinkle magic on the mundane, turning the act of unpacking into a playful
journey, interspersed with a subtle narrative that deals with personal growth
and toxic relationships. Life-simulation games such as The Sims help
players give their daydreams more concrete shapes, allowing them to touch
on ecstasies that may be denied to us in real life, if only in a brief, synthetic
manner. Russian avant-garde gaming auteur Vasily Zotov’s nightmareinducing, actively and refreshingly ugly games explore the darkness of
Hollywood, the hypnotisation of police officers, eight-sided eyeballs in
psychiatric wards, a romance between an actress and a yeti, and the
destruction of a courtroom by a fascist with a rocket launcher.28 These
weird, eccentric, truly outsider gems exist, but are not easy to come by, and
are held at the margins of the industry with few accolades to their name.
It is only a matter of time until we find out what it means to have games
done in the style of Fluxus or the Gutai Art Association. A punk-zine
equivalent of a videogame with DIY production, hardware included? Some
revoltingly wonderful Viennese Actionism games? Or Banksyesque games
– found unexpectedly? A Sagrada Familia of videogames – an experience so
profound it stops you in your tracks? These are all coming. What would it
mean if games became tools for changing our lives, rather than mere
signifiers of the status quo? What would gaming look like for us, the postwork-inclined? No longer would games be all about accomplishing
missions or winning; they could wash over us effectively with minimal
input from the creator, a sort of Malevich of videogames? What would it
mean to have games made ethically and organically? Not just tiny mods in
AAA games or art projects in Berlin. What would it mean to make this
industry a source of renewable energy, rather than a draining force? But
even within the current constraints, the creativity within our medium is
unparalleled.
Games kindle a gamut of emotions and confront us with unexpected
scenarios. Pokémon Go filled the streets with crowds of inadvertent
Situationists involving themselves in dérives – a reimagination of the city.
The Obscure Game Aesthetics Twitter account leaves one in awe at the
wonderful, weird and surreal visuals that videogames can contain.

 Sometimes these qualities are crafted by gamers themselves when they
tweak and bend somewhat standard games into weirdness. A wave of joy
and giddiness washes over one before a fan-made mod of the popular
fantasy game Skyrim (2011), which turns a flying dragon descending on a
medieval village into Thomas the Tank Engine – train sound effects
included.29 Mattel, the owners of the blue locomotive’s intellectual property
and brand, were apparently less charmed and sent their corporate lawyers
after the modder who built it.30
Videogames are being made about period cycles (Tampon Run, 2014),
sixteenth-century Bavarian monks (Pentiment, 2022), post-apocalyptic
Shropshire (Everybody’s Gone to the Rapture, 2015), a 100-metre-tall
policeman overlooking a gloomy industrial Russian town (Militsioner,
TBA), dating in high school (Raptor Boyfriend: A High School Romance,
2021), and metro and highway systems (Mini Metro [2014] and Mini
Motorways [2019] series). There are Inception-like scenarios of playing a
game within a game (Inscryption [2021], children’s doodles turned into
entire levels (Pedigree Tactics [2023], and the nature of existence, the
purpose of life and the repercussions of endless conflict (NieR: Automata
[2017]). Studio Oleomingus in India created gorgeously surreal postcolonial videogame adaptations of the works of the fictional poet Mir Umar
Hassan, while the American game studio Cardboard Computer featured the
installations and theatre plays of fictional avant-garde artist Lula
Chamberlain. Set in the 1960s, Detention (2018) by the Taiwanese studio
Red Candle Games explores the horrors of the White Terror regime through
the metaphor of a folk ghost story. Atuel (2022), by the Argentinian
cooperative Matajuegos, documents the connections between people,
animals and the changing natural landscape while players fly along a digital
recreation of the eponymous Atuel River. In 2018 Robert Yang gifted the
world the little queer masterpiece that is Rinse and Repeat – a tender,
sensual, surreal opportunity to embody a stranger intently rubbing and
scrubbing another man in a public shower. The geniuses behind the
nightmare-inducing little game Paratopic (2018), a small studio called
Arbitrary Metric, are releasing a philosophical and psychedelic detective
mystery experience with Roman Sands RE:Build, in an aesthetic borrowing
from both anime and vaporware. Sam Barlow created deep, haunting
wonderlands in his Mulholland Drive–inspired game Immortality (2022)

 that have sparked more than one exquisitely erotic dream in this writer’s
mind.
Videogames are an incredible art form in urgent need of liberation from
the draconian modes of production that entangle them with the darkest,
most corrupt practices of the modern era. What needs to be fought for, what
needs to be won, is for gaming to divorce itself from harm.
Claire Bishop’s parting words in Artificial Hells offer poignant
conclusions for this fight:
The ‘political’ and the ‘critical’ becoming shibboleths of advanced art
signals a lack of faith both in the intrinsic value of art as a de-alienating
human endeavour (since art today is so intertwined with market
systems globally) and in democratic political processes (in whose name
so many injustices and barbarities are conducted) … The task today is
to produce a viable international alignment of leftist political
movements and a reassertion of art’s inventive forms of negation as
valuable in their own right. We need to recognise art as a form of
experimental activity overlapping with the world, and – more radically
– we need to support the progressive transformation of existing
institutions.31
There are so many facets to unpick, underline, revolutionise. The actors are
numerous and the alliances diverse. This arena is bursting with politics –
from the code written, to the theme portrayed, to the human cost of the
objects on which games are played. Nothing short of an international
worker-led takeover of this industry will suffice to save it, and the planet,
from its own greedy, destructive tendencies. Resistance will be fierce –
from a brutal last squeeze of the existing extractive practices, to a
debasement of the workforce, to attempts to whitewash status-quo gaming
and depoliticise union-busting. For the people embedded in the industry,
this change must take place to salvage what is to be enjoyed here, not to
take it away.
And what can players do to help the people in the industry win the battle
for the soul of gaming? Some solutions for more ethical consumption, of
course, come to mind – check the source of a game’s materials, the
conditions in its factories and the sustainability of its components. Upon

 purchasing a videogame, consider seeking out information about its makers
and their record of treatment of the game’s devs – chances are, there will be
stories on the internet. Support the good ones; there are plenty of them!
Follow games industry unions on social media and support their calls for
action. Enjoy and encourage artistic experimentation in this field and
support smaller creators. Do not dismiss political action within these spaces
as isolated aberrations, but engage with them, give them merit, be curious.
Those most precious of encounters – organising, assisting, critical play,
archaeology, scheming or even just dilly-dallying together in the most
surreal circumstances, the David versus Goliath battles, reciprocal altruism
and solidarity – all these must be rewarded and encouraged. A broad gamut
of leftist playing exists which can beautifully assist in the fight against the
bosses, beyond games. People working in the games industry cannot be the
only ones expected to improve it – their job security is at stake. While we
can play our part in pursuing less destructive methods of producing the
figurative pencil, solidarity with those making a difference has to come
from outside of game spaces, too.
Yes, politics have traditionally been assigned to analogue spaces – streets,
libraries, pubs, union meeting rooms and launderettes. Increasingly, though,
virtual spaces are becoming territories for political organising and
scheming, often affecting what happens in real-life governmental buildings.
Instead of viewing gaming as some sort of deranged aberration and a
distraction from real life, realise that, for millions, gaming represents a very
real means of communication about key subjects in their lives and, without
doubt, about the wider world. The space in between ranges from reactionary
forces using their influence for harmful ends to enabling the purest, kindest
sides of humanity. Even today, children’s analogue games hint at that
possibility, too, providing a clue as to what a more equitable society would
look like.
The 2022 Venice Biennale art piece that moved me the most consisted of
videos of children playing regional iterations of classic playground games.
At the Belgian pavilion, Francis Alÿs showed children transforming
ordinary objects, such as stones, coins, plastic bottles and car tyres, into
magical universes that transcend national borders and cultural divides.32
Played for their own sake, rather than as a means to a repressive end, games
show the emancipatory potential in the slapstick and nonsense of farceurs,
clowns and circus performers.33 Games and buffoonery bear witness to how

 life could be – free of domination and based around principles where
actions are carried out autonomously for their own ends, beyond the sphere
of power relations.
Plenty of space for fooling around, or it’s not my revolution, eh?34 We
must criticise the debased forms in which competition is manifested in
today’s capitalist society, but we can also valorise and defend the possible
liberatory types of rivalry that could flourish in a future society devoid of
oppression and power.
The Situationists, in their own time, proposed correctly that love is under
siege, stripped of its meaning and used as an element of consumption.
Today a similar diagnosis can be made about games. Play is under constant
siege, reduced to an act of competition, of winning, to a dance between
constant upgrades and sudden downfalls. Herein lies the heartbreak that the
games industry inflicts – the medium is capable of modelling infinite
capacities and possibilities for utopian worlds not yet lived, and still it
insists on tapping into our weaknesses, emboldening antagonism and
destruction. Spaces for cooperation, selfless generosity and solidarity are
mostly carved out by the players themselves, rather than by the game
makers.
We must refrain from diagnosing the problems in gaming in terms of
their aesthetics, and instead fight for emancipation and improvement in the
same way we’d fight for the betterment of any industry. The spectacle does
not colonise everything. Boundless creativity is exuded by masses of people
who live under the existing system of domination.35 The action of play, of
enjoying artistic creations, has always been a part of that. The mission
before us is to uncover the methods and mechanisms for unshackling games
from their current modes of production, freeing them from the necessity to
compensate for bad deeds.
To quote my beloved Raymond Williams, ‘to be truly radical is to make
hope possible rather than despair convincing.’36 The glimmers of hope in
this industry must be taken as inspiration for its long-term overhaul rather
than as a sign that it will all be okay in the end. Without resistance, the
interests of capital will weave their way into every part of our existence and
leisure. The ethical scale will not tilt towards equity if we do not employ
force. A fight must take place for every beautiful relationship established by
gaming communities. For every uplifting experience, every epiphany met
through loading up a videogame. For every minute we allow ourselves to

 relax and escape, beer in hand, after a day at a dead-end job or caring for a
loved one.
We must wrest gaming from the shark jaws of extractivism for every kid
or adult who wishes to live out their most outrageous fantasies, for every
worker killing time during their lunch hour or taking three days off to enjoy
plunging into imaginary digital worlds and leaving their mark there. For its
communities, for its art, for its clumsiness, endearing quirks and vast
universes, it is everything for some of us, and it is becoming increasingly
influential even in the lives of those who don’t partake. Gaming deserves to
be rescued from its self-destructive ways that poison the most visionary
parts of this captivating field, to be unleashed from the thorny vines that are
smothering it.
Above all, this book is a love letter. It’s my way of voicing all the fears
and problems I have with this relationship I have found myself in, with this
medium that brings me endless joy and has brought me together with some
of the most important people in my life, that has changed my class position
and inspired optimism in me during the darkest of times. This relationship
is marred by a sense of guilt and anger, an inability to truly champion and
love this pastime, as so many parts of it are defined by well-disguised
cruelty. I want to get rid of that feeling. I want for all of us to be freed from
it.
There exists, on the horizon, a possible revolutionary future where all of
us can lie on the beach, cocktail in hand, with few cares in the world, but to
get there, we must first overcome the obstacles and win many fights,
including those that manifest themselves on our myriad of black mirrors.
And for those who prefer a session of Elden Ring to the beach, there is
everything to be won by challenging the current crooked, bloated and
monopolised methods of game making and distribution. In the era of nonstop productivity contests, when work seemingly never ends and leisure
blurs insidiously into minting coins for others, we demand the right to be
lazy. With pride!
How special would it be to cleanse something as innocent as play of all
those considerations? It will not be easy, but nothing is when fighting the
juggernaut of capitalism. Still, we’re equipping ourselves with knowledge
and a variety of methods for engaging in this battle. Our leisure time is on
life support – it is not yet completely destroyed, but has been colonised into
a profitable network of little destructions. If we don’t reclaim it – either via

 major reforms, a series of small revolutions or a thorough break in its
current modus operandi – the corrosion will become terminal. The future is
not decided; it is ours for the taking. The stakes are high and, indeed, it’s
still anyone’s game.
OceanofPDF.com

 Acknowledgements

Listen, I may not be able to do another one of these again, so I’m gonna
take my time! I guess this is the part where I’m meant to celebrate a bit,
right? My shrink would be disappointed, but honestly, my immediate
feeling on starting these acknowledgements is a bit of dread and almost
sadness. The truth is that this is not my first attempt to work on a book
project. I was exploring ideas with another publisher, but in summer 2020, I
was overcome by depression so intense, I just couldn’t do the work, so it
fell apart. My mental health was at its lowest – game over, I thought. And
yet these angels surrounded me, like in a videogame, indeed, and bit by bit
injected me with enough kindness, or Health Points, that I was able to
rebuild myself. To them, I’ll be forever thankful.
Also, very importantly, a book like this one doesn’t happen because of
my own talent or whatnot. It’s a curation of hundreds and hundreds of
sources from authors who have collated all the facts and figures that
illustrate the arguments I’m making. I have tried to create a picture out of
them, but I do I implore everyone to check out the work of all the amazing
people referenced in the endnotes. In the last few years, I’ve had an Airtable
sheet which I’ve been filling with all the little factoids that have piqued my
interest. This book is a collection of all those thoughts, ideas and
commentaries, obviously with my personal slant and so on, but still – I just
need to make a grateful acknowledgement of all the brilliant writers and
journalists who have informed my own thinking over the years. Okay, now
back to the folk I am lucky to know.
To Leo Hollis – for giving me the opportunity to realise this, for your
warm wisdom, meticulous edits, curiosity, guidance and interest in this field
when so few within the left care! Your work across radical literature is
outstanding, and I’m immensely proud to be part of the catalogues you’re
curating.

 To Alfie Bown – you offered me a pint and a job when I was at my
lowest and believed in me. You’re a comrade I’ll always be thankful to.
Your work on videogames and politics has been pioneering, and I’m so
grateful for the opportunities you have given me – the idea for this book,
too!
To Aylon Cohen – huge thanks for being my test audience for the book,
for your thoughtful comments and for being a soulmate through the highs
and the lows of our strange lives. I want to grow old with you; some of my
favourite memories in life have you in them. I hope for many more to come.
To Ed Daly – you changed my life and had faith in me at a very crucial
moment. Many things in my life are better because our paths have crossed.
Your style is great, and our team bloody brilliant. Thank you for everything.
(I’m a Marxist, alright? It’s very strange for me to be shilling for my boss,
but what can I say? You deserve it!)
To James Poulter – the only person to the left of me, I think, ha! Finding
you (way too late, mind) was such a revelation, and seeing you prosper,
proper shine right now, is just the warmest feeling. We’ve seen a lot
together, no doubt there’s more ahead. Thank you for being there for me
through it all.
To Galan – you appeared out of nowhere and made a huge difference: to
my confidence, to how I understood this strange space we found ourselves
in, full of righteous combat and victories and egos larger than life. Your
moral compass is sturdy as a rock and your sensitivity divine.
To Katherine Neil – a rare gem in this strange history. Your story is one
of powerful action, integrity, creativity and vigour. For years I admired you
online and from afar. I feel blessed our paths have finally crossed and I’m
able to pick your lovely brains on a variety of topics. You teach me so
much, and your kindness when you didn’t have to be, ah, it meant so much.
Thank you.
To Laurynas Šedvydis – during my tender teenage years, you took me
under your wing when you were a young lad yourself and allowed me to
ask any silly question about politics, with no judgement or disdain, just
empathy and great, great humour. How thankful I am! Others, I think, have
had a much worse experience. You taught me so much; I’ll always be in
your debt. Thank you.
To Matt Cole and Frank Mace – Frank, you were the first one to believe
that there was a book in me. I’ll always remember that meeting we had at an

 Elephant and Castle Wetherspoons, ha! Well, since then I couldn’t unthink
it, but finally, here we are. And Matt, wow, we’ve seen some crap, eh? But
we persevered through it all, and I’m so proud of us for that. Having a
connection with you through it all was invaluable. Your and Frank’s union
is romantic, lush, profound and so filled with meaning. I am so excited
about your next chapter with more rad folk in your wonderful family.
To Rosie Collington – my move to Copenhagen was great enough, but
then it gifted you into my life. And wow, a fortune came my way! As the
meticulous, brave, awesome author you are, you guided me through so
much of how this entire process would be, you mentored me and inspired
me. But – even more importantly and preciously – you invited me into your
wonderful circle of friends and painted this lovely city with entirely new
colours. Many more hygge times for us to come, please!
To Rowan Milligan – I just love you, okay? I just do, and I always will,
and I’m tearing up now, there we go. I don’t know what miracle brought
you into my life, or by what magic I managed to keep you, but, wow, what a
reward that all has been. You enriched me – materially (oh, God bless
magical Norman!), spiritually. You held me through the worst, and we
laughed our bums off through the most amusing, strange little bits of our
delightful life together. I look forward to our silver years. We’ll have fun.
To TheoryFighter – many people made this book happen, but by god
you’re the beginning of it all. My searching mind met your brilliant,
generous knowledge and, most importantly, a judgement-free zone where I
was able to ask anything. You’re the one who ignited my passion for this
field, who conjured up a fire in me to explore these spaces politically, to
have empathy for them, to dig deeper. And you offered it all with sass and
unmatched humour. Thank you.
To Tomas Marcinkevičius – the wonderful first pair of eyes on my
ramblings here. You are more than just a subeditor as you gave me so many
brilliant pointers and ideas. I’m deeply proud and in awe with all the work
you’re doing to make our lil’ neck of the woods a warmer, better place.
To Artūras Rumiancevas and the entire LŽKA crew – you’re crafting a
fascinating games industry over in Lithuania. I’m so happy that it’s under
the guidance of your creative and ambitious minds. To Josh Sawyer for,
well, being you. Miss you profusely. To Katha for support through the
years. To Luan – the amazing owner of the cafe in the Sundby Library
where I crafted this book. Your occasional cheeky free noon rakias relaxed

 me when I was at a dead end, and your smile combated any writer’s block I
had. To Gabbas Salyamovich Islamov – my magnificent roots in Bashkiria,
your values and smile and the sweet smell of your bees will always follow
me. To Martha Lauren for your beautiful laughter, which I hear IRL too
little. To Joshua Baldwin for your attention to the text and great
comradeship at our ship. To my brother and Valentinas, who showed me
games first. To Simon Saunders for encouraging me to pursue these themes
when I was just getting started; your work was always a huge inspiration.
To Assem Khaled for showing me light when I thought there was none left.
To Matija for our dreamy summers on the Adriatic coast – I hope there are
many more to come. To the brilliant comrades at STJV and other radical
game unions across the world – you do God’s work and are implementing
groundbreaking change. Thank you. To Dovilė Valiūnė. To Dan B – thank
you for looking after me in my early twenties. To Kate N for housing me
when I really needed it. To Yusef / Marsy / Joy Connors – your sacrifice
was not in vain, you hero.
I want to make all of you proud, folks, as you’ve been all so generous
with me. Negronis on me next time we’re together, this side of the rainbow
or the other, eh!
And, finally, to the two most important ones:
To my mum, Guzel Islamova – everything that is good in me is because
of you, and my life’s work is to get at least close to the splendour of you, to
make you know how thankful I am for all that you have given me. You’ve
had the toughest time, and yet, out of it all you built magnificent talents,
courage, strength; you carry immense beauty and that wicked wonderful
Soviet sense of humour. What a brilliant fortune it is to be yours, to have
you calm me, inspire me, look after me, to whisper in my ear sweet
nothings that wrap me with love. The universe expands with our affection,
with our strife, with our passion for a better tomorrow.
To Shalev Moran – I love us in intellectual conversations, in our precious
silences, in warm cuddles, in wondrous adventures. You had me bursting
with energy and ideas when I first embarked on this wonderful project; you
helped me with all the stumbling blocks, and got it all to sound just right.
You diligently walked me through my woes during all those ‘ah, this is
crap’ moments. Your charm, grace and kindness have me feeling like the
luckiest person, and I’m always in awe of all your talents and elegance. I
still cannot believe we’re spending our lives together, it’s so delicious

 (thanks to Tim Garbos and Rosa Carbó-Mascarell for effectively bringing
us together, too!). My heart trembles when I think of you – I love you so
much.
All I do is to make you two proud, our future a bit more secure and our
world a little bit kinder. Thank you for everything.
If I can be arrogant enough to suggest a soundtrack to accompany this book,
may it be 52 Commercial Road – the album A Wreck Provides an Excellent
Foundation.
Thank you so much for reading this book. If you’re interested in my views
on current goings-on, please feel free to find me online. Such is the gift of
the interwebs.
OceanofPDF.com

 Notes

Introduction: Main Menu
1. Global Games Market Report 2019, Newzoo, 2019.
2. Online Nation Report 2021, Ofcom.org, 2021.
3. ‘Global Video Game Market Size, Share and Industry Trends Analysis Report by Type (Offline
and Online), by Device (Mobile, Console, and Computer), by Regional Outlook and Forecast,
2022–8’, KBV Research, 2022.
4. J. Clement, ‘Grand Theft Auto V Total Unit Sales 2023’, Statista.com, 10 November 2023.
5. James Batchelor, ‘GTA V Is the Most Profitable Entertainment Product of All Time’,
GamesIndustry.biz, 9 April 2018.
6. David Curry, ‘Minecraft Revenue and Usage Statistics (2023)’, Businessof Apps.com, 9 January
2023.
7. Charlie Campbell, ‘How Netflix Is Extending Its Tentacles across Asia in Search of the Next
Squid Game’, Time.com, 24 November 2023.
8. Keith Stuart, ‘Minecraft passes one trillion views on YouTube’, Guardian, 15 December 2021.
9. ‘Essential Facts about the Video Game Industry 2022’, Entertainment Software Association,
2022.
10. Kevin Webb, ‘More Than 100 Million People Watched the “League Of Legends” World
Championship, Cementing Its Place as the Most Popular Esport’, Business Insider India, 18
December 2019. In the text, ‘onwards’ next to the release date indicates the game continues to
be developed up to the present day, in contrast to single complete releases.
11. ‘Super Bowl LIII Draws 98.2 Million TV Viewers, 32.3 Million Social Media Interactions’,
Nielsen Report, 2019.
12. Tiffany Holmes, ‘Art Games and Breakout: New Media Meets the American Arcade’,
SIGGRAPH 2002: Art Gallery art paper, 2002.
13. Lewis Gordon, ‘The Environmental Impact of a PlayStation 4’, Verge, 5 December 2019.
14. Johan Huizinga, Homo Ludens, Boston: Beacon Press, 1955, 173.
15. At that time, we lived in Šiauliai, the fourth-largest town in Lithuania. So don’t worry, nobody
too influential.
16. This house was on Miškas Street in Kaunas, Lithuania. Shout-outs to my neighbours from back
in the day!
17. Nick Dyer-Witheford and Greig de Peuter, Games of Empire, Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota, 2009, 228.
18. Stuart Hall, ‘Encoding/Decoding’, in Stuart Hall, Dorothy Hobson, Andrew Lowe, and Paul
Willis (eds), Culture, Media, Language: Working Papers in Cultural Studies, 1972–1979,
London: Routledge, 1980.
19. Stuart Hall, ‘Notes on Deconstructing “the Popular”’ in John Storey (ed.), Cultural Theory and
Popular Culture: A Reader, 5th edition, London: Routledge, 2019.

 20. Joshua Green, Devil’s Bargain: Steve Bannon, Donald Trump, and the Storming of the
Presidency, New York: Penguin Press, 2017.

Tutorial: History
1. Mariana Mazzucato, The Entrepreneurial State: Debunking Public vs. Private Sector Myths,
London: Anthem Press, 2013. Another fascinating example on this theme I found recently: Uber
scrapes and integrates the publicly funded Transport for London data into its apps. Egregious!
Chris Stokel-Walker, ‘Uber’s London Data Grab Hints at a Future Subscription Service’,
Wired.com, 1 May 2019.
2. Marlene Simmons, ‘Bertie the Brain Programmer Heads Science Council’, Ottawa Citizen,
1975, 17.
3. Mark J. P. Wolf, Encyclopedia of Video Games: The Culture, Technology, and Art of Gaming,
Santa Barbara: Greenwood Publishing Group, 2012.
4. Steven L. Kent, The Ultimate History of Video Games: From Pong to Pokémon and Beyond,
New York: Three Rivers Press, 2001.
5. Ibid.
6. Steven L. Kent, The First Quarter: A Twenty-Five-Year History of Video Games, Bothell: BWD
Press, 2000.
7. Adjusted for inflation. Source: The Coin Operated and Home Electronic Games Market Report,
New York: Frost & Sullivan, 1976.
8. Dale Bashir, ‘Treat Yourself to a Coveted Retro Console with the Game and Watch: Super Mario
Bros.’, IGN.com, 4 August 2023.
9. Damien McFerran, ‘Thanks to Switch, Nintendo Has Now Sold Over Half a Billion Handheld
Consoles’, Nintendo Life, 7 May 2021.
10. Damiano Gerli, ‘A Discussion on the European Gaming Market in the 80s’, Genesis Temple, 30
April 2022.
11. Jennifer S. Light, ‘When Computers Were Women’, Technology and Culture 40: 3, 1999, 455–
83.
12. Emily Chang, Brotopia: Breaking Up the Boys’ Club of Silicon Valley, New York:
Portfolio/Penguin Random House, 2018.
13. Clive Thompson, ‘The Secret History of Women in Coding’, New York Times, 13 February
2019.
14. Ibid.
15. Scott Cohen, Zap! The Rise and Fall of Atari, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1984.
16. The award was swiftly withdrawn after an outcry on social media, mostly by Atari’s previous
women employees.
17. Adam Fisher, Valley of Genius: The Uncensored History of Silicon Valley, New York:
Twelve/Grand Central Publishing, 2018.
18. David Kushner, ‘Sex, Drugs and Video Games: The Untold Story of Atari’, Playboy, 19 July
2012.
19. Robert Wieder, ‘A Fistful of Quarters’, Oui, 1974.
20. For an important contribution to this entire subject, see Cecilia D’Anastasio, ‘Sex, Pong, and
Pioneers: What Atari Was Really Like’, Kotaku, 12 February 2018.
21. Andrew Boyd, ‘The Video Game Crash of 1983’, Engines of Our Ingenuity, 7 January 2016.
22. Tristan Donovan, Replay: The History of Video Games, Lewes: Yellow Ant, 2010.
23. Tracey Lien, ‘No Girls Allowed’, Polygon.com, 2 December 2013. Polygon is one of the largest
American gaming entertainment websites, publishing blogs, reviews, guides, videos, and news
primarily covering videogames. It is owned by Vox Media.

 24. Time stamp 44:40, ‘Coleco Presents the Adam Computer System’, YouTube, 3 May 2016,
posted by Computer History Museum.
25. The politics of anime could take up another book. It’s an extremely diverse field with numerous
artistic and societal expressions. Just take Studio Ghibli, one of the most famous anime
animation studios. Their films include themes of environmentalism, pacifism, feminism, anticonsumerism and so on. Once again, just because the aesthetic may be unfamiliar to many
(mostly in the West), it doesn’t mean that it’s not incredibly rich with meaning.
26. Amanda Hess, ‘A History of Sexist Video Game Marketing’, Slate, 4 December 2013.
27. Mary Kenney, ‘A Generation of Gamers Started Out Playing Barbie Fashion Designer’,
Harper’s Bazaar, 20 December 2022. This article is a beautiful ode to this delightful game.
28. Leslie Wayne, ‘Atari Moving Most Production’, New York Times, 23 February 1983.
29. Peter McNiff, ‘Atari Workers Protest’, RTÉ News, 7 January 1985, archived on rte.ie.
30. David Kushner, Masters of Doom: How Two Guys Created an Empire and Transformed Pop
Culture, New York: Random House, 2003.
31. Nic Reuben, ‘House Flipper 2 Review – Moreish and Meditative Fixer-Upper Fantasy’,
Guardian, 13 December 2023.
32. Carly A. Kocurek, ‘Coin-Drop Capitalism: Economic Lessons from the Video Game Arcade’, in
Mark J. P. Wolf (ed.), Before the Crash: Early Video Game History, Detroit: Wayne State
University Press, 2012.
33. Kyle Riismandel, ‘Arcade Addicts and Mallrats: Producing and Policing Suburban Public Space
in 1980s America’, Environment, Space, Place Journal 5: 2, 2013.
34. See Corey Mead, ‘Shall We Play a Game? The Rise of the Military-Entertainment Complex’,
Salon.com, 19 September 2013; Owen Good, ‘US Army Investing $50 Million in Video
Games’, Kotaku.com, 23 November 2008; Peter Suciu, ‘The Complicated Relationship Between
the Military and Video Game Industry’, Clearance Jobs, 27 Aug 2021. Dollar figures adjusted
for inflation.
35. Adjusted for inflation. Source: Jim Edwards, ‘“America’s Army” Recruitment Video Game Cost
Taxpayers $33M’, CBS News, 11 December 2009.
36. Paul Cockeram, ‘America’s Army Preview (PC)’, Games First!, 8 June 2002.
37. Jason D’Aprile, Israeli Air Force: Defending the Promised Land, PCGame-Pro – Fly/Drive
Reviews.
38. Jamie Woodcock, Marx at the Arcade: Consoles, Controllers, and Class Struggle, Chicago:
Haymarket Books, 2019.
39. Steffen P. Walz and Sebastian Deterding (eds), The Gameful World: Approaches, Issues,
Applications, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2014.
40. Meghan M. Biro, ‘5 Ways Leaders Win at Gamification Technology’, Forbes, 15 September
2013.
41. Ian Bogost, ‘Gamification Is Bullshit’, Atlantic, 9 August 2011.
42. ‘Nintendo Wii Lifetime Unit Sales Worldwide as of September 2023’, by region (in million
units), Statista.com, 2023.
43. Informa Telecoms and Media, ‘Mobile Games Industry Worth US$ 11.2 Billion by 2010’,
3G.co.uk, 19 May 2005.
44. Tom Wijman, ‘New Gaming Boom: Newzoo Ups Its 2017 Global Games Market Estimate to
$116.0Bn Growing to $143.5Bn in 2020’, Newzoo. com, 28 November 2017.
45. Oliver Yeh, ‘Candy Crush Players Spent $4.2 Million Per Day Last Year, Pushing the
Franchise’s 2018 Total Past $1.5 Billion Report’, Sensor Tower, 2019.
46. Stuart Dredge, ‘Why Is Candy Crush So Popular?’, Guardian, 26 March 2014.
47. Juegoadmin, ‘Deep Dive: How Does Candy Crush Make Money?’, Juego Studio, 28 July 2023.
48. ‘Mobile Gaming Market: Information by Monetization (In-App Purchases, Paid Apps), Platform
(Android, iOS), Genre (Casual, Action), Gaming Vertical (Money Games) and Region –

 Forecast until 2030’, Straits Research, 2021.
49. Annie Njanja, ‘Game Studios Come Together to Grow Industry in Africa’, TechCrunch.com, 23
February 2022.
50. ‘Video Games – Africa’, Statista.com, 2023.
51. Julia Carrie Wong, ‘Germany Shooting Suspect Livestreamed Attempted Attack on Synagogue’,
Guardian, 10 October 2019.
52. Lizzie Dearden, ‘Stephan Balliet: The “Loser” Neo-Nazi Suspected of Deadly Attack on
German Synagogue’, Independent, 10 October 2019.
53. Olga R. Rodriguez, ‘Man Accused of Attacking Paul Pelosi with a Hammer Testifies He Was
Drawn to Right-Wing Conspiracies by “Gamergate”’, PBS News, 14 November 2023.
54. Ash Parrish, ‘Activision Blizzard CEO Denies Culture of Harassment and Blames Unions for
Company Problems’, Verge, 1 June 2023.
55. EA Spouse, ‘EA: The Human Story’, LiveJournal, 11 November 2004.
56. Tim Surette, ‘EA settles OT dispute, disgruntled “spouse” outed’, GameSpot.com, 26 April
2006.
57. Dave McNary, ‘SAG-AFTRA Goes on Strike against Video Game Companies’, Variety.com, 21
October 2016.
58. Allegra Frank, ‘Pro-Union Voices Speak Out at Heated GDC Roundtable’, Polygon.com, 22
March 2018.
59. Jack Morse, ‘Netflix Is Quietly Working on a Livestreaming Feature, Report Claims’,
Mashable.com, 14 May 2022.
60. Hawken Miller, ‘Video Games Connect Chronically Ill Children Isolated at Home’, Hospital,
Prader-Willi News, 22 May 2020; ‘Video Games and Dyslexia: Can Gaming Increase Reading
Speed?’, Succeed with Dyslexia, 26 March 2021.
61. Brian Handwerk, ‘Video Games Improve Vision, Study Says’, National Geographic, 29 March
2009.

Level I: The Theme
1. Hope Roberts, ‘A Jump Cut in History: How Breathless Revolutionized Filmmaking’,
Cinemablography.org, 27 March 2023.
2. Emru Townsend, ‘The 10 Worst Games of All Time’, PC World, 23 October 2006.
3. Keith Stuart, ‘Danny Ledonne on Super Columbine Massacre RPG’, Guardian, 9 August 2007.
4. Brian D. Crecente, ‘“Super Columbine” game triggers uproar,’ Rocky Mountain News, 2008.
5. Ian Bogost, Newsgames: Journalism at Play, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2010.
6. Joseph ‘Jagwar’ Asuncion, ‘Mortal Kombat 11 Banned in Japan, Indonesia, and Ukraine for
Gore’, ONE Esports, 24 April 2019.
7. Kim Ghattas, ‘Syria Launches Arab War Game’, BBC News, 31 May 2002.
8. YouTube User @CheeseYourself, a comment left under ‘Hotline Miami 2: Wrong Number
Soundtrack – The Green Kingdom – 02 Untitled’, YouTube, 2022.
9. NPCs (non-playable characters): characters in a computer game not controlled by someone
playing the game.
10. Archived on Reddit by user salamiolivesonions, ‘If male costumes were designed like female
costumes’, r/gaming Subreddit, Reddit, 5 November 2020.
11. T. V. Reed, Digitized Lives: Culture, Power, and Social Change in the Internet Era, New York:
Routledge, 2014.
12. Paul R. Messinger, Xin Ge, Eleni Stroulia, Kelly Lyons, Kristen Smirnov, Michael Bone, ‘On
the Relationship Between My Avatar and Myself’, Journal of Virtual Worlds Research,
November 2008.

 13. Linda Katherine Kaye and Charlotte Rebecca Pennington, ‘Girls Can’t Play’: The Effects of
Stereotype Threat on Females’ Gaming Performance, Ormskirk: Edge Hill University, 2015.
14. Nick Dyer-Witheford and Greig de Peuter, Games of Empire, Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota, 2009.
15. Donna Goodman, ‘Capitalism Breeds Violence Against Women’, Liberation Magazine, 1 June
2005.
16. Stefan Schubert, ‘Playing With, Not Against, Empires: Video Games and (Post)Colonialism’,
US Studies Online, 27 November 2020.
17. Dmitri Williams, Nicole Martins, Mia Consalvo, James D. Ivory, ‘The Virtual Census:
Representations of Gender, Race, and Age in Video Games’, New Media and Society 11: 5,
2009, 815–34.
18. Ibid.
19. Lucas Pope, @dukope, Twitter, 9 August 2016; Lawrence Bonk, ‘Indie Favorite “Papers,
Please” Has Sold 5 Million Copies’, Engadget.com, 9 August 2023.
20. Walter Benjamin, ‘The Author as Producer’, in Walter Benjamin: Selected Writings, Volume 2:
1931–1934, Harvard University Press, 2005.
21. In his collection of essays Revolutions in Reverse (London: Autonomedia, 2011), anthropologist
and political theorist David Graeber expresses similar worries about politics in the fine arts.
22. Lai-Tze Fan, Kishonna Gray, Aynur Kadir, ‘How to Design Games That Promote Racial
Equity’, Electronic Book Review, 9 December 2021.
23. Liz Ryerson, @ellaguro, Twitter, 12 May 2021.
24. Joe Dempsey, Daniel Hargreaves, Daniel Peacock, Chelsea Lindsey, Dominic Bell, Luc
Fontenoy, Heather Williams, ‘Pudding Lane: Recreating Seventeenth-Century London’, Journal
of Digital Humanities 3(1), 2014.
25. Lissa Holloway-Attaway, ‘Interview with Stella Wisdom, Digital Curator at the British Library’,
Gamevironments Magazine 14, 2021.
26. Fernando Fernández-Aranda, Susana Jiménez-Murcia et al., ‘Video Games as a Complementary
Therapy Tool in Mental Disorders: Playmancer, a European Multicentre Study’, Journal of
Mental Health 21: 4, 364–74, 2012.
27. Hawken Miller, ‘Video Games Connect Chronically Ill Children Isolated at Home’, Hospital,
Prader-Willi News, 22 May 2020; Sen Li, Yang Song, Zhidong Cai, and Qingwen Zhan, ‘Are
Active Video Games Useful in the Development of Gross Motor Skills among Non-Typically
Developing Children? A Meta-Analysis’, BMC Sports Science, Medicine and Rehabilitation 14:
140, 2022.
28. Sara A. Freed, Briana N. Sprague et al., ‘Feasibility and Enjoyment of Exercise Video Games in
Older Adults’, Frontiers in Public Health 9, 2021; ‘Video Games Made Me a Better Surgeon’,
BBC News, 21 October 2018; Christian Moro, Charlotte Phelps, Zane Stromberga, ‘Utilizing
Serious Games for Physiology and Anatomy Learning and Revision’, Advances in Physiology
Education 44: 3, 2020.
29. ‘Video Games and Dyslexia: Can Gaming Increase Reading Speed?’, Succeed with Dyslexia, 26
March 2021; Eleanor Jameson, Judy Trevena, Nic Swain, ‘Electronic Gaming as Pain
Distraction’, Pain Research and Management 16: 1, 27–32.
30. Mark Fisher, Capitalist Realism: Is There No Alternative?, New Alresford: Zero Books, 2009.
31. Angela Ndalianis, Neo-Baroque Aesthetics and Contemporary Entertainment, Cambridge: MIT
Press, 2005.
32. Jean Baudrillard, The Transparency of Evil: Essays on Extreme Phenomena, London and New
York: Verso, 2009, p. 17.
33. Nick Dyer-Witheford and Greig de Peuter, Games of Empire, Minneapolis, University of
Minnesota, 2009.

 34. The following article has a few ideas: Paolo Pedercini, ‘Gaming Under Socialism’,
Molleindustria’s blog, 12 April 2017.
35. Jen Pan, ‘Why Liberals Lose Their Minds over Hollywood Movies’, YouTube, posted by
Jacobin, 16 September 2021.
36. Adolph Reed Jr, ‘Django Unchained, or, The Help: How “Cultural Politics” Is Worse Than No
Politics at All, and Why’, NonSite.org, 25 February 2013.
37. Pan, ‘Why Liberals Lose Their Minds over Hollywood Movies’.
38. ‘Games Are Not Empathy Machines | The Last Guardian | Subtext Adventure’, YouTube, posted
by Samantha Greer, 12 December 2022.
39. Johannes Breuer, Rachel Kowert, Ruth Wendt, Thorsten Quandt, ‘Sexist Games = Sexist
Gamers? A Longitudinal Study on the Relationship Between Video Game Use and Sexist
Attitudes’, Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking 18: 4, 192–202, 2015.

Level II: Communities
1. youtube.com/@TheoryFighter.
2. Beautifully retold here: Eliza Gauger, ‘Breaking: Goonfleet Stomps Band of Brothers in Biggest
EVE Takedown Ever’, Destructoid.com, 5 February 2009.
3. ‘DKP Is Market Socialism’, YouTube, posted by Joshua Citarella, 28 January 2022.
4. ‘Battlefield 1 Players Hold a Cease Fire on Armistice Day to Commemorate the End of WW1
Clip’, YouTube, posted by Isolated Gamer, 12 November 2018.
5. ‘Chinese Gamers Bid Sad Farewell to “World of Warcraft”’, France 24, 23 January 2023.
6. ‘Last Minute Before Shutdown of Chinese WoW Servers’, YouTube, posted by Asmongold
Clips, 25 January 2023.
7. ‘Gamers Meet in Real Life at Bedside of Terminally-Ill Friend’, BBC News, 29 September 2018.
8. Nathan Grayson, ‘Elite: Dangerous Players Band Together to Save Cancer Patient’s Expedition
from Griefers’, Kotaku.com, 31 January 2018.
9. ‘10 Times Gamers Came Together to Do UNBELIEVABLE Things’, YouTube, posted by
gameranx, 16 March 2019.
10. Nick Dyer-Witheford and Greig de Peuter, Games of Empire, Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota, 2009.
11. Henry Jenkins, ‘National Politics within Virtual Game Worlds: The Case of China’, Pop
Junctions, 1 August 2006.
12. Steve Henn, Jess Jiang, ‘A 12-Year-Old Girl Takes On the Video Game Industry’, NPR.org, 8
April 2015.
13. Tom Regan, ‘Gay Weddings for Russia: How The Sims Became a Battleground for the
LGBTQ+ Community’, Guardian, 22 February 2022.
14. Aja Romano, ‘Is J.K. Rowling Transphobic? Let’s Let Her Speak for Herself’, Vox.com, 16
March 2023; Dani Di Placido, ‘The “Harry Potter” Anti-Semitism Controversy, Explained’,
Forbes.com, 5 January 2022.
15. Evgeny Obedkov, ‘Hogwarts Legacy Hits $1 Billion in Retail Sales, Nearly 10% of WB
Discovery’s Quarterly Revenue’, Game World Observer, 5 May 2023.
16. Ed Nightingale, ‘Homophobic Players Upset at LGBT+ Toggle in Arcade Racer Buck Up and
Drive’, Eurogamer.net, 17 January 2022.
17. Zack Zwiezen, ‘Two Massive Charity Game Bundles Have Now Raised Over $12 Million for
Ukraine’, Kotaku.com, 19 March 2022.
18. See the Games Done Quick funds tracker at their website.
19. Andrew Webster, ‘Ubisoft Keeps Pretending Its Political Games Don’t Have Politics in Them’,
Verge, 9 May 2019.

 20. John Herman, ‘The Sad Parents of #Gamergate’, The Awl, 16 October 2014.
21. A slightly later but similar phenomenon that possibly has its roots in #Gamergate is QAnon.
Groups such as reddit.com/r/QAnonCasualties support the loved ones of the lost ‘Q’s.
22. This popular internet meme originated from the side-scrolling shooter arcade video game Zero
Wing (1989). The phrase became famous in the early 2000s for its humorous, poorly translated
broken English, and was widely shared across the internet, often accompanied by visually
manipulated images and remix videos.
23. Heejin Kim, ‘Michael Burry Calls GameStop Rally “Unnatural, Insane, Dangerous”’,
Bloomberg.com, 27 January 2021.
24. Emily Stewart, ‘The GameStop Stock Frenzy, Explained’, Vox.com, 29 January 2021.
25. Shona Ghosh, ‘Reddit Group WallStreetBets Hits 6 Million Users Overnight after a Wild Week
of Trading Antics’, Business Insider, 29 January 2021.
26. Jack Morse, ‘Reddit’s r/WallStreetBets Breaks All-Time Traffic Record’, Mashable.com, 27
January 2021.
27. Matthew Goldstein and Kate Kelly, ‘Melvin Capital, Hedge Fund Torpedoed by the GameStop
Frenzy, Is Shutting Down’, New York Times, 18 May 2022.
28. Stephen Gandel, ‘Corporate Executives Reap Millions from Reddit Stock Frenzy’, CBS News,
30 January 2021.
29. Joe Rennison, ‘GameStop Frenzy Helps Fuel Sharp Gains for Morgan Stanley Fund’, Financial
Times, 3 February 2021; Niket Nishant, ‘Black-Rock May Have Raked in $2.4 Bln on
GameStop’s Retail-Driven Stock Frenzy’, Reuters.com, 27 January 2021.
30. ‘When Did the WoW Community Get So Political?’, a Blizzard Forums thread made by user
Lithya, 6 December 2018.
31. Thiago Falcão, Daniel Marques, Ivan Mussa, Tarcízio Macedo, ‘At the Edge of Utopia. Esports,
Neoliberalism and the Gamer Culture’s Descent into Madness’, Gamevironments Magazine #13,
University of Bremen, 2020.
32. ‘Esports: General Law of Sport is approved in the Senate with rejection of the amendment on
CBDEL’, IRGlobal.com, 17 June 2022.
33. Minecraft is apolitical, except for the fact that its creator, Markus Persson (aka ‘Notch’), has
demonstrated numerous far-right, misogynist and homophobic tendencies.
34. Tristan Kirk, ‘Teenage Neo-Nazi Jailed for Sending Out Bomb Manual Disguised as Minecraft
Handbook’, Standard, 7 February 2022.
35. YouTube Culture and Trends Report, ‘One Trillion Minecraft Views: Exploring the Data Behind
a Mind-Boggling Milestone for Gaming Creators on YouTube’, YouTube, 2023.
36. Chella Ramanan, ‘PewDiePie Must Not Be Excused. Using the N-Word Is Never OK’,
Guardian, 11 September 2017; Ben Gilbert, ‘Ninja Tyler Blevins Apologizes After Accidentally
Using Racist Term on Twitch’, Business Insider, 29 March 2018.
37. ‘Putin’s Palace. History of the World’s Largest Bribe’, YouTube, posted by Alexei Navalny, 19
January 2021.
38. ‘Putin’s Palace in Minecraft 1:1’, YouTube, posted by TeamCIS, 24 January 2021.
39. ‘Строю дворец Путина в SIMS 4 Прямой эфир’, YouTube, posted by Glitch, 28 January
2021; ‘Строю дворец неПутина в Симс4’, YouTube, posted by HoneyMelon, 6 February
2021.
40. Alice Finney, ‘The Uncensored Library Gives Gamers “a Safe Haven for Press Freedom”’,
Dezeen.com, 17 August 2021.
41. Cyrus Farivar, ‘Extremists Creep into Roblox, an Online Game Popular with Children’, Head
Topics, 28 August 2019.
42. Cecilia D’Anastasio, ‘How Roblox Became a Playground for Virtual Fascists’, Wired.com, 10
June 2021.

 43. ‘Myanmar: Facebook’s Systems Promoted Violence Against Rohingya; Meta Owes Reparations
– New Report’, Amnesty International, 29 September 2022.
44. One of the main influencers in this space is the incredible streamer Xmiramira, who creates the
most magical, chaotic, surreal set-ups in her Sims games. She is also a modder who pushed for
diversity in The Sims, eventually becoming a consultant for Electronic Arts, the creators of the
game. Be sure to check her out!
45. Nathan Grayson, ‘Sims Players Hold Virtual Black Lives Matter Rally’, Kotaku.com, 12 June
2020.
46. Maurizio Lazzarato, ‘Immaterial Labor’, in Paolo Virno and Michael Hardt (eds), Radical
Thought in Italy: A Potential Politics, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1996, 133–
47; Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, Empire, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2000.
47. Rob Walker, ‘The Buying Game’, New York Times Magazine, 16 October 2005.
48. Sam Parker, ‘Ultima Online Volunteers Sue Origin’, GameSpot.com, 20 September 2000.
49. Cale Michael, ‘Nintendo Imposes Severe Tournament Limitations – and the Community
Responds with Uproar’, DoteEsports.com, 24 October 2023.
50. Shiburizu, ‘Capcom’s New Community License for Street Fighter V Tournaments Is a
Dangerous Misfire’, SuperCombo.gg, 1 March 2022.
51. Guy Debord, ‘Théorie de la Dérive’, Internationale Situationniste #2, Paris, December 1958.
52. u/isavino, ‘Why the fuck am I outside my house at 1am in my underwear trying to catch a
meowth?’, r/gaming Subreddit, Reddit, 7 July 2016.
53. David Hambling, ‘Ships Fooled in GPS Spoofing Attack Suggest Russian Cyberweapon’, New
Scientist, 10 August 2017.
54. ‘Pokemon Go Players Banned for Cheating’, BBC News, 21 February 2021.
55. ‘Grand Theft Auto 5 Mod Lets You Watch a Deer Roam Los Santos’, GameRant.com, 21 March
2016.
56. Logan Molyneux, Krishnan Vasudevan, Homero Gil de Zúñiga, ‘Gaming Social Capital:
Exploring Civic Value in Multiplayer Video Games’, Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication, 2015.

Level III: Efficacy
1. Pierre Bourdieu, Loïc J. D. Wacquant, An Invitation to Reflexive Sociology, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1992.
2. Geoff Cox, Nav Haq, and Tom Trevor (eds), Concept Store #3: Art, Activism and Recuperation,
Bristol: Arnolfini, 2010.
3. Maria Lind, This Is Going to Be Really Funny: Notes on Art, Its Institutions and Their Presumed
Criticality, Bristol: Spike Island and Systemisch, 2004, 33–4.
4. Nav Haq, ‘Declarations: The Polemics of Art Engaged With Conflict’ in Concept Store #3: Art,
Activism and Recuperation, Bristol: Arnolfini, 2010.
5. ‘Art in Service of the Environment: The Ice Bear Project’, WWF.org, 2009.
6. ‘Gameplay Trailer for Recharge’, Music for Relief, 2013; Christina Nunez, ‘“Recharged”:
Linkin Park’s Efforts on Energy Poverty Get Brighter’, National Geographic, 18 November
2013.
7. The game first premiered on Apple Arcade, Apple’s video game service. Apple is also a major
polluter, with gigantic ecological manufacturing costs and waste emissions.
8. Clark Boyd, ‘Darfur Activism Meets Video Gaming’, BBC News, 6 July 2006.
9. Claire Bishop, Artificial Hells: Participatory Art and the Politics of Spectatorship, London and
New York: Verso, 2012, 13.

 10. Jane McGonigal, Reality Is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better and How They Can Change
the World, London: Penguin Books, 2010, 11.
11. Toke Lykkeberg, ‘Political Commitment Is a Beginning, Not an End’, Kunstkritikk.com, 19
September 2016.
12. Nicolas Bourriaud, Relational Aesthetics, Dijon: Les Presses du réel, 2002.
13. Malcolm Miles, The Strange Relation of Art and Politics: Considering an essay by Jacques
Rancière, paper at Loughborough University, for Radical Art Radical Aesthetics, March 2012.
14. ‘Santiago Sierra by Teresa Margolles’, Bomb Magazine 86, 1 January 2004.
15. Collection Items, Whitney Museum of Modern Art, whitney.org.
16. Tania Bruguera, ‘Political Art Transforms the Audience Into Citizens’, Texte Zur Kunst 80,
2010, 133–5.
17. To find out more about where the rich hoard their vast collections, read about Geneva Free Port
and Le Freeport in Singapore. The former hosts a collection three times larger, according to the
New York Times. Hosts is a generous word – the facilities are simply high-end containers with
access only for security and the owners.
18. Kolja Reichert, ‘The Vacuum Cleaner Effect’, Arts of the Working Class, 3 December 2019.
19. Ian Walker, ‘After Being 98% Off for 5 Years, This Indie Game Is Going Up to $100 Forever’,
Kotaku.com, 16 October 2019.
20. Alec Meer, ‘Grab a Free Dog Opera from The Proteus Musicman’, Rock Paper Shotgun, 4
March 2019.
21. wally b kleeposting, @kleeposting, Twitter, 5 March 2023.
22. ‘A Response to PMG’s Disco Elysium Investigation’, YouTube, posted by stushi, 12 June 2023.
23. Claire Bishop, Artificial Hells: Participatory Art and the Politics of Spectatorship, London and
New York: Verso, 2012, 19.
24. David Graeber, ‘The Sadness of Post-Workerism, or “Art and Immaterial Labour”’ in
Revolutions in Reverse: Essays on Politics, Violence, Art, and Imagination, London and New
York: Minor Compositions, 2011, 98.
25. Theodor Adorno, The Culture Industry: Selected Essays on Mass Culture, edited by J. M.
Bernstein, London: Routledge, 1991, 168.
26. Jennifer R. Whitson, ‘Book Review: Graeme Kirkpatrick, Computer Games and the Social
Imaginary, Cambridge, Polity Press, 2013’, Canadian Journal of Sociology, 2014.
27. Ibid.
28. Walter Benjamin, ‘The Author as Producer’, included in Walter Benjamin: Selected Writings,
Volume 2: 1931–1934, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2005.
29. Such as criticising the very close relationship between the corrupt Barclays Bank and the
progressive parts of the UK’s games industry.
30. Philip Oltermann, ‘Post-Internet Artist Hito Steyerl on Refusing Honours, Buying Her Work
Back – and Fighting Big Tech’, Guardian, 13 June 2023.
31. Walter Benjamin: Selected Writings, Volume 4, 1938-1940, Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 2003, 270.

Level IV: Modes of Production
1. Sarah ‘KZ’ Zulkiflee, ‘How Many People Play Genshin Impact in 2022?’, Esports.gg, 1 May
2022; Ann Cao, ‘Genshin Impact Bags US$4 Billion in Sign of Rising Power of China’s Video
Gaming Industry’, South China Morning Post, 2 January 2023. Important to note – there is
absolutely nothing wrong with waifus or husbandos as game characters! They also must be
liberated and unshackled from the profiteering, addiction-inducing incentives that they are
mostly associated with these days.

 2. Lewis Rees, ‘Which Five Mobile Hits Generated $7.2 Billion in Revenue in 2022?’, Pocket
Gamer, 18 January 2023; Owen Mahoney, Shiro Uemura, Investor Presentation Q2 2023,
Nexon Co., Ltd., 9 August 2023, 33.
3. Although in mid-2023, CD Projekt announced a move to Unreal Engine for Cyberpunk, away
from their in-house tools, further solidifying Epic’s influence in games.
4. ‘Are Game Engines the Future of Filmmaking?’, Filmmakers Academy, 26 July 2021.
5. ‘Game Player and App User Privacy Policy’, Unity.com, 15 November 2022.
6. Charlie Hall, ‘The Fury Over the Epic Games Store, Explained’, Polygon. com, 5 April 2019.
7. EA Spouse, ‘EA: The Human Story’, EA Spouse LiveJournal, 11 November 2004.
8. Kate Brice, ‘“Rockstar Spouse” Accuses Dev of Pushing Its Employees “to the Brink”’,
GamesIndustry.biz, 11 January 2010.
9. Ben Gilbert, ‘The Creator of “Fortnite” Reportedly Has a Brutal Work Culture Where Some
Employees Have 100-Hour Work Weeks: “I Hardly Sleep. I’m Grumpy at Home. I Have No
Energy to Go Out.”’, Business Insider, 23 April 2019.
10. 2019 Developer Satisfaction Survey, International Game Developers Association, November
2020.
11. Nathan Grayson, ‘Guild Wars 2 Writers Fired for Calling Out Fan on Twitter’, Kotaku.com, 6
July 2018.
12. Shannon Liao, ‘Since Lawsuit, Riot Games’ Once All-Male Leadership Now Over 20 Percent
Women’, Washington Post, 10 August 2022.
13. Tom DiChristopher, ‘Digital Gaming Sales Hit Record $61 Billion in 2015: Report’,
CNBC.com, 26 January 2016.
14. ‘Court Approves EEOC’s $18 Million Settlement with Activision Blizzard’, US Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, 30 March 2022.
15. Nick Statt, ‘Telltale Under Fire for Prioritizing The Walking Dead Conclusion in Wake of Mass
Layoffs’, The Verge, 25 September 2018; Alissa McAloon, ‘Capcom Shuts Down Dead Rising
Developer Capcom Vancouver’, Game Developer, 18 September 2018; Liana B. Baker,
‘Activision Blizzard Cuts 600 Jobs’, Reuters.com, 29 February 2012.
16. Todd Spangler, ‘Electronic Arts to Lay Off 800 Employees, 6% of Workforce’, Variety.com, 29
March 2023; ‘Electronic Arts Revenue 2010-2023’, Macrotrends.net, 30 September 2023;
Ashley Capoot, ‘Unity Software to Lay Off 600 Employees, or 8% of Its Workforce’,
CNBC.com, 3 May 2023; Ash Parrish, ‘More Layoffs at Another Embracer Group Studio’, The
Verge, 5 December 2023.
17. Ian Williams, ‘It’s Time to Talk About Labor in the Games Industry’, Giant Bomb, 9 February
2016.
18. 2022 UK Games Industry Census, United Kingdom Interactive Entertainment, Ukie.org, 2023.
19. Alex Fernandes, @oneferny, Twitter, 3 October 2021.
20. As of early 2022, the top 10 companies were as follows: Tencent (gaming revenue of $32.2
billion), Sony ($18.2 billion), Apple ($15.3 billion), Microsoft ($13 billion), Google ($11
billion), NetEase ($9.6 billion), Activision Blizzard ($8.1 billion), Nintendo ($8.1 billion), EA
($6.5 billion), Sea Limited ($4.3 billion). Jeffrey Rousseau, ‘Report: Top 10 Companies Made
65% of Global Games Market in 2021’, GamesIndustry.biz, 12 May 2022.
21. Tom Warren, ‘Microsoft Completes Activision Blizzard Acquisition, Call of Duty Now Part of
Xbox’, The Verge, 12 October 2023.
22. Brady Langmann and Josh Rosenberg, ‘Leslie Grace Says Batgirl’s Cancellation Felt “Like
Deflating a Balloon”’, Esquire.com, 13 February 2023.
23. Wenlei Ma, ‘Disney+ Production Nautilus Scrapped after Wrapping on the Gold Coast’,
Guardian, 29 August 2023.
24. Mergers: Commission Clears Acquisition of Activision Blizzard by Microsoft, Subject to
Conditions, press release, European Commission, Brussels, 15 May 2023.

 25. Jay Peters, ‘Microsoft’s Phil Spencer Says Acquiring Nintendo Would Be “A Career Moment”’,
The Verge, 19 September 2023.
26. J. Clement, ‘Steam Gaming Platform – Statistics & Facts’, Statista.com, 10 November 2023.
27. Ibid.
28. ‘Live Nation Entertainment’s Revenue from 2006 to 2022’, Statista.com, February 2023.
29. ‘PC Video Gaming Software Sales Revenue Worldwide from 2008 to 2025’, Statista.com,
August 2021; ‘Console Gaming Revenues Worldwide from 2020 to 2026, by Type’,
Statista.com, May 2023; ‘Mobile Games – Worldwide’, Statista.com; David Curry, ‘Google
Play Store Statistics (2023)’, Business of Apps, 2 May 2023.
30. Jeffrey Rousseau, ‘Mobile Games Accounted for 66% of App Store Spending in 2022’,
GamesIndustry.biz, 17 May 2023.
31. Ibid.
32. ‘DOTA 2 The International Championship Prize Pool from 2011 to 2022’, Statista.com,
November 2022.
33. Some wild stories here: Nicole Carpenter, ‘Philadelphia Fusion Overwatch Player Sado
Apologizes for Boosting’, Dot Esports, 4 December 2017; Kevin Webb, ‘A Gamer Tried to Go
Pro Using a Fake Identity, and the Scandal Could Have Big Consequences for Women in
Esports’, Business Insider, 9 January 2019.
34. Jeffrey Boxer, ‘Doping in Esports: An International Solution to the Problem that No One Is
Talking About’, Medium.com, 9 May 2022.
35. Marijam Didžgalvytė, ‘Esports *Could* Be Sexy, So What’s Going On?’, Medium.com, 21
November 2017.
36. Emily Rand, ‘Rand: Finding the Meaning of Family Through League of Legends’, ESPN.co.uk,
30 September 2019.
37. Andrew Webster, ‘Meet the Counter Strike E-sports Team Where Everyone Is over 60’, The
Verge, 20 December 2017.
38. Cecilia D’Anastasio, ‘Saudi Arabia Is Investing $38 Billion to Become a Video-Game Hub’,
Bloomberg.com, 23 June 2023.
39. Robert Hoogendoorn, ‘Exclusive Dookey Dash Game Does $35 Million in Trading Volume’,
DappRadar.com, 23 January 2023.
40. A great website collating this information live is the Cambridge Bitcoin Electricity
Consumption Index. It is collated by the Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance, Judge
Business School, University of Cambridge.
41. Clint Pumphrey, ‘How Gold Farming Works’, HowStuffWorks.com, 30 April 2015.
42. Lydia DePillis, ‘Click Farms Are the New Sweatshops’, Washington Post, 6 January 2014.
43. Ian Bogost, ‘How Video Games License Guns’, Atlantic, 20 August 2019.
44. Paris Martineau, ‘Amazon Expands Effort to Gamify Warehouse Work’, The Information, 15
March 2021.
45. Adrian Hon, You’ve Been Played, New York: Basic Books, 2022.
46. Wilfred Chan, ‘$7,000 a Day for Five Catchphrases: The TikTokers Pretending to Be “NonPlayable Characters”’, Guardian, 19 July 2023.
47. I want to be completely clear – I find cosplaying an intensely fascinating project. The
craftsmanship and technical prowess demonstrated by cosplay is outstanding! As the daughter of
a seamstress, I find the talent of sewing together complicating materials truly remarkable. It is a
technical skill, a craft, then, rather than a purely creative art of coming up with designs. IP rules
are being followed most of the time. Still, what a feast for the eyes!
48. Daniel Greene, ‘Landlords of the Internet: Big Data and Big Real Estate’, Social Studies of
Science 52: 6, 2022.
49. Ibid.

 50. Ben Abraham, ‘4K & 8K Gaming and Energy Efficiency: How Many Pixels Is Too Many?’,
Greening the Games Industry, 17 May 2022.
51. Ibid.
52. Siddharth Kara, Cobalt Red: How the Blood of the Congo Powers Our Lives, San Francisco: St.
Martin’s Press, 2023.
53. Charlie Campbell, ‘Foxconn Founder Terry Gou Wants to Be Taiwan’s President – and a GoBetween for US and China’, Time.com, 11 July 2019.
54. ‘Beyond Foxconn: Deplorable Working Conditions Characterize Apple’s Entire Supply Chain’,
China Labor Watch, 27 June 2012.
55. Ibid.
56. Bin Jiang, The Foxconn Factory Site, Methods, and Procedure for Design Interventions, Hong
Kong: University of Hong Kong, 2021.
57. David Barboza, ‘IPhone Maker in China Is Under Fire after a Suicide’, New York Times, 26 July
2009.
58. Brian Merchant, ‘Life and Death in Apple’s Forbidden City’, Guardian, 18 June 2017.
59. ‘Beyond Foxconn: Deplorable Working Conditions Characterize Apple’s Entire Supply Chain’,
China Labor Watch, 27 June 2012.
60. Jenny Chan, Ngai Pun, Mark Selden, ‘Dying for an iPhone: the Lives of Chinese Workers’,
China Dialogue, 15 April 2016.
61. Han Tang, ‘China’s Young Workers Fight Back at Foxconn’, Labor Notes, 13 August 2013.
62. Shannon Liao, ‘Amazon and Foxconn Reportedly Strip Workers of Benefits and Pay Low
Wages in Chinese Factory’, The Verge, 11 June 2018.
63. Michael Sainato, ‘“They’re More Concerned about Profit”: Osha, Doj Take On Amazon’s
Gruelling Working Conditions’, Guardian, 2 March 2023.
64. Ben Abraham, ‘What’s the Game Industry’s Plastic Footprint?’, Greening the Games Industry,
17 April 2023.
65. Lewis Gordon, ‘The Many Ways Video Game Development Impacts the Climate Crisis’, The
Verge, 5 May 2020.
66. Alex Hern, ‘TechScape: Will the Video Games Industry Ever Confront Its Carbon Footprint?’,
Guardian, 13 April 2022.
67. Lewis Gordon, ‘How to Make the Video Game Industry Greener’, Wired. com, 9 June 2022.
68. Offsetting is a corruption-ridden approach where a private company promises to do something,
normally to plant trees, to offset the CO2 emissions of a funding organisation. Notably, some
game companies like Sumo Group, for instance, choose to offset locally, funding peatlands in
the UK which lock in huge amounts of carbon. The results are then easier to verify and see with
one’s own eyes compared to other approaches.
69. Green Games Guide, Report, United Kingdom Interactive Entertainment, 2021.
70. Lewis Gordon, ‘This Videogame Is Killing the Planet’, ArtReview.com, 8 December 2021.
71. Check out more of Dr Ben Abraham’s brilliant blog: benabraham.net.
72. Wes Davis and Richard Lawler, ‘Nvidia Became a $1 Trillion Company Thanks to the AI
Boom’, Verge, 31 May 2023.
73. ‘The TVs, monitors, and laptops of CES 2024 / Today on The Vergecast, it’s screens all the way
down’, Verge podcast, 10 January 2024.

Conclusion: Final Boss
1. Leonard E. Read, ‘I, Pencil: My Family Tree as Told to Leonard E. Read’, Irvington-on-Hudson,
New York: Foundation for Economic Education, 1998.
2. Ibid.

 3. Lewis Gordon, ‘The Environmental Impact of a PlayStation 4’, The Verge, 5 December 2019.
4. Viola Zhou, ‘AI Is Already Taking Video Game Illustrators’ Jobs in China’, Rest of World, 11
April 2023.
5. David Graeber, Bullshit Jobs: A Theory, New York: Simon & Schuster, 2018.
6. Laine Brotherton, ‘Are Bots a Threat to Multiplayer Games?’, Michigan Daily, 8 April 2021.
7. Anthony Cuthbertson, ‘“Subscribe to PewDiePie”: What Did Christchurch Mosque Gunman
Mean in Final Words Before Shooting?’, Independent.co.uk, 15 March 2019.
8. Toxicity in Multiplayer Games Report, Unity, 2023.
9. Theodor Adorno, The Culture Industry: Selected Essays on Mass Culture, edited by J. M.
Bernstein, London: Routledge, 1991.
10. David Graeber, The Utopia of Rules: On Technology, Stupidity, and the Secret Joys of
Bureaucracy, New York: Melville House, 2015.
11. David Graeber, Revolutions in Reverse: Essays on Politics, Violence, Art, and Imagination,
London and New York: Minor Compositions, 2011, 111.
12. Marijam Didžgalvytė, @marijamdid, Twitter, 8 March 2023.
13. ‘Namibia Bans Export of Unprocessed Critical Minerals’, Reuters.com, 8 June 2023.
14. ‘Finnish Game Industry Model for CO2 Emissions Calculations – An Update’, Neogames
Finland, May 2023.
15. Sophie McEvoy, ‘Die Gute Fabrik and the Necessity to Tackle Climate Inaction’,
GamesIndustry.biz, 26 October 2023.
16. Read more about all their brilliant victories on their website: code-cwa.org.
17. ‘Mission Statement’, Game Workers Alliance.
18. Gene Maddaus, ‘SAG-AFTRA to Set More Talks with Video Game Companies in Hopes of
Averting Second Strike’, Variety.com, 16 October 2023.
19. Nicole Carpenter, ‘Corsair’s Warehouse Workers Make Pennies Compared to CEO’s Millions –
and Now They’re Fighting Back’, Polygon.com, 15 September 2023; Nicole Carpenter,
‘Tabletop, Card Game Retailers Join the Game Industry’s Burgeoning Union Push’,
Polygon.com, 9 November 2022.
20. ‘Escape Room Workers Union Goes Public’, Industrial Workers of the World (IWW), 2 July
2023.
21. Nathan Grayson, ‘Game Studio With No Bosses Pays Everyone the Same’, Kotaku.com, 25 July
2018.
22. Imogen West-Knights, ‘Fine Dining Faces Its Dark Truths in Copenhagen’, Financial Times, 2
June 2022.
23. Jeffrey Rousseau, ‘Dutch Government Seeks to Ban Loot Boxes’, GamesIndustry.biz, 3 July
2023; James Batchelor, ‘Microsoft, EA, Activision, Ubisoft and Epic Face Game Addiction
Lawsuit’, GamesIndustry.biz, 8 November 2023; Ash Parrish, ‘Former Ubisoft Executives
Arrested After Sexual Harassment Investigation’, The Verge, 4 October 2023; Jeffrey Rousseau,
‘South Korean Government Charges Game Rating and Administration Committee with
Embezzlement’, GamesIndustry.biz, 5 July 2023.
24. Simon Parkin, ‘Elden Ring Review – An Unrivalled Masterpiece of Design and Inventiveness’,
Guardian, 23 February 2022.
25. Mary Flanagan and Helen Nissenbaum, Values at Play in Digital Games, Cambridge: MIT
Press, 2014, 3.
26. ‘Foldit Players Beat Scientists in Determining a Protein’s Shape’, Graduate School of Arts and
Sciences, Harvard University, 3 October 2016.
27. Full disclosure – at the moment, I work for the company making the title.
28. A highly recommended read – a beautiful interview with Zotov: Fuzz, ‘Space Spy: Interview
with Vasily Zotov’, TigSource.com, 20 November 2009.

 29. ‘Skyrim – Thomas the Tank Engine Mod (HD)’, YouTube, 12 December 2013, posted by
lambo_96.
30. Patricia Hernandez, ‘Thomas the Tank Engine Mod Got Skyrim Player in Legal Trouble’,
Polygon.com, 15 May 2019.
31. Claire Bishop, Artificial Hells: Participatory Art and the Politics of Spectatorship, London and
New York: Verso, 2012, 284.
32. ‘FRANCIS ALŸS: Children’s Games 1999–2022’, press release, Copenhagen Contemporary,
2022.
33. Max Horkheimer and Theodor W. Adorno, Dialectic of Enlightenment, Stanford: Stanford
University Press, 2002, pp. 137, 143.
34. A reformulation of the famous quote, ‘If I can’t dance, it’s not my revolution!’, attributed to the
legendary anarchist Emma Goldman.
35. ‘Helmers and Hill Argue that Visual Rhetoric Is Particularly Essential in the Face of
Globalization and Mass Media’, insights from Ian Bogost, Persuasive Games: The Expressive
Power of Videogames, Cambridge: MIT Press 2007, 21; John Clark, ‘The Society of the
Spectacle, Reconsidered’, Fifth Estate.org, 1 June 2015.
36. Raymond Williams, Resources of Hope: Culture, Democracy, Socialism, London and New York:
Verso, 1989, 118.
OceanofPDF.com

 Index

010101: Art in Technological Times exhibition, San Francisco Museum of Modern Art 5
4chan 18, 119–20, 120
165 Halsey Street (telecoms org) 204
1870: Cyberpunk Forever (game) 90–1
1979 Revolution: Black Friday (game) 91
2011 London Riots 117
A Clockwork Orange (film) 72
A Hand with Many Fingers (game) 169
A Little to the Left (game) 55
Abraham, Ben 212, 214
Activision Blizzard 64, 66, 188, 191
addictive videogames 6, 7, 22, 58, 96, 179, 215, 219, 227–228
Adobe Flash 59
Adorno, Theodor 173–5
Adventure (game) 39
aesthetics 5, 75, 86, 92, 100, 147, 152, 235
Afrocomix 58
Agamar, Haargoth 108
Age of Empires (game) 85
Aimpoint 52
Alba: A Wildlife Adventure (game) 149–50
Alcorn, Allan 27, 28
Alibaba (company) 204
altruism 12, 111, 234
Alÿs, Francis 234–5
Amazon (company) 203, 211
AMD (Advanced Micro Devices, Inc) 218
America’s Army (game) 50
Andre, Carl 165, 166
Animal Crossing (game) 55
Anime 40, 71, 176, 232
Annapurna Interactive 228
antifascism 14, 19, 101, 117, 168–9, 198
anti-Semitic tropes 115
Apple (company) 36–7, 57, 214
Apple App Store 193–4
Arab Spring 221
Arbitrary Metric (games studio) 232

 arcade culture 11, 26, 27, 39, 46–47
ArenaNet 183
Argentina 4, 171, 224, 226, 232
arms companies 52–3, 202–3
artificial intelligence 26, 46, 69, 175, 215, 220
Atari 27, 28–9
advertising 39
outsourcing 41–2
profits 36
sexist corporate culture 37–8, 183
Atomic Heart (game) 115
Atuel (game) 232
augmented reality 136
Augustin, Andrew 90
Australia 111, 189, 212, 224
Austria 76, 212, 230
avant-garde art 100, 230, 232
avatars 69, 80–82, 97, 112–113
Avatar (film) 3
Avatar: The Way of Water (film) 3
Aveiro-Ojeda, Santo 90–1
Avengers: Endgame (film) 3
BAFTA Awards 88
Balenciaga 69
Band of Brothers 106–8, 109
Bangalore 58
Banksy 164
Bannon, Steve 16–17, 18, 61, 68
Barbican 4
Barbie Fashion Designer (game) 41
Barclays Bank 196
Barlow, Sam 232
baroque 100–1, 227
Barrett Firearms 52
Batgirl (film) 189
Battlefield 1 (game) 111
Battlefield 2042 (game) 214
Baudrillard, Jean 101
BBC console 30
Behind the Frame (game) 92
Belarus 68
Belgium 234
Benjamin, Walter 175–6, 176
Berke, Larry 39
Bertie the Brain 25–6
Beyond Interface exhibit, Walker Art Center, Minneapolis 5
BioShock (game series) 86–7
Bishop, Claire 150–1, 172, 232–3
BitStreams exhibition, Whitney Museum of American Art 5

 Bitsy 102
Black Card Revoked (game) 89–90
Black Lives Matter movement 131–2
Blackbird Interactive 226
Blitzkrieg (game) 11
Blizzard Entertainment 111, 129–30, 197
Bogost, Ian 54, 73
border control practices 87–9
Boston Computer Society 40
Bourdieu, Pierre 145
Bourriaud, Nicolas 152
boycotts 115–16
Brazil 124–5, 131, 224
Breakout (game) 36
Breitbart News 16–17, 18
British Film Institute 104
British Library 96, 104
British Museum 172
Brookhaven National Laboratory 26
Brotopia: Breaking Up the Boys’ Club of Silicon Valley (Chang) 33
Bruguera, Tania 159, 164
Buck Up and Drive! (game) 116, 117
Bunchball 54
Burden, Chris 76, 159–60
Burry, Michael 120–1
Bushnell, Nolan 27, 28, 37
Call of Duty (game) 51, 115, 130, 192, 202
Call of Duty 4: Modern Warfare (game) 85
Call of Duty: Black Ops (game) 205
Cambridge Analytica 1
Cambridge, University of 25
Cameroon 58
Cambodia 202, 219
Campaign to Organize Digital Employees-Communications Workers of America 225
Canada 25, 121, 168
Canadian National Exhibition, 1950 25–6
Candy Crush Saga (game) 57–8, 193, 228
Cannon, William M. 33–4
Capcom 46, 134–5
capital 30, 107, 118, 123, 140, 145, 148, 153, 172–3, 182, 198, 211, 221, 236
capitalism 12, 13, 15, 20, 21, 55, 68, 81–2, 100, 102, 120, 123, 133, 141, 163, 173, 174, 176, 197,
206, 222, 235, 237
carbon footprint 8, 201, 212–14, 224
Cardboard Computer 231
Carmack, Adrian 43
Carmack, John 43
Carnegie Mellon University 26
Castle Wolfenstein (game) 43
CCP Games 108

 CD Projekt 180
Chamberlain, Lula 232
Chang, Emily 33
Cheong, Ian Miles 61
child trafficking 207
China 3, 111–12, 114, 181, 209–11, 220
The Chinese Room (British games studio) 90, 228
Christchurch mosque massacre 63, 220
Chun-Li (Street Fighter character) 82
Citadel LLC 122
Citarella, Joshua 110
Civilization (game series) 85
civic agendas 21
civic engagement 108, 140–2
civic entities, gamers as 109–17
civic implications 94–8
civic life, participation in 141
civic productivity 140
civic systems 108–9
Clarke, Joan 32
Clapton Community Football Club 198
click farms 68, 201–2
climate change 8, 148–150, 201, 212–14, 224
Clinton, Hillary 95
CO2 emissions 8, 201, 213, 214, 224
Cohen, Ryan 121
colonialism 50, 51, 84–91
Columbine School massacre 72–3
Colt’s 52
Combat (game) 39
Command and Conquer: Tiberian Sun (game) 11
Commodore 41
Commodore 64 34
Communications Decency Act (US) 130
community events, licensing requirements 134–5
competition 11, 26, 41, 191, 235
Computer Space (game) 27, 28
Conflict: Desert Storm (game) 11
Conflict Kitchen (game) 157
Congo, Democratic Republic of the 8, 93, 206–7
consolidation, game companies 188–91, 192
consumer protest 113–17, 192
co-operatives 20, 70, 226
Corbyn Run (game) 95
Corbyn, Jeremy 95
Coreth, Mark 148
corporate culture, sexist 36–8
Cosmology of Kyoto (game) 48
cosplay 204
Counter-Strike (game) 130, 199

 COVID-19 pandemic 2, 120, 128
crash of 1983 38–42
Crazy Rich Asians (film) 103
Croatia 30
Croft, Lara 82
Crow Crow Crow 226
crunch 65, 160, 182–183, 185, 191
cryptocurrency 200, 201, 202
curation 4, 191–5
Cyberpunk 2077 (game) 180
D’Anastasio, Cecilia 38
Dabney, Ted 27, 28
Daniel Defense 52
Darfur Is Dying (game) 150
Dark Souls (game) 133
data centre logistics 204–5
Dayton shootings, Ohio 63
De Montfort University 96
Dead Cells (game) 226
Dead or Alive (game) 79
Dead Pets Unleashed (game) 83
Dean, Howard 94–5
Dear Esther (game) 6
deaths, hardware manufacturing workers 209–10
Debord, Guy 136
Dell 208
Deller, Jeremy 76–7
Denes, Agnes, Wheatfield 147–8
de Peuter, Greig 15, 81
Denmark 92, 164, 224, 227
Depression Quest (game) 62
dérive 136, 139
Detention (game) 232
Deterding, Sebastian 53
Didžgalvytė, Marijam 9–11, 13–15, 15–16, 18–20, 23–4
Die Gute Fabrik 224
digital humanities 96
Disco Elysium (game) 168–9, 189
Discord channels 8, 129
Disney Character Voices International 66
Disney Plus 189
Dookey Dash (game) 200
Doom (game) 5, 10, 40, 41, 44–5, 46, 48, 205
dopamine 53
Dota 2 4, 195
doxxing 18
Dreisinger, Baz 156–7
drones 52
drugs and drug abuse 196

 Duke Nukem (game) 49, 79
Dungavel Immigration Removal Centre 87
Dungeon Fighter Online (game) 179
Dyer-Witheford, Nick 15, 81
dyslexia 69
Ebert, Roger 60
Edgehill University 81
Egypt 127, 128
El Paso massacre 220–1
Elden Ring (game) 213, 228–9, 237
election games 94–6
Electronic Arts (EA) 65, 66, 111, 113, 115, 131, 182
Electronic Games (magazine) 39
Elephant (film) 73
Eliasson, Olafur 148
Elite Dangerous (game) 112–13
Embracer Group 184
endorphins 49, 58
energy consumption 212–14, 230–1
Enigma machine 32
Entertainment Software Association 3
Eotech 52
Equinix 204
Epic Games 180, 181
Epic Store 194
esports 3–4, 46, 52, 195–200
Estonia 168
Euro Truck Simulator (game) 54
Eurofiber 204
European Commission 191
European Union 13, 97
Ethiopia 58, 90
EVE Online (game) 22, 106–8
EverQuest (game) 133–4
Everybody’s Gone to the Rapture (game) 90, 231
extractivism 179, 236
Facebook 54, 130
Famicom 38–9
Fan, Lai-Tze 89
Fantasy Westward Journey (game) 22, 114
far-right 8, 17–18, 23, 114, 119, 128
FarmVille (game) 54
fashion industry 69, 91, 148, 224
Fenty Beauty 198
Fernandes, Alex 187–8
Fields, Derrick 90
FIFA (organisation) 203
FIFA World Cup Qatar 2022 69–70

 FIFA World Cup (game) 65, 195
Fighting games 46–8
Final Fantasy VII (game) 82
financial crisis, 2008 119–23
Financial Times (newspaper) 114, 170, 227
Fine Art
agility 159
impact on society 15
institutional critique 161–2
participatory 147–53
political 156–62
potential to inform games 156–62
social achievements 172
utility 172
videogames as 4–5
Finland 148–9, 224
Finnish Game Developers’ Association 224
Firewatch (game) 182
Fisher, Mark 99
Flanagan, Mary 229
Fluxus Art Movement 230
Foldit (game) 229
Forbes Global 2000 companies 54
Fortnite Battle Royale (game) 79, 180, 182
Football 19, 65, 69, 192, 195, 198–199, 203, 228
Foursquare app 54
Foxconn 8, 163, 209–10, 211
France 37, 71, 73, 144, 187, 226, 227, 243
Frankfurt 173
Fraser, Andrea 161–2, 166
FreeCell (game) 11
Freeciv 49–50
Friedman, Milton 217
Friedrich Petzel Gallery 162
Fry, Edward 158
Fuel Rats 112–13
gacha mechanics 179
gachapons 179
Gage, Manon 83
Gage, Zach 167
Galaksija (game) 30
gambling 22, 26, 47, 69–70, 178, 201, 227
Game and Watch 29
Game Arts International Association 4
Game Boy 29
game companies, consolidation 134, 188–92, 192, 237
Game Developers Conference, 2018 19, 66–7
game engines 43, 44, 59, 69, 180–4,
Game Workers Alliance 225

 Game Workers Unite International 19, 67, 186–7
The Gameful World: Approaches, Issues, Applications (Walz and Deterding) 53
Gamergate 18, 61–3, 118–19
Games Beyond Entertainment 143
Games Done Quick 118
Games for Impact 143
Games for Peace 69
Games of Empire (Dyer-Witheford and de Peuter) 81–2
GamesIndustry.biz 19
GameStop short squeeze 119–23
gamification 52–5, 68, 203
Gara 58
Garriott, Richard 113
Gears of War (game) 85
gender portrayal and stereotypes 32, 33–4, 78–84
Genshin Impact (game) 178, 182
Germany 63, 90, 105, 111, 131, 155, 173, 175, 198, 220, 230
Get Water! (game) 149
Ghana 58
Godard, Jean-Luc 71
gold farmers 17
Goldman Sachs 120
Google 32
Google Play 193
Goldsmiths College, University of London 15–16
Goonswarm 106–8, 109
Gordon, Lewis 8, 212–13, 213, 214
Gotcha (game) 36
Gou, Terry 209
GPS spoofing 138–9
Graeber, David 172–3, 222
Grand Theft Auto (game) 79
Grand Theft Auto 3 (game) 59
Grand Theft Auto 4 (game) 2–3, 139
Grand Theft Auto: Vice City (game) 85
Gray, Kishonna 89
Grayson, Nathan 62
Greene, Daniel 204
Greer, Samantha 104
Guardian (newspaper) 18, 62–3, 228–9
Guild Wars (game series) 183
Guinness World Record 41
Gutai Art Association 230
Haacke, Hans, Shapolsky et al. Manhattan Real Estate Holdings, A Real Time Social System, as of
May 1, 1971 157–8, 169
Hades (game) 90
Hall, Stuart 16
Hall, Tom 43
Halle (city in Germany) 63, 220

 Halo 3 (game) 79
Haq, Nav 146
harassment 7, 18, 80, 183–4, 227
hardware
creation issues 23
design 41
prices 59
production 8, 36, 206–11
waste 211–14
hardware building, outsourcing 36
hardware manufacturing workers 209–11
Harmondsworth Immigration Removal Centre 87
Harvard University 26
Haw, Brian 158–9
Hawk, Tony 203
Her Story (game) 5–6
Hern, Alex 213
Hewlett-Packard (HP) 208
Hidden Figures (film) 32
Hillstock, Cara 90
hit boxes 75
Hogwarts Legacy (game) 115–16
Hollywood 32, 66, 83, 102, 104, 189, 228, 230
Holocaust, the 153–4
home consoles, spread of 47–8
Homo Ludens (Huizinga) 9
homophobia 80
Hong Kong 41, 208, 210
Hopper, Grace 31–2
Hotline Miami (game) 77–8
‘How to Design Games That Promote Racial Equity’ 89
How to Not: A Guide to Avoiding Worst Practices 89
The Howard Dean for Iowa Game (game) 94–5
Hsieh, Tehching 160
Huizinga, Johan, Homo Ludens 9
human trafficking 218
husbandos 178
I Am Rich (game) 165, 166
IBM 53
System Development Corporation 33–4
IBM Programmer Aptitude Test 33
id Software 43–5
Idol Worship (Keeble) 148
Imangi Studios 114
immaterial labour 132–5
immersion 42–6, 45, 140
Immortality (game) 83, 232
imperialist propaganda 12, 84–91
Inception (film) 231

 Independent Workers’ Union of Great Britain 19
India 58–9, 68, 149, 211, 224, 231
indie game revolution 59–61
Inscryption (game) 231
Inflation Reduction Act (US) 223
influencers 8, 123, 194
information presentation 157–8, 169–73
in-game economies 68, 113
Insight Technologies 52
institutional critique 161–2
intellectual property 41, 46, 189–90, 191–2
International Game Developers Association (IGDA) 66–7, 183
International Rescue Committee 93
iPhone 57, 209
Islamophobia 115, 126
Islands (game) 97
isolation 96, 141, 229–30
Israel 51, 69, 75, 95
Israel Defense Forces 51
Italy 148, 156, 163
Iwatani, Toru 39
Jackson, Mary 32
Jacobin (magazine) 102–3
Jameson, Fredric 102
Jane’s IAF: Israeli Air Force 51
Japan 29–30, 38–40, 46, 56, 114
Jimquisition, the 227
Jingle Jam (game) 118
job insecurity 184–5
Jobs, Steve 205–6
Johnson, Boris 95
Johnson, Katherine 32
The Jungle (Sinclair) 102
Kadir, Aynur 89
Kalashnikov Concern 52
Kara, Siddharth 206–7
Kaunas 10, 13
Keeble, Laura, Idol Worship 148
Keith, Brandon 112–13
Kenya 58
King (games company) 57–8
Kitfox Games 226
kitsch 93
Kocurek, Carly A. 47
Koons, Jeff 93
Kotaku 19, 38
Kotick, Bobby 64
Kushner, David 43

 Kuuluu Interactive Entertainment 149
LA Noire (game) 182
La Petite Mort (game) 164–5
Labour – Elections 96 (game) 95
LAN party 13, 48
The Last Guardian (game) 104
The Last of Us (game) 82
The Last of Us Part II (game) 83–4
The Last of Us (TV show) 83–4, 104
latency 47
LAZA KNITEZ!! 165–6
Lazzarato, Maurizio 132
League of Legends (game) 3–4, 183–4, 199
Leake, John 96
learning disabilities 53
Lebanon 51
Ledonne, Danny 72–3
Left Left Up (game) 19
The Legend of Zelda (game) 30
leisure activity 173–4, 237
LGBTQ+ 80, 83–4, 131, 196
Liberal Crime Squad (game) 91
licensing 134–5, 202–3
Lien, Tracey 39–40, 40
Life Is Strange (game) 82
Ligman, Kris 169
Lind, Maria 146–7
Linkin Park (band) 149
Lithuania 10, 13
Loach, Ken 230
Local area network (LAN) parties 14, 48
Lockhart, Brian 82
Lockhart, Tifa 82
Lode Runner (game) 44
London 13, 96, 106, 126, 148, 154, 198, 219
loot boxes 110, 201–2, 227
Lose/Lose (game) 167
Lovable Hat Cult 164–5
The Love Tester (game) 29
LP Recharge (game) 149
ludology 21, 98
Lynch, David 83, 232
McDonald’s 148, 152, 163
McDonald’s Video Game (game) 163
McGonigal, Jane 151–2
machinimas 45
Mafia: City of Lost Heaven (game) 11, 59
Magnavox 27–8

 Manga 178, 189
manufacturing 8
labour abuses 42
outsourcing 41–2, 218
Malevich, Kazimir 230
Margolis, Jane 35
Mario Kart (game) 190
marketing 39–40, 170–1, 191–2
Marvelisation 189
Marx, Karl 67, 132
Mass Lone Demos campaign 159
mass-shootings 12, 220–1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) 25, 26
massively multiplayer online role-playing games 91, 106, 109, 113, 134, 201
Masters of Doom: How Two Guys Created an Empire and Transformed Pop Culture (Kushner) 43
Matajuegos 226, 232
Mattel 231
Max Payne (game) 59
Max Payne 3 (game) 182
May, Theresa 95
Medal of Honour (game) 51
mega-factories 209–11
Melvin Capital 122
memeology 118
mental health therapy 96–7
Messer, Maddie 114
Meta 204
Metacritic 194
Metal Gear (game) 190
Mexico 118, 127, 129, 171
micropayments 200
Microsoft 188, 191, 192, 193, 202, 214, 219, 224
microtransactions 108, 201
middleware 180
Midway (game) 39
militarisation / military propaganda 7, 49–52
military/games companies collaboration 50–2
Militsioner (game) 231
Minecraft (game) 3, 22, 125–7
Mini Metro (game) 231
Mini Motorways (game) 231
Miners’ Strike, 1984 76–7
misogyny 40, 78–84, 86, 183
mobile games 55–8, 59, 178–9, 193–4
mobile phones 56–8
modders and modding 5, 44, 135, 138–40
moderation 130
modes of production 12, 12–13, 99, 141, 163, 177–216, 217–21
alternatives 223–8
centralisation 188–91, 192

 creation 180–91
curation 191–5
destruction 206–16
hardware 211–14
layers of 179n
liberation from 232
new conceptual framework 228–37
publication 191–4
reach 195–206
shopfront curation 194
uniqueness 187
work conditions 182–8
Molleindustria 163
Museum of Modern Art 4
monopolies 134, 188–91, 192
Montano, Linda 160
moral dilemmas 88, 153
moral judgement 52, 75
moral panic 165
moral values 72, 171
Moran, Shalev 177
Mortal Kombat (game) 74
Motion Twin 226
Mulholland Drive (film) 232
Mumbai 58
Murakami, Takashi 93
Museum of Modern Art 48, 60
Myanmar 130
Myst (game) 40–1
Namibia 223
narrative 5–6, 21, 22, 49, 72, 91–4, 98, 104
NASA mathematicians 32
National Football League (NFL) 3, 203
Navalny, Alexei 126
Nazis 11, 43, 63, 76, 84, 126, 128–9, 154
NBC News 128–9
Negri, Antonio 132
neo-baroque 158
neo-Nazi networks 126, 128–9
nerdy-man gender stereotype 33–4
NetEase 111
Netflix 68–9
Netherlands 227
New York 127, 147, 155, 156, 157, 160, 171
New York Times (newspaper) 35, 41, 62–3
Newsgames: Journalism at Play (Schweizer, Bogost, and Ferrari) 73
N-Gage 57
NieR: Automata (game) 231
Nigeria 58

 Night in the Woods (game) 83
Ninja (streamer) 126
Nintendo 29–30, 38–9, 56, 134, 219
Nintendo DS 30
Nintendo Switch 29
Nissenbaum, Helen 229
Nokia 57, 148
Noma (restaurant) 227
non-disclosure agreements 184, 192
non-fungible tokens (NFTs) 69, 200–1
non-playable characters 78, 203–4
NPC streaming 203–4
NTT Global Data Centers 204
Nvidia 215
Obscure Game Aesthetics Twitter account 231
Obsidian Entertainment 90
Occupy demonstrations 221
Odyssey (games console) 28
Oikospiel Book I (game) 166
Olympic Esports Games 195
OneAsia 204
Orgreave, Battle of 76–7
Oscars 92
Oui (magazine) 37
outsourcing 7, 36
manufacturing 41–2, 218
software development 67–8
Overwatch (game) 129–30, 198, 199
Overwatch League 196
Pac-Man (game) 39, 60
Paharia, Rajat 54
Palestine 1, 51, 69, 75
Pan, Jen 102–3
Panasonic 148
Pan Africa Gaming Group (PAGG) 58
Papers, Please (game) 87–9, 143–4, 153, 154
Paratopic (game) 232
PARC Xerox 25
Parkin, Simon 228–9
participatory fine art 147–53
Pedercini, Paolo 163
Pedigree Tactics (game) 231
Pelosi, Nancy 63
Pentiment (game) 90, 231
Peres, Shimon 95
performance art 133, 159–60, 162
Perry, Dallas K. 33–4
PewDiePie 126

 Philippines 202
Phone Story (game) 163, 167, 170
Pinchbeck, Dan 6
online piracy 45, 48, 125
Planetary Annihilation (game) 133
platform games 42
Playboy (magazine) 37
Playing for the Planet Alliance (initiative) 224
PlayMancer (games) 97
PlayStation 8, 11, 59, 193, 208, 211, 213–214, 218
Pokémon 30, 190
Pokémon Go (game) 136–9, 231
Poland 106, 171
political activism 123–7
political actors 48–52
political agendas 50
political agents, gamers as 117–23
political art 145, 146–7, 153–62
political awakening 116
political awareness 144
political convictions 13
political correctness 18
political disillusionment 221
political engagement 215, 233–4
political expression 108–9, 125, 126, 127–32, 198–9
political formations 135–40
political intentions 22
political intrusions 62
political meaning 71, 109
political narrative 91–4
political negotiation 95
political organising 13–15
political participation 140
political party membership 141
political platforms, videogames as 127–32
political space, gaming as 19
political stances 7
political transformation 144
political utility 22
politicisation 115, 123–7
politics 12, 20, 22, 23, 135–6, 234
Pollock, Jackson 161
Polygon 39
Pong (games) 28–9, 36, 37
Pope, Lucas 87–8, 157
porn industry 37
poverty porn 155
Prevent Cancer Foundation 118
Price, Jessica 183
Programmer Scale 34

 programmers
aptitude tests 33
characterisation 33–4
characteristics 31, 33
children 34–5
demographic 31–8
exclusion 35–6
male domination 31–8
psychological’ evaluation 33–4
women 31–3, 35
propaganda 21, 50–1, 84–91, 94, 100
Proteus effect 80–1
Pudding Lane Productions 96
pump-and-dump schemes 202
Pune 58
punk 13, 83, 101–2, 230
Pupperazzi (games) 92
Putin, Vladimir 2, 115, 126–7
puzzle games 42
QAnon 129
Quake (games) 10, 48, 205
Quake III Arena (games) 195
quality assurance (qa) workers 185
Quatar 69
Quinn, Zoë 18, 61–2
racial identities 85
racism 12, 85, 86, 126
racist depictions 50
radicalisation 34, 119, 128–9
Ramington Firearms 52
Raptor Boyfriend: A High School Romance (game) 231
Rare (game studio) 30
rare metals 206–7, 223
Raspberry Pi 222
Raven Software 225
raw materials extraction 207–9, 223
Read, Leonard E. 217
reciprocal altruism 111, 234
recuperation 146
recycling 224
Red Candle Games 232
Red Dead Redemption (game) 182
Reddit 18
Reed, Adolph L., Jr 103
Reeves, Byron 53
regulation 74, 124–5
relational aesthetics 152–3
relational art 133

 Reporters without Borders 127
representation 98–105, 146
of women 78–84, 90, 105
reputation systems 53–4
Resident Evil (game) 49
Resident Evil 5 (game) 85
Return to Castle Wolfenstein (game) 11
revenues 188–91
crash of 1983 38
mobile gaming 193–4
review bombing 116–117
Rihanna 198
Rinse and Repeat (game) 232
Riot Games 183–4, 197
Riteng Electronics 8, 210
Robin Hood (legendary character) 122
Robinhood (app) 119–23, 203
Roblox (game) 22, 128–9
Roblox Corporation 128–9
Rock Paper Shotgun 62
Rockstar Games 182
Rockstar North 2, 30
Roman Sands RE:Build (game) 232
Romero, Brenda 153–4
Romero, John 43, 46
Rowling, J. K. 115
Rugoff, Ralph 165
Ruiz, Susana 150
Russian Federation 1, 77, 115, 126, 127, 202, 219, 228, 230, 231
GPS spoofing 138–9
invasion of Ukraine 115, 118
Rwanda 58
Ryerson, Liz 93–4
Sagrada Familia 230
Sailor Moon (manga) 189
Saint Petersburg Institute of Performing Arts 10
Saltsea Chronicles (game) 224
Samsung Electronics 208
San Diego synagogue shootings 63
San Francisco Museum of Modern Art 5
Sanders, Bernie 95
Sarkeesian, Anita 18, 62
Saudi Arabia 115, 200, 212
school shootings 72–3
Schubert, Stefan 84–5
Scotland 6, 30, 198, 230
Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA) 66, 225
Second Life (game) 81
self-harming 130

 self-organisation 12, 124
self-publishing 192
Send Me to Heaven (game) 167
Senegal 58
Senteio, Michelle (‘Missy’) 90
Serious Organised Crime and Police Act (SOCPA) 158, 159
sexism 78–84, 105, 183–4
sexist rhetoric 12
sexual harassment 7, 80, 183–4, 227
digital shopfront curation 194
shoutcasters 197
Sid Meier’s Colonization (game) 49–50
Sierra, Santiago 154–6, 166
Silicon Valley 31, 65, 161
The Sims (game) 10, 55–6, 115, 127, 131–2, 230
Sinclair Research 30
Sinclair, Upton 102–103
Sinclair ZX80 30
Situationist International 136, 138, 235
skin colour, change options in game 91
Skyrim (game) 231
SlothOfDoom (Reddit user) 137
Slovakia 30
Slovenia 30
Snake (game) 57
social capital 102, 130, 143, 145–7, 155, 158, 175–6
social media 7, 60–1, 127–8, 130, 221, 233
Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum 157
Sony 8, 133–134, 192, 193, 208, 214, 219, 224
Sony Online Entertainment 133–4
South Africa 58
South Korea 3, 131, 199, 224, 227
South by Southwest (SXSW) festival 54
Soviet Union 10, 30
Space Impact 2 (game) 57
Space Invaders (game) 39
Spacewar! (game) 27
Spain 154, 156, 230
SPARX (game) 96–7
spin doctors 49
Splash Damage 226
Squatting 14
Squid Game (game) 3
St Pauli Football Club 198
Stack Overflow (game) 53–4
Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 27
Stanford University 25
StarCraft (game) 48
Stardew Valley (game) 55
Steam (game publishing platform) 116–17, 163, 193–4

 Steyerl, Hito 176
Still Wakes the (game) 229–30
STJV (French games industry union) 187
story and storytelling 5–6, 45, 49, 75, 103–4
Stowe, Harriet Beecher 102–3
Street Fighter (game) 82, 134–5
Street Fighter 2 (game) 5, 46, 75, 205
strike, labour 66, 76, 77, 190, 211,
Studio Oleomingus 231
subcultures 34
Sudan 150
Super Bowl, viewers 3–4
Super Columbine Massacre RPG! (game) 72–3
Super Mario (game) 30, 40, 190
Super Mario Bros. 2 (game) 83
Super Mario World (game) 49
Super Nintendo Entertainment Systems 29, 29–30
Super Smash Bros (game) 190
surrealism 231–2
Sweden 146
Sweeney, Tim 181
Switzerland 71
Symantec 202
Syria 51, 75
System Development Corporation 33–4
Table Tennis (game) 28
Taiwan 41, 208, 211, 218, 225, 232
Takala, Pilvi 148–9, 155–6
Tamatipico (game) 163
Tampon Run (game) 231
Tank (game) 36
Tanzania 58
Tate Britain 158, 172
Tate Modern 104, 148, 172
tax and taxation 52
Tax Avoiders (game) 94
Teen Vogue (magazine) 198
Tekken (game) 195
Tell Me Why (game) 83
Telltale Games 184
Temple Run (game) 114
Tencent 181, 188
Tennis for Two (game) 26
Tetris (game) 19, 30, 60
Thatcher, Margaret 95
TheoryFighter 106
This War of Mine (game) 91–2
Thomas the Tank Engine 231
Thomas, Hank Willis 156–7

 Thomas, Mark 159
Thompson, Clive 35
3D game engine 42–6
Ticketmaster 193
TikTok 1
#TodosContraPLS383 campaign 124–5
Tokyo Olympics, 2021 3–4
Tomb Raider (game) 49–50, 82
Total War (game series) 85
toxic behaviour, number of players encountering 221
trade union organising 19–20, 22, 186–8, 224–6
Train (board game) 153–4
transphobia 80, 115
trolling 128, 130, 164
Troy Industries 52
TRS-80 34
Trump, Donald 18, 68
TSMC 218
Tunisia 58
Turing, Alan 32
tutorials 133
Twine 102
Twitch 63, 68
Uber 135, 169–171, 203
The Uber Game (game) 169–71
ubiquity 68–70
Ubisoft 118, 227
Udogaranya, Danielle 131–2
Ukraine, Russian invasion of 115, 118
Ultima Online (game) 113, 134
The Ultra Machine (game) 29
Uncle Tom’s Cabin (Stowe) 102
Under Ash (game) 51, 75
union membership 141
unionisation 19–20, 22, 67, 186–8, 211, 224–6
United Kingdom 13, 17, 30, 95
art 158, 159, 168, 230, 231
colonialism 84
countryside 90, 168
border control practices 87–8
protest 131
riots, 2011 116–17
unions 18, 77, 224
universities 81, 96
United Kingdom Interactive Entertainment 213–14
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations 149
United Nations Environment Programme 223–4
United States Department of Defense 50, 118, 169
United States of America

 Americana 86
art 147, 156, 157, 159, 160, 162, 171, 230, 231
border 171
Communications Decency Act 130
crime 77, 220
domination 30–1, 36, 130
economy 38, 193
elections 95
far-right 63–64
galleries 5, 60
Inflation Reduction Act 223
outsourcing 36
protest 131
unionisation 65–66, 225
universities 26, 35, 62
terrorism 72–73
Unity (game engine) 59, 180, 182, 184
University of South Wales 96
University of Washington, Center for Game Science 229
Unpacking (game) 230
Unreal (game engine) 59, 180–1, 182
Untitled Goose Game (game) 168
UsTwo Games 149–50
Utah State University 62
van Gogh, Vincent 161
van Sant, Gus 73
Valve Corporation 163–4, 197
Vaughan, Dorothy 32
Venice Biennale 148, 156, 234–5
venture capitalism 53, 195, 200
Verge (magazine) 118, 215
Vib-Ribbon 48
Vice (magazine) 18, 169
Victoria and Albert Museum 4, 104
Viennese Actionists 76
Vimeo 54
violence 6, 12, 44, 74–8
in the arts 76–7
banality of 77–8
cathartic 75
desire for 41
enacting 76
fetishisation 7
glamorisation 74
handling 77
and hit boxes 75
least 41
player’s relationship to 76
purpose 75, 78

 and story 75
against women 76, 82–3
virtual reality 96
Wagner Group 202
waifus 177–8
Walker Art Center, Minneapolis, Beyond Interface exhibit 5
The Walking Dead (TV show) 184
Wallinger, Mark 158–9
WallStreetBets 120–3
Walz, Steffen P. 53
Wang-Ho, Han ‘Peanut’ 199
Warhammer (video and tabletop game) 190
Warner Communication 36
Washington Post (newspaper) 114
waste, hardware 211–14
Watanabe, Brent 139
weapons 52–3, 202–3
Web 2.0 business models 53
#WeddingsForRussia 115
Werthein, Judi 171
Wheatfield (art installation) 147–8
white supremacism 50, 84, 85, 91
Whitney Museum of American Art 5
Wholesome Direct 92, 93
wholesome games 92–4
Wieder, Robert 37
Wii console 56
WikiLeaks 52
Williams, Ian 185
Williams, Raymond 235
Wisdom, Stella 96
The Witcher (game) 180
The Witcher (TV adaptation) 104
Wodiczko, Krzysztof 171
Wolfenstein 3D (game) 43
women
characters 78–9, 81–3
depiction 78–84
Gamergate harassment 18, 61–3, 118–19
gamers 3, 39, 40, 80
gender stereotypes 32
heroes 73
programmers 31–3, 35
representation of 78–84, 90, 105
sexual harassment 7, 80, 183–4, 227
violence against 76, 82–3
work conditions 64–8, 182–8, 209–11, 218–19, 226–7
worker-led takeover 233
World of Warcraft (game) 17, 109–11, 111–12, 123–4, 133

 World Press Freedom Index 127
World Water Day 149
World Wide Web 68, 204–5
World Wildlife Fund 148
Writing on the Wall (Thomas and Dreisinger) 156–7
Wu, Brianna 18
Xbox 59, 188, 193, 208, 211, 213, 214
Xbox Store 194
Yang, Robert 232
Yarl’s Wood Immigration Removal Centre 87
Yiannopoulos, Milo 17–18, 61
Yokai Inn (game) 92
Yoshi (game) 190
You Are Jeff Bezos (game) 169
YouTube 3, 62, 77, 126
Yugoslavia 30
ZA/UM 168
Zenitco 52
Zimbabwe 223
Zotov, Vasily 230
OceanofPDF.com

 