 Thank you for downloading this Scribner eBook.
Join our mailing list and get updates on new releases, deals, bonus content and other great books from
Scribner and Simon & Schuster.

CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP

or visit us online to sign up at
eBookNews.SimonandSchuster.com

  Contents
Foreword, by Adele Faber
How It All Started, by Julie & Joanna
A Note from the Authors
PART I
THE ESSENTIAL TOOLBOX

Chapter One
Tools for Handling Emotions . . . What’s All the Fuss about Feelings?
—When kids don’t feel right, they can’t behave right

Chapter Two
Tools for Engaging Cooperation . . . Feelings Schmeelings, She Has to Brush
Her Teeth
—Getting kids to do what they have to do

Chapter Three
Tools for Resolving Conﬂict . . . Avoiding Combat on the Home Front
—Replacing punishment with more peaceful, eﬀective solutions

Chapter Four
Tools for Praise and Appreciation . . . Not All Odes Are Equal
—Ways to praise that will help, not hinder

Chapter Five
Tools for Kids Who Are Diﬀerently Wired . . . Will is Work with My Kid?
—Modiﬁcations for kids with autism and sensory issues

 Chapter Five and a Quarter
e Basics . . . You Can’t Talk Your Way Out of ese
—Conditions under which the tools won’t work

PART II
THE TOOLS IN ACTION

1 Food Fights—e Battle at the Kitchen Table
2 Morning Madness—Escaping the Intense Gravitational Pull of Your
Home

3 Sibling Rivalry—Give the Baby Back!
4 Shopping with Children—Mayhem at the Market
5 Lies—Kids and the Creative Interpretation of Reality
6 Parents Have Feelings, Too
7 Tattling—Snitches and Whistle-Blowers
8 Cleanup—e Dirtiest Word
9 Doctor’s Orders—Medicine, Shots, Blood Draws, and Other Horrors
10 Shy Kids—Fear of Friendly Folks
11 Little Runaways—Kids Who Take Oﬀ in the Parking Lot and Other Public
Places

12 Hitting, Pinching, Poking, Punching, Pushing—I Barely Touched Him!
13 Sleep—e Holy Grail
14 When Parents Get Angry!
15 Troubleshooting—When the Tools Don’t Work
THE END?

 Acknowledgments
Additional Resources
About Joanna Faber and Julie King
Notes
Reminder Index
Index

 “A person’s a person, no matter how small!”
—Horton the Elephant
(Dr. Seuss)
“e way we talk to our children becomes their inner voice.”
—Peggy O’Mara

 Foreword
Adele Faber
e ﬁrst hint I had of the passion that would fuel the creation of this book
came when it was my turn to carpool the authors to nursery school.
I put my daughter Joanna in the car, drove around the corner to collect
Julie, and then two more blocks to pick up Robbie. Soon all three children
were buckled up in the back seat, happily chattering with each other.
Suddenly the mood shied and a heated debate erupted:
Robbie: He had no reason to cry! He wasn’t even hurt.
Julie: Maybe his feelings were hurt.
Robbie: So what? Feelings don’t matter. You have to have a reason!
Joanna: Feelings do matter. ey’re just as important as reasons.
Robbie: No, they’re not! You have to have a good reason.

I listened and marveled at these three little people. It wasn’t hard to ﬁgure
out where each of them was coming from. Robbie’s mother was a serious,
no-nonsense woman. Julie’s mom, a piano teacher, loved talking with me
about the discoveries I was making in my parenting workshops with the
renowned child psychologist Dr. Haim Ginott. ere was always so much
for us to think about and try out with our children.
Sometimes bits of our discussions would ﬁnd their way into the book
Elaine Mazlish and I had decided to write together. We had each
experienced such profound changes in our own lives and witnessed so many
transformations in the lives of others in our group, it seemed wrong not to
share our journey with as many parents as possible. Best of all, we had Dr.
Ginott’s blessing. He read our early dras and oﬀered his editorial support.
Fast-forward twenty-ﬁve years. Our ﬁrst book, Liberated
Parents/Liberated Children: Your Guide to a Happier Family, has been
published. It wins the Christopher Award for “Literary Achievement

 Aﬃrming the Highest Values of the Human Spirit.” Seven more books soon
follow. How to Talk So Kids Will Listen & Listen So Kids Will Talk and
Siblings Without Rivalry become best sellers and are published in more than
thirty languages.
e little girls I drove to nursery school are grown, married, and each has
three children of her own. Each has lived abroad and explored diﬀerent
areas of study. I still have to smile when I remember Julie telling me about
an exchange she had at her ﬁrst internship as a law clerk at a legal aid
agency. She was presenting a case for a lawsuit that appeared to be based on
a simple misunderstanding.
“Can we get them together to talk? I’m sure if they could listen to each
other’s point of view they could come to an understanding.”
e boss was impatient with her naïveté. “We don’t do that. You can’t talk
to the opposing party.”
It was at this point, Julie said, that she started to think she might be in the
wrong profession.
And I have to smile when I remember a hurried phone call from Joanna
aer a frustrating day with the special needs children in her classroom.
“e kids won’t stop ﬁghting. It’s chaos. I can’t get through a lesson! What
do I do?”
I drew a blank. “Well, you know what I usually do when I’m stuck,
but . . .”
“Oh, you mean problem-solving. Okay, thanks. Bye!” and she hung up.
She swung into action the next morning, and we were thrilled to
incorporate the amazing results of her new tactic when Elaine and I were
writing How to Talk So Kids Can Learn/At Home and In School.
Finally, each woman found herself responding to the urgent need for
parenting workshops in her part of the world: Joanna on the east coast, Julie
on the west. Aer years of helping parents, many of whom had young
children who presented a wide variety of challenges, they decided to join
forces and produce a book of their own:
How to Talk So Little Kids Will Listen
A Survival Guide to Life with Children Ages 2 to 7

 Elaine and I expect you’ll be delighted and enlightened by all the
discoveries you’ll make as you turn its pages.
Happy reading!

 How It All Started
Julie
My two-year-old son peed on the carpet under the crib . . . again! What to
do? My degrees in public policy and law were of no use. I was surprised by
how quickly I could be brought to my knees by a small person too young to
drive a car—or tie his own shoes.
I didn’t plan a career as a parent educator. I ﬁgured I’d be a mom on the
side as I advanced my professional career. But when I was told that my ﬁrst
child had signiﬁcant developmental delays, as did my second, I realized that
parenting was not going to be an “on the side” activity for me. I found myself
committed to endless rounds of appointments with medical specialists and
physical therapists and advocating for children with neurodevelopmental
diﬀerences.
Lucky for me, I grew up with a best friend, Joanna, whose mom, Adele
Faber, took a parenting workshop with the late, great child psychologist
Haim Ginott. Her mom and mine are also close friends, and they tested out
their new parenting strategies on us. Little did I know that these methods
would become a lifesaver for me so many years later when I faced the
challenges of parenting my own three children.

 Julie and Joanna in an earlier collaboration.

When the head of the Parent Education committee at my son’s preschool
was looking for someone to organize an event for parents, I volunteered to
lead a workshop based on Adele’s book How to Talk So Kids Will Listen. My
ﬁrst eight-week group was such a success that everyone insisted I continue
to lead the group for another eight weeks, and another . . . and we ended up
meeting for four and a half years! rough word of mouth, other people
asked me to lead workshops, which snowballed into a career I had never
imagined.
Meanwhile, my friendship with Joanna continued. In many ways she and
I are quite diﬀerent. She loves the outdoors and dogs (you will ﬁnd many
references to dogs throughout our book), while I love to sit at the piano
playing classical music (which is why Joanna’s references to pop music oen
go over my head). Yet I’ve always felt I can talk to her about anything, and
she really listens and understands. Even though we now live on opposite
coasts, we’ve spent the last year writing together and the result is this book.

 Joanna and Julie today.

I hope you ﬁnd this information as life transforming as I have, and I hope
you have as many laughs reading it as we had writing it. I’ll introduce you to
my three kids in chapter ﬁve, where you can read more about the experience
of parenting and teaching non-neurotypical children.

 How It All Started
Joanna
I have a confession to make. I was raised by a mother who wrote best-selling
books about parenting. My two brothers and I grew up in a family where my
mother and father used a language of respect for their children’s ideas and
emotions. Even our most ferocious conﬂicts were resolved by problemsolving rather than punishment.
So parenting for me should be a snap. I have no excuses! en again, I
didn’t think I would need any. Not only had I been raised by practically ideal
parents, I had plenty of experience of my own. I have read and studied
extensively in the ﬁeld of child development and psychology. I have a degree
in special education and ten years of experience working with both native
English speakers and bilingual children in West Harlem as a teacher in the
New York City school system. I was going to be a natural with my own kids.
I remember taking my ﬁrst little baby to the supermarket, talking and
singing sweetly to him about the apples and bananas. A fellow shopper
leaned in and generously oﬀered me some advice. “Enjoy him now, before he
learns to talk.” What an awful woman! I couldn’t wait for my little darling to
express his amazing thoughts to me in words.
Fast-forward a few years and there I was, back in the grocery store. I now
had three young children in tow, and on this day they were being
particularly well behaved. e two younger ones were riding in the cart and
the older one was helping me get items oﬀ the shelf. A grandfatherly man
stopped, looked at these adorable kids, and said, “You are so good. I’ll bet
your mother never yells at you!”
It was a golden moment. My oldest looked at him wide-eyed and said,
“No, she yells at us all the time . . . for no reason!”
What happened here? Who were these less-than-perfect creatures? And
where was that ideal mom who would never “yell for no reason,” no less, “all

 the time!”
What I discovered as a parent was that there is a certain twenty-fourhours-a-day relentlessness to caring for young children that makes it hard to
think straight. Even though I thought I would be a natural, when it comes to
handling all those constant needs and emotions day aer day, night aer
night, there is no such thing as easy or perfect. Sometimes simple survival is
a good goal.
As a new mom I certainly did not feel that I had much wisdom to share
about raising children. I didn’t even feel particularly competent. As a matter
of fact, it seemed best to keep quiet about my own parentage. I kept a low
proﬁle and neglected to mention to the other moms in my social circle that
my mother was a famous author. When my children were wailing,
whimpering, or whacking each other, I preferred to deal with the situation
without having to wonder if anyone was watching me and thinking, “Hmph,
her mother wrote a book on parenting?”
It turns out that at least one person was watching and noticing. One day
at a playgroup, my friend Cathy said to me, “Joanna, I have this book that
you would love. It’s just your style. It really reminds me of the way you talk
to your kids. It’s called How to Talk So Kids Will Listen & Listen So Kids Will
Talk.”
At that point I ﬁgured it would be fruitless to feign ignorance. I admitted
that my mother wrote the book. Cathy was delighted. She called out to the
group of mothers, “Hey, guys, Joanna’s mother wrote this great book and she
never told us!”
And so I was outed, my secret identity revealed.
Soon aer that, Cathy told me that she was in charge of organizing a
lecture series for her church group, and she asked me if I would give a
presentation about my experience growing up as the daughter of Adele
Faber. As the date approached I began to hope for some disaster at the
church. Nothing that would hurt anybody, just a little ﬂooding or perhaps a
well-timed power outage. What was I going to say to these people? I felt
woefully inadequate to represent myself as a paragon of parenting. I didn’t
even want to think about it!
But they were expecting me to say something up there. e forecast
looked good, no hurricanes or blizzards on the horizon. I was getting
desperate. Finally it struck me that I did have something to oﬀer. Cathy had

 noticed it when she commented on my style. I’m not the perfect parent; I get
into plenty of conﬂicts with my children. But I do have skills to help get us
through those conﬂicts, and I use them every day.
I gave my talk at the church. Aerward there was great enthusiasm
among the parishioners about forming a parenting group. I found myself
leading parenting workshops, and then giving more lectures, and eventually
traveling across the country, giving presentations to parents, teachers, social
workers, and health care providers.
e book you hold in your hand is the result of many requests by parents
for more examples and strategies to use with very young children. Terrible
two-year-olds, truculent three-year-olds, ferocious four-year-olds, foolhardy
ﬁve-year-olds, self-centered six-year-olds, and the occasional semi-civilized
seven-year-old. is work represents my re-immersion into the pool of
knowledge that I grew up with and additional insights about making our
way as parents in the twenty-ﬁrst century. Part of this process included
collaborating with my childhood friend Julie King, who encouraged me to
lead when I felt like I was just ﬁnding my own way. e following work
contains the very hands-on insights of Julie and myself and all the parents
and teachers who trusted us and shared their stories.
We are presenting this work to you in two parts. Part one lays out the
basic equipment you’ll be glad to have in your toolbox when a youngster
goes haywire. Part two addresses the speciﬁc challenges that we’ve found to
be the most common themes of early childhood—eat, get dressed, get out
the door, stop hitting, go to sleep!—and shows how the parents in our
groups used these tools in various creative and unusual ways. We hope this
book will provide you with a deep well of ideas that you can dip into and
pull up by the cool, refreshing bucketful when you feel you’ve run dry!

  A Note from the Authors
We struggled with the question of whose voice to use as a narrator. It quickly
became clear that writing “I, Joanna . . .” and “I, Julie . . .” would not work.
We tried to create a composite character with composite children, but it
didn’t feel authentic. We wanted to use real stories from our own families. As
you’ll see, while we collaborated on the entire book, we settled on writing in
our individual voices. You will see the name Joanna or Julie under each
chapter heading to let you know who is narrating that section.
All the stories told by characters in our book actually happened. Names
and other identifying details have been changed, but in all cases real live
children and real live parents and professionals really did say and do these
things.

 PART I
THE ESSENTIAL TOOLBOX

 Chapter One
Tools for Handling Emotions . . . What’s All the
Fuss about Feelings?
—When kids don’t feel right, they can’t
behave right
Joanna
Most of the parents in my workshops have been pretty impatient with this
ﬁrst topic: helping children deal with diﬃcult feelings. ey’d like to move
right on to the second session: how to get your kids to do what you tell them
to do! Not that we don’t care about how our kids feel. It’s just not generally
the ﬁrst priority for a frazzled parent. Let’s face it, if they did as they were
told, things would go so smoothly we’d all feel great!
e problem is, there’s just no good shortcut to getting a cooperative kid.
You can try, but you will likely end up knee-deep in a bog of conﬂict.

ink of those times when you’re very glad you’re not being ﬁlmed for
reality television. e times when you’re screaming at a kid so hard your
throat aches; you’ve just told him for the hundredth time not to shove his

 little sister near the stove, or pull the elderly dog’s ears—“He will BITE YOU!
And you will DESERVE IT!!”—and your child remains oblivious.
I’m guessing those were times when you were feeling tired, stressed, or
upset about something else entirely. If the same incident had occurred when
you were feeling more cheerful, you would have shown grace under
pressure. Maybe scooped up the little sister or the long-suﬀering dog, with a
quick kiss or a scratch under the chin, and redirected your young savage
with an understanding chuckle.
So what’s the point of all this? e point is that we can’t behave right
when we don’t feel right. And kids can’t behave right when they don’t feel
right. If we don’t take care of their feelings ﬁrst, we have little chance of
engaging their cooperation. All we’ll have le going for us is our ability to
use greater force. And since we’d like to reserve brute force for emergencies
such as yanking children out of traﬃc, we’ve got to face this feelings thing
head-on. So let’s dig in!
• • •
Most of us don’t have too much trouble accepting our children’s positive
feelings. at’s pretty easy. Gosh, Jimmy is your best friend in the world? You
love Daddy’s pancakes? You’re excited about the new baby? How nice. Glad to
hear it.
It’s when our children express a negative feeling that we run into trouble.
“What? You hate Jimmy? But he’s your best friend!”
“You plan to punch him in the nose? Don’t you dare!”
“How can you be sick of pancakes? ey’re your favorite.”
“You want me to give the baby back? at is a terrible thing to say! Don’t
ever let me hear something like that come out of your mouth again!”
We don’t want to accept negative feelings because they’re so . . . well . . .
negative. We don’t want to give them any power. We want to correct them,
diminish them, or preferably make them disappear altogether. Our intuition
tells us to push those feelings away as fast and hard as possible. But this is
one instance in which our intuition is leading us astray.
My mother always tells me, “If you aren’t sure what’s right, try it out on
yourself.” Let’s do that. Consider your reaction to this situation:
Imagine you wake up feeling lousy. You didn’t get enough sleep last night
and you can feel a headache coming on. You stop to get some coﬀee before

 going to work at the preschool and run into a coworker. You say to her, “Boy,
I don’t want to go into work today and face all those loud, quarrelsome kids.
I just want to go back home, take some Tylenol and spend the day in bed!”
What would your reaction be if your friend:
. . . denied your feelings and scolded you for your lousy attitude?
“Hey, stop complaining. e kids aren’t that bad. You shouldn’t talk
about them that way. Anyway, you know you’ll have a good time once
you get there. Come on, let me see that smile.”
. . . or gave you some advice?
“Look, you’ve got to pull yourself together. You know you need this job.
What you should do is get rid of that coﬀee, drink some soothing
herbal tea, and meditate in the car before school starts.”
. . . or perhaps a gentle philosophical lecture.
“Hey, no job is perfect. at’s just life. ere’s no use complaining
about it. Dwelling on the negative is not productive.”
. . . How about if she compared you with another teacher?
“Look at Liz. She’s always cheerful about going to work. And do you
know why? Because she is ultra-prepared. She always has really great
lesson plans ready, weeks ahead of time.”
. . . Would questions be helpful?
“Are you getting enough sleep? What time did you get to bed last
night? Do you think you might be getting a cold? Are you taking
vitamin C? Have you been using those Sani-Wipes they have available
at the school so you won’t catch germs from the kids?”

Here are some of the reactions we get when we present this kind of
scenario in our group:
“I’m never talking to YOU again!” “is is no friend of mine!” “You
have NO CLUE!” “I hate you! Go to hell!” “Blah, blah, blah.” “SHUT
UP!” “I’ll never talk to you about my problems again; I’m sticking to
topics like the weather from now on!” “I feel guilty for making such a

 big deal about this.” “I wonder why I can’t handle the kids.” “I feel
pitiful.” “I hate Liz.” “I feel like I’m being interrogated.” “I feel judged;
you must think I’m stupid.” “I can’t say it out loud but I’ll tell you the
initials . . . F-you!”
at last response perfectly expresses the intensity of hostility that we
sometimes experience when someone denies our negative feelings. We can
go quickly from unhappiness to rage when talked to this way, and so can our
children.
So what would be helpful to hear in a situation like this? My guess is that
some of your misery would be soothed if someone simply acknowledged
and accepted your feelings.
“Ugh. It’s awful to have to go to work when you don’t feel well.
Especially when you work with kids. What we need is a nice
snowstorm, or maybe a very small hurricane that would shut the
school down for just one day.”
When their feelings are acknowledged, people feel relieved: She understands
me. I feel better. Maybe it’s not so bad. Maybe I can handle it.
Do we actually talk to our kids this way—correcting them, scolding
them, interrogating them, and lecturing them when they express a negative
feeling? e group has no trouble coming up with examples. Here are some
of the most common.
Denial of feelings:
“You don’t really hate school. You’ll have fun once you get there. You
know you like playing with the blocks.”

Has any child ever responded, “Oh yeah, you’re right. You just reminded me
that I do love school!”
Philosophy:
“Look, kiddo, life isn’t fair! You’ve got to stop it with the ‘He got more,
hers is better.’ ”

 How likely is it that your child will reply, “Gee whiz, I was all upset, but now
that you explained to me that life isn’t fair, I feel so much better. anks,
Dad!”
Questions:
“Why did you throw sand when I just told you not to?”

What child says, “Hmm, why did I? I guess there’s no good reason. anks
for pointing that out. It won’t happen again.”
Comparison:
“Look at how Olivia is sitting quietly and waiting her turn!”

Whose child would say, “Oh gosh, I will try to be more like Olivia!” It’s more
likely she’ll feel like giving Olivia a bonk on the head.
Lecture:
“Why do you always want a toy as soon as your brother starts playing
with it? You had no interest in it a minute ago. You just want to take it
away from him. at’s not very nice. Anyway, that’s a toy for babies
and you’re a big girl now. You should be more patient with your little
brother.”

And where is the child who responds, “Do go on, dear mother. I’m learning
so much from this speech. Let me just jot down a few notes on my iPad so I
can go over these points later.”
• • •
Okay, okay, I hear you say. But it’s easy to be empathic with a grown-up
friend. Grown-ups are civilized! Little kids aren’t like that. ey are way less
logical. My friends don’t keep me up at night. At least not most of them. I don’t
have to get my friends to go to school, or brush their teeth, or stop hitting their
siblings. Pretending my child is an adult is not going to cut it. If an adult friend
behaved like my child, she would not be my friend for long.
All right, I get it. We can’t treat our children like we treat our adult
friends. But if we want their willing cooperation instead of their hostility, we

 need to ﬁnd a way to use the same principle of acknowledging feelings when
a person is in distress.
Let’s peer into our toolbox and see how we can modify our stockpile for
use with the younger set.

TOOL #1: Acknowledge Feelings with Words

e next time your kid says something negative and inﬂammatory, follow
these steps:
1. Grit your teeth and resist the urge to immediately contradict him!
2. ink about the emotion he is feeling
3. Name the emotion and put it in a sentence
With any luck you will see the intensity of the bad feelings diminish
dramatically.
Good feelings can’t come in until the bad feelings are let out. If you try to
stuﬀ those bad feelings back in, they will marinate and become more potent.
For example:
When a child says, “I hate Jimmy. I’m never playing with him again.”
Instead of, “Of course you will. Jimmy is your best friend! And we
don’t say ‘hate.’ ”
Try, “Boy, sounds like you’re really angry with Jimmy right now!”
or “Something Jimmy did really annoyed you!”
When a child says, “Why do we always have to have pancakes? I hate
pancakes.”

 Instead of, “You know you love pancakes! ey’re your favorite
food.”
Try, “Sounds like you’re disappointed about pancakes for
breakfast. You’re in the mood for something diﬀerent.”
When a child says, “is puzzle is too hard!”
Instead of, “No, it’s not. It’s easy. Here, I’ll help you. Look, here’s a
corner piece.”
Try, “Ugh, puzzles can be so frustrating! All these little pieces
could drive a person nuts.”
You are giving your child a crucial vocabulary of feelings that he can
resort to in times of need. When he can wail, “I AM FRUSTRATED!”
instead of biting, kicking, and hitting, you will feel the thrill of triumph!

All feelings can be accepted. Some actions must be limited!

I’m not suggesting that you then stand by and cheer as Junior slugs his
friend Jimmy in the nose, or that you immediately start cooking up a
mushroom and cheddar cheese omelet for your demanding toddler who has
just complained about the pancakes. Just accept the feeling. Oen a simple
acknowledgment of the feeling is enough to defuse a potential meltdown.
For those times when it’s not enough, you’ll ﬁnd more tools in chapter two.
(What? You’re impatient? You want the entire book stuﬀed into chapter one?
I hear you! It’s annoying to be strung along like this. If I could ﬁt it all into
one paragraph, I would.)

 Like most great endeavors, this accepting feelings thing is easier said than
done. I’m going to reminisce about a few (among many) of the times when I
found it diﬃcult to follow this seemingly simple path. To me the beautiful
take-home lesson of these stories is that you can mess up endlessly and it’s
okay. You can ﬁx it! You can wander from the path, get stuck in the bog, pull
yourself out, scratch your mosquito bites, and move on down the road. e
itchy spots will heal, the mud will wash oﬀ, and your journey will be
pleasant again for the next little bit.
When a conversation was turning to conﬂict, my mother used to gesture
wiping a slate clean and say, “Erase and start again!” But that’s old school.
She’s from the generation of chalkboards. Have kids even heard of a
chalkboard these days? Some parents in my groups have used the word
Rewind! as they walk backward out of a room and then reenter with more
accepting words. Even that has an old-fashioned sound now that cassette
tapes have become a thing of the past. What would be the modern
equivalent of asking for a second chance? Perhaps yelling “Control Alt
Delete!” or “Reset!” with the motion of a ﬁnger pressing an imaginary
button?

 e important thing is to give yourself endless chances, whatever imagery
you choose to use. Here are a few examples from my years as a mom of
toddlers where I managed to change course midstream and save my little
parenting ra from upending in rough waters.

The Disappointing Sponge Creature
Sam, at age three, has little sponge eggs that you drop in warm water, where
they hatch into little sponge animals. He has decided he will hatch one a day
to make them last. He drives me crazy asking, “Is it the next day yet?” but
sticks to his plan. On the third day two little horses come out attached by
their noses.
Sam: What is it?
Me: (Needing it to be good.) Oh look, honey, it’s a mommy and a
baby horse.
Sam: No, it’s not. You can’t even see their faces.
Me: Yes, you can. See, they’re kissing.
Sam: I don’t like them.
Me: (Getting desperate.) I could draw their noses on with a pen.
Sam: I will never like them!
Me: (Foolishly persisting.) I could cut them apart with scissors so
their faces will be easier to see.

 Sam: I WILL NEVER, NEVER LIKE THEM! THEY ARE BAD!!
Me: (Finally seeing the light.) Oh, I see. You don’t like the way their
faces are squished together.
Sam: Yeah. I’m going to play with the penguins instead.

Why did I refuse to acknowledge his feelings for such a long time here? I
just desperately wanted to make it better, ﬁx the problem, protect my child
from sadness and disappointment. Let’s be honest, I wanted to protect myself
from his sad emotions! Who enjoys a wailing child? But he just as
desperately needed his disappointment to be heard before he could move on
to happier feelings.
Here’s another time Sam was disappointed and I had trouble accepting
his feelings at ﬁrst.

Where in the World Is (the Video Tape of) Carmen Sandiego
In this story, Dan is ﬁve and Sam is three.
Me: Dan, I taped Bill Nye the Science Guy for you.
Sam: Did you tape Carmen Sandiego for me?
Me: No.
Sam: Oh no! (Starts crying.)
Me: You didn’t ask me to tape it. Dan asked me to tape Bill Nye.
(How many times has a nice reasonable explanation like that to a
crying child worked for you?)
Sam: (Continues to cry, doesn’t go for my logic.)
Me: (Irritated with him for being so whiny.) Sam, it’s on every day of
the week. You can see it tomorrow.
Sam: (Cries harder, heading for total meltdown.)
Me: (Switching gears.) Boy, you sound so disappointed! You really
like that show a lot!
Sam: (Stops crying.) It’s my favorite show.
Me: Tell me what you like about it.
Sam: I like the way the dancers ﬂip around, and the machines make
smoke, and they have to catch the bad guy. It’s so cool.

 And we proceed to have a nice civilized conversation about the coolness of
Carmen Sandiego.
• • •
Why again, with all that I know, was it initially hard for me to just accept the
darn feeling? Well, since you’re asking, I’ll tell you! I was sure my son was
having an outsized reaction to a trivial matter. To me, a missed TV show
does not qualify as worthy of a meltdown. But a child’s emotions are just as
real and important to him as our grown-up emotions are to us. e best way
to help a child “get over it” is to help him go through it.
Here is one more story where I found it very challenging to accept the
emotion.

Block Wars
I have that familiar sinking feeling as I watch my one-year-old, Sam,
approach my three-year-old, Dan, who is building with blocks. Dan takes a
guarding position.
Me: Dan, let the baby have a few blocks. He just wants to play with
you.
Dan: No, no, I’m making something.
Me: Come on, Dan, he’ll just play with them for a minute. You know
how babies are.

Sam is upon the blocks. Dan shoves him and he falls down, wailing.
Me: Dan, what is the matter with you? Now you made the baby cry!

Clearly this is not a self-esteem-enhancing conversation. e good thing
about being a parent is that if you blow it the ﬁrst time, you almost always
get another chance. In this particular case the same basic scenario recurred
several hundred times, so I had ample opportunity to practice. Here I am in
a ﬁner moment:
Dan guarding blocks, baby approaching . . .

 Dan: No! No! No!
Me (acknowledging and identifying his feelings): Oh no, here you are working
on something special and the giant baby is coming to grab it. How
frustrating!
Dan: Here, here, here!
(He swily tosses a handful of blocks to the ﬂoor to distract the baby
and moves his creation to the coﬀee table.)
Me: Wow, you ﬁgured out what to do to keep that baby happy.

What made it so diﬃcult for me to acknowledge my son’s feelings the ﬁrst
time around? Well, because I was sure this desire to knock a sibling on his
head over a few blocks was so wrong that I needed him to understand it
now, and not indulge this aggressive impulse for even a split second. Yet it
was only by showing respect for his strong feelings about his work that he
was able to move past aggression. When I tried to dismiss his feelings, he
had to ﬁght his brother and his mother.
We do these things automatically—protect against sad emotions, dismiss
what we see as trivial emotions, and discourage angry emotions. We don’t
want to reinforce negative feelings. To acknowledge them seems
counterintuitive.
You may be wondering, “Isn’t there a time when we have to explain to the
child why he must do something, and don’t children need to be told to
respect other people’s feelings?”
e answer is YES . . . but we’re not there yet. Without having their own
feelings acknowledged ﬁrst, children will be deaf to our ﬁnest explanations
and most passionate entreaties. My pint-sized next-door neighbor illustrated
this very eloquently the other day. I had promised to take care of little Jackie
so that her mother could get some important paperwork done.

Babysitting Failure
Jackie (three years old): I want to go home.
Me: You just got here. Let’s stay in the yard for a while. We can play
on the swings.
Jackie: NO! Go home!

 Me: Your mom has to get some work done. We can have fun over
here.
Jackie: NO! (She runs back to her own house.)
Me (calling her mother): Is Jackie okay?
Jackie’s mom: She’s ﬁne.
Me: I’m sorry it didn’t work out. Did she say why she wouldn’t stay?
Jackie’s mom: She just told me, “Joanna said, ‘BLAH BLAH BLAH
BLAH BLAH!’ ”

Hey, how dare she? I’m a communications expert!
But when I didn’t acknowledge her feelings, all she heard of my eﬀort to
persuade her to stay was “Blah blah blah blah blah.”
Children depend on us to name their feelings so that they can ﬁnd out
who they are. If we don’t, our unspoken message is: “You don’t mean what
you say, you don’t know what you know, you don’t feel what you feel, you
can’t trust your own senses.”
Children need us to validate their feelings so they can become grown-ups
who know who they are and what they feel. We are also laying the
groundwork for a person who can respect and not dismiss the needs and
feelings of other people.
Okay, ﬁne, can we move on now? you ask. We need chapter two already!
I’m not going to insist that you stay here in chapter one. Skip ahead if you’d
like. But I’m going to linger here a bit longer. is idea of accepting feelings
is so big, so important, that I’m going to explore some variations on the
theme before I join you up ahead in the next chapter. I’m betting that if I can
spend more time accepting feelings in diﬃcult situations, a lot of my
conﬂicts will dissolve without even glancing at chapter two!
Here are some more ideas about how to make this powerful tool of
accepting feelings work for you.

 Sit on those “buts.”

It is so very tempting to follow up a perfectly lovely statement accepting a
feeling with the word BUT. We worry that our kids will think we approve of
their negative behavior when we acknowledge a negative feeling. So we
sabotage our good intentions by saying:
“I understand you are furious, BUT you cannot hit your sister!”
“I hear how upset you are about your brother wrecking your Legos,
BUT you have to understand, he’s just a baby.”
“I know you want to stay and play, BUT it’s time to pick up your
brother.”
“I know you’re in the mood for chocolate chip cookies, BUT we don’t
have any in the house.”
“But” takes away the gi you’ve just given. It’s like saying, “I hear how you
feel and now I am going to explain to you why that feeling is wrong.”

 Imagine hearing someone say, “I am so sorry your mother passed away. But
hey, she’s dead, you’re alive, tears won’t change it; let’s move on!”
If you feel a but bubbling up, you can replace it with this handy sentence
starter:

The problem is . . .
“It can be irritating to have to deal with a baby when you’re trying to
build a spaceship! e problem is, babies don’t understand about
Legos.”
“How disappointing to ﬁnd an empty box when you’re in the mood
for cookies! e problem is, it’s too late to go shopping.”
e problem is suggests that there is a problem that can be solved without
sweeping away the feelings. Perhaps you will ﬁnd a table where you can set
up the Legos out of reach. Maybe you will add cookies in big red letters to
the shopping list and stick it on the refrigerator.
Toni, a no-nonsense mom in one of my parenting workshops,
complained that she wasn’t happy with this phrase. “It’s not always a
problem!” she protested. “Why does everything have to be a big problem?
So, there are no cookies right this second. Get over it!”
I had to think. Darn it, that’s my go-to solution and this woman is rejecting
it. I have to accept her feelings about it. I’d better come up with something else
quick. ankfully a phrase my mother used came to me. “Ahh, try this,” I
oﬀered.

Even though you know . . .
“Even though you know it’s too late to go shopping for cookies, you’d
sure like to have some right now!”
“Even though you know it’s time to pick up your brother at the bus
stop, it can be exasperating to have to leave the playground when
you’re having fun.” (As a bonus, you’ve taught him a new
vocabulary word!)

 Even though you know is not oﬀ-putting because it gives your child
credit for understanding the problem, while at the same time
letting him know that you empathize with how strongly he feels.

TOOL #2: Acknowledge Feelings with Writing

Seeing their feelings and desires written down in black and white can be
very powerful, even for prereaders. Carry paper and pencil when you go
shopping so that you can add to your child’s “wish list.” It will come in handy
when you are on that unavoidable, dreaded shopping trip to the toy store for
a birthday gi for somebody else’s child, and your own child is presented with
thousands of temptations and absolutely no understanding of ﬁnancial
limitations. Instead of explaining to your child why she should not whine for
a new toy because she just had her birthday last month and she shouldn’t be
acting like such a spoiled brat (has that speech ever worked for anyone?) you
can write down everything she wants on her wish list. It is satisfying to a kid
to have a physical list of her desires. And you can keep it posted on your
bulletin board and refer to it when holidays and birthdays come up.
“But won’t that contribute to their feeling that every desire must be
gratiﬁed?” asks Toni, the straight-shooter in my group.
“On the contrary,” I countered. “How many times have we given in and
just bought some stupid thing we don’t need to avoid a public tantrum?
Writing down wishes is a diﬀerent way to avoid a tantrum, without spoiling
your child. ink of it as an opportunity to accept feelings while limiting
actions.”
Having their feelings acknowledged actually helps children accept that
they can’t always get what they want. In the toy store you can say, “Oh boy,
that is a really cool unicorn! You like the sparkles on his mane . . . and the

 pink and orange stars on his rump. Let’s write it down on your wish list.”
Who knows, maybe she’ll save her allowance, or request it from Aunt Bertha
on her birthday, or perhaps in a few weeks or months her tastes will change
and it will drop oﬀ the list. e important thing is that she has a parent who
listens to how she feels when she yearns for something, and that helps her
develop the important life skill of deferred gratiﬁcation.
And how about when one child needs something and we have another
child without any need. Do we spend the extra money resentfully just to
preserve the peace? Put up with hurt feelings and wailing? With this skill, we
can honestly empathize:
“Even though you know you don’t need new PJs, it’s still hard to see your
brother get a new pair. Let’s write down the colors you like so we’ll know
what to buy when you need them.”
Aer a session on acknowledging feelings, Michael, a dad who is almost
always eager to experiment, reported back to the group.

Michael’s Story: Cookie Magic
My two-year-old, Kara, wanted chocolate chip cookies. I wrote the word
COOKIE on a piece of paper for her inside a circle that was supposed to look
like a cookie. She added the dots for chips. She was amazingly content to
carry around that piece of paper. It was like the word was a magical
talisman. Usually she doesn’t give up when she wants something, no matter
how many times we tell her we just don’t have it in the house.

TOOL #3: Acknowledge Feelings with Art

 Sometimes words, written or spoken, are not enough to express a strong
feeling. If you are feeling creative, try art. You don’t have to be Rembrandt—
stick ﬁgures will do.
• • •
Maria is the mother of one-year-old Isabel and three-year-old Benjamin, a
child who has major meltdowns many times a day.

Maria’s Story: Train Wreck
Benjamin is obsessed with trains these days. He loves to make elaborate
tracks and crossings and push the trains uphill and down, but sometimes the
trains or the tracks fall apart. It’s amazing how quickly Benjamin can melt
down into a major tantrum, and then the trains and tracks go ﬂying. e
other day I was at the train table and sure enough, the trains crested the hill
and started falling apart on the way down. ere was this pause, and I could
see Benjamin was about to lose it, but since I had just taken the workshop I
did not say “It’s okay, we can ﬁx it, don’t worry.” at’s what I’d normally say,
and then he’d scream and throw things. is time I said, “is is frustrating!
You don’t like the trains coming apart.”
He looked at me and didn’t scream.
I had a blackboard next to the table, so I grabbed it and said, “Let’s draw
how you feel.”
I drew a sad face. “Is this how you feel?”
He nodded. I made a tear coming out of the eye and he said, “Draw
another one.”
I drew more tears. He reached for the chalk and I could see him get a
little glimmer in his eye. He drew some gigantic tears. en I drew another
face that wasn’t quite as sad. Benjamin had the hint of a smile at this point so
I drew a happy face. He started giggling. We went back to playing with the
trains. Tantrum averted.

 • • •
Anton is on the autism spectrum, and it can be particularly hard for him to
have his expectations thwarted. His mother, Anna, shared this story with the
group.

Anna’s Story: The Tragic Nap
I had promised Anton that we would stop at this really cool playground on
the way home from his aunt and uncle’s house. But we le late and by the
time we passed the playground Anton was asleep in the car and I certainly
wasn’t going to wake him. I was hoping he would sleep through the night,
but of course he woke up when his dad was carrying him in from the car.
When he realized that he missed the playground, he started crying and
saying “You lied, you lied!”
I tried to be patient. I explained to him that he was sleeping, but that
made him madder. Finally I said, “You really like that playground. Even
though you were sleeping, you still wanted to play there. You wanted us to
wake you up!”
“Yeah!”
I grabbed a piece of paper and a pencil and I started drawing. “What’s
your favorite thing at the playground?”
“Swings,” he said, so I drew them.
“Put in the big slide.” I drew that, too. He drew a snowball on the slide.
“How about the bridge?”

 “Yeah!”
I drew that. en I put a cat on the bridge, and a boy. He wanted to tape
the picture on his wall, so we put it over his bed. It was a good save to the
evening!
• • •
Michael was enthusiastic about giving the art solution a try. He came in with
this story.

Michael’s Story: Fire Balls
I went to wake up four-year-old Jamie for preschool. He burrowed down
under the covers and said he was not getting up, not going to school, he
hated school!
I gave him a little back rub and said, “I can see you are not ready to get
up. I’m going downstairs to make breakfast, and you can come down when
you’re ready. I’ll have a paper and crayons for you so you can draw me a
picture of how bad school is.”
In about ﬁve minutes Jamie came pounding down the stairs and ﬂung
himself into his chair at the kitchen table. “Where’s the paper and crayons?”
Oops, I guess I didn’t really believe he would go for it. I quickly grabbed
the supplies for him. He started drawing furiously. I looked at it and asked
him, “What are these big red things bouncing all over the page?”
“ose are the ﬁreballs at the school,” he said emphatically.
He sounded so convincing, I actually asked him if there were really
ﬁreballs at the school.
“NOoooo!” he answered as scornfully as a four-year-old can say that
word.
“en he ate breakfast and went to school happily. Never found out
anything else about those ﬁreballs.”
• • •
Sometimes pure art is not enough. Maria’s three-year-old son Benjamin
oen gets so angry he hits himself and his mom. Here’s what happened
when she invited him to draw his feelings.

 Maria’s Story: Performance Art
Benny was mad because he didn’t get to go with his dad this weekend. He
was moping around and kicking things. I got out a pad and some crayons
and said, “Show me how mad you are.”
Benny said “No!” and threw the crayons down. It wasn’t working but I
needed a story for the group, so I kept on trying.
I took the crayon myself and said, “You are this mad!” I made angry
marks, kind of attacking the paper. e crayon ripped through, which really
got Benny’s attention. He grabbed the crayon and started slashing at the
paper. at was satisfying to him. en he grabbed the paper in both hands
and began to rip it into little pieces. I kept saying things like, “Wow, you are
this mad!”
When the paper was completely shredded, he looked at the pile and
started giggling. “Look how mad I was, Mommy.”
“Yeah, you were really mad. at poor paper. It looks like a tiger tore it
up.”

He walked oﬀ and asked for a snack. I gave him some apple slices. Every
once in a while for the rest of the day he walked over to the pile of paper and
said, “Look how mad I was!” with great delight.

 Match the emotion. Be dramatic!
Some of the parents reported that when they tried to acknowledge
feelings, their kids seemed to get even more furious. It just wasn’t working. I
asked them to give me an example.
Toni said, “I told my son, omas, ‘You seem angry.’ omas reacted with
annoyance, ‘I don’t seem angry. I AM angry!’ ”
When I heard Toni’s calm soothing tone, I said, “Aha! Your words are
telling me you understand, but your tone is telling me to calm down. ere
is nothing so infuriating as being told to calm down when you’re angry.”
Sarah, another mom in the group, immediately agreed. “ose are two
words my husband is never allowed to say to me. If he dares, I will rip his
head oﬀ!”
“Imagine this. You call me and say, ‘What a horrible day. e kids were
totally hyper and it was pouring rain outside, so they were climbing the
walls. I ﬁnally got it together to take them out to the movies, and it turned
out the paper had the wrong time so we had to go home and everyone was
whining and crying.’ ”
In the most irritatingly calm, soothing, singsong voice I could muster I
said, “Oh, you seem frustrated. It’s okay to feel frustrated with your kids
sometimes.”
e group reacted with rolling eyes and threatening shakes of their ﬁsts.
“Okay, okay, give me another chance! Is this better?” is time I spoke
with real emotion, “Oh my gosh, how frustrating! Sounds like one of those
horrible days when everything is against you.”
is time I heard the word “Yes!” muttered by several people, and I felt a
little safer. Always good to have the tools to soothe an angry crowd.
“at would at least be an acceptable start,” snapped Toni. “I don’t like all
this sugary, fake stuﬀ.”

 It’s important to be genuine when you acknowledge feelings. Nobody
likes to feel manipulated. Reach inside and ﬁnd that emotion. Be real!
My group went home and went to work. e next week they reported
some big changes.

Maria’s Story: All Terrain Bicycle
You already know that Benjamin melts down over the littlest things. I
realized that I oen take this kind of fake soothing tone with him out of fear
that I’ll send him over the edge. It never works! Last night he had a
meltdown over having to put his new big-boy bike away at dinnertime. e
way he was screaming you’d think he had a life-threatening injury. is time
instead of trying to calm him I got loud. I said dramatically, “You want to
keep riding your bike!”
He said, “Yes,” with a trembling lip, holding back tears.
I said, “Who cares if it’s dinnertime? I bet you’d be happy to eat while
riding!”
Another “yes” from Benny.
“I bet you’d like to ride that bike in bed when it’s time to go to sleep! You’d
ride it in your dreams.”
“Yes” again, but now he’d stopped crying and was looking at me with
curiosity.
“You’d be happy to ride your bike underwater at your swimming lesson
tomorrow!”
Now he was laughing. And just like that, our little guy came in to dinner.

Michael’s Story: Born Free
My wife, Jan, has trouble dressing our daughter in the morning. Kara is only
two, but she can really put up a ﬁght. She’ll twist and wail because she likes
to be naked. It’s a real wrestling match. Jan tries to gently acknowledge her
feelings and explain why she has to be dressed to go to preschool, but it
hasn’t helped.
Aer our last session Jan decided to try a more dramatic tactic. I heard
her yell, “You like to be a nudie!! Nude all night and nude all day! Nude in

 the house, nude in the car, nude at school!”
en I heard Kara yelling, “NUDIE, NUDIE, NUDIE!”
I guess Jan was putting her clothes on the whole time because she came
downstairs fully clothed and Jan said it was a breeze to dress her.

TOOL #4: Give in Fantasy What You Cannot Give in Reality

Sometimes a child wants something that it is impossible to provide. Your
ﬁrst impulse is usually to explain why she cannot, or should not, or must not
have her heart’s desire. at’s the rational approach.
And how does that work for you? Not well, you say? Your kid isn’t going
for your logic? As soon as you begin your explanation she covers her ears
and screams? You are not alone! A child in emotional distress is unlikely to
be soothed by well-reasoned discourse.
A terriﬁc tool for moments like these is to give a child in fantasy what
you can’t give in reality. When your child is crying in the car because he’s
thinking about the candy you didn’t buy him at the mall, it’s not the right
time for a lecture on tooth decay. Admit it! Candy tastes good! Wouldn’t it be
nice if we could eat candy every day and nothing bad would happen to our
teeth? What would we have for breakfast? M&M’s or lollipops? And how about
lunch? Encourage your kids to chime in. I recall a memorable ride home
when my three boys happily imagined a world where the car itself was made
out of sweets and even the road was paved with candy. You could take a rest
stop and nibble on the bumper, or crumble oﬀ a little piece of pavement if
you felt like having a snack.
• • •

 Sarah is a preschool teacher in our group. She is also the mother of sevenyear-old Sophia, ﬁve-year-old Jake, and Mia, who just turned three. She
reminisced about a stressful time in her life when fantasy pulled her
through.

Sarah’s Story: The Pink House
We had been renting a one-bedroom apartment and now with a second
child, space was getting tight. We were ﬁnally making the big move. We had
closed on a house. We were excited but anxious because we were stretched
to our limit with the closing costs, and we were second guessing ourselves all
the way to the bank. As I was driving Sophia to preschool one morning she
started whining, “I hate the new house!”
I know that little kids don’t like change, and that it was natural for her to
be upset about the move, but that didn’t stop my instant irritation. I snapped
at her to stop whining. en I launched into a lecture about how the old
apartment was way too small, and in a bad neighborhood, and in the new
house she would have her own bedroom.
I went on and on until I glanced over and noticed that she was crying.
at brought me up short. “Boy, you really don’t like the new house. You
would choose a diﬀerent house.”
She said, “YEAH!”
“What if you could choose any house you wished? What would your
house be like?”
“PINK!”
“Ohhh, a pink house.”
“Yes, it would have pink walls, and a pink roof, and a pink bed.”
“How about some pink grass on the lawn?” I oﬀered.
“Moo-oom, no such thing as pink grass. But there could be pink ﬂowers.”
We spent the rest of the ride happily listing all the things in the house
that could be pink. e mood was saved. Later on we did buy some pink
sheets for her bed. I was able to deliver a happy child to school, instead of a
miserable, weepy one.
• • •

 At the next session, Sarah shared this story from her preschool class with the
group.

Sarah’s Story: Endless Hours
Last week in our block room a child was reluctant to begin cleaning up.
Instead of giving him the standard clean-up lecture, I acknowledged his
feelings by saying, “It’s frustrating to have to clean up when you’re not
ﬁnished with what you’re building.” He just looked at me. So I tried giving
him a wish for more time in fantasy. “I wish you had a hundred more hours
to play.”
He responded, “I wish I had a hundred million billion more hours to
play!” en he started putting blocks away. Amazing.

Maria’s Story: A Penny Saved
Benjamin found a penny at the park and put it in his pocket. We were
driving home and he wanted the penny, but he couldn’t get it out of his
pocket because he was strapped into his carseat. He was starting to scream
and cry about it. Normally I would have told him, “It’s okay, we can get it
when we get home,” which would not have helped. Or I would have tried to
ﬁsh out a coin to give him while I was driving, which would have
endangered the people in the next lane. But this time I remembered the idea
of giving a wish in fantasy. I said, “at is so frustrating! You know what I
wish? I wish I had a button right here.” I pointed to a spot on the dashboard.
Benjamin stared at the spot. “And whenever I pushed that button, heaps
and heaps of pennies would come pouring out over here.” I pointed to the
light in the ceiling of the car.
“Not just pennies, but every kind of coin, even coins from other
countries, and they would all fall right into your lap. And you would have so
much money, you could buy anything you wanted. What would you buy
with all that money?”
“A really big teddy bear!” Benjamin said.
“How big? As big as you?”
“Yeah!”

 At this point he was really into the story and very happy. He didn’t lose it
over the penny, which is pretty amazing if you know my son!

Resist the urge to ask questions of a distressed child.

You may have noticed that we don’t respond to a child’s distress by asking
questions: Are you sad? Did that make you angry? Why are you crying?
Even gentle questions can feel like an interrogation when a child is in
distress. He may not know why he is upset. He may not be able to express it
clearly in words. Oen when questioned like this, even adults can feel
threatened. We have the feeling we are being asked to justify how we feel and
that our explanation may not live up to the asker’s standards. (Oh, is that all
it is? You shouldn’t be crying about that!) By making a statement instead of
asking a question, we accept the feelings without requiring any justiﬁcation.
You don’t have to ﬁgure out the cause of the feelings in order to empathize.
You can say, “You seem sad.” “Something upset you.” Or even just,
“Something happened.” at kind of phrase invites your child to talk if she
feels like it, but also gives comfort if she doesn’t feel like talking.

 • • •
Toni, mother of six-year-old omas and four-year-old twins, Ella and
Jenna, was skeptical but willing to give it a try.

Toni’s Story: The Gauntlet
For the past few weeks, omas has been cheerful in the car on the way to
school, but once we get there, he sits on the curb and refuses to go in. When
I ask him what’s wrong he says, “Nothing!” Sometimes he’ll jump up and run
in as soon as one of his classmates arrives.
omas isn’t very big on answering questions when he’s upset, but I really
wanted to ﬁnd out what was happening. I waited until aer dinner when he
was in a relaxed mood to say, “I notice you’re not too happy when we get to
school. Something makes you not want to go in.”
omas nodded slowly. en he explained that if he goes in at the same
time as the second graders they call him a baby, and he is not a baby. (He
really prides himself on being the big boy in the family.) He likes to wait
until all the second graders are in, or at least wait for a friend so he doesn’t
have to go in alone. I didn’t realize it was so complicated to get into school. I
have more patience for him in the morning now that I understand what’s
going on in his head.

Sarah’s Story: . . . And Then What?
Jake came in all red-faced and teary aer playing with the neighbor children
in their backyard. Clearly he was very upset. In the past I would ask him,
“What’s wrong?” or “What happened?” And I always got the standard
responses, “I don’t know,” or “Nothing.”
is time, instead of questioning him, I tried making a statement to show
I understood how he felt. I said, “Jake, you look mad and sad at the same
time.” Well, that opened a ﬂoodgate. He told me a long, complicated story
about one of the neighbors pushing him oﬀ the swing, and then there were
some “bad words” like stupid and dummy exchanged, and then there was
threatening with a stick. He went on and on and then he looked at me and,
well . . . I didn’t know what to say next!

 • • •
e problem is that being a parent doesn’t end at the third frame like the
comics in this book. Don’t panic. Read on.

TOOL #5: Acknowledge Feelings with (Almost) Silent
Attention
(Don’t just say something. Sit there!)

is brings us to a small and unimpressive-looking tool of great power.
e tool of (almost) silent attention. You can continue to listen to your child,
responding with an empathic, “Ugh!,” “Mmm,” “Ooh,” or “Huh.” Oen that’s
all you need. By lending an attentive ear and ﬁrmly squeezing our lips
together, or letting out a sympathetic grunt, we can help our children ﬁnd
their own way through their feelings. e gi we can give them is to not get
in the way of their process by jumping in with our reactions: advice,
questions, corrections. e important thing is to give them our full attention
and trust them to work it out.
Sarah reported back on this tool.

Sarah’s Story: Sibling Squabbling Zen
Well, I did it! My seven-year-old daughter came in just before bedtime to
complain about her younger brother . . . again. I have very little patience le
at this time of night. All I can think is “Can’t it be over?” He had come into
her room, he had touched her toys without asking, he had teased her, and so

 on. Usually I try to tell her that he’s just a little kid and she should be more
patient, which results in her repeating the charges in a louder and more
emotional voice. is time I just said, “Mmm . . . ugh . . . oh . . . I see . . .”
right out of the script. It was nothing short of miraculous. Aer about ﬁve
minutes she said, “Okay, I’m going to read now,” and kissed me goodnight. I
didn’t have to solve anything. I feel freed!

Michael’s Story: Very Bad Day
Jamie came home from school and said, “I had a horrible day and everybody
hates me.” Normally I would have argued with him. How can a preschooler
have a horrible day when all they do is play games and paint and have story
time? It’s not like they have to ﬁll out tax forms or get stuck in traﬃc! And
it’s not true that everybody hates him. I would have started listing all the
people who love him: his parents, sisters, grandma and grandpa, friends.
is time I just gave my most sympathetic “Ugh” and put my arm around
him. He sat down and told me that his friend Max was really annoying.
Again I bit my lip so as not to remind him that he could be annoying too
sometimes, and that Max was his best friend. He proceeded to tell me a long,
sad story about how he and Max used to play Star Wars together, but now
Max was playing Ghostbusters with a new friend and didn’t want to play
with him anymore. And that he, Jamie, didn’t want to play Ghostbusters,
because that was stupid, and how do you play that game anyway, and now all
the kids are playing it. He talked himself out and then wandered away for a
snack.
I was amazed because he’s never talked to me like that before. I had no
idea preschoolers had such complicated social lives. I felt sad for him, but I
think he’ll be able to work it out. He was certainly much cheerier aer telling
me all his woes.
• • •
It was the end of a session and we had almost run out of time, but Toni
insisted on telling this story before we le.

Toni’s Story: Sisters Are Doing It for Themselves

 We were coming back from getting take-out from a burger place and Ella
really wanted to start eating in the car. We were all tired and Ella’s whining
was driving me nuts. I explained that she could have the food just as soon as
we got home, but we were not going to have it in the car because of the mess.
We were going back and forth and getting nowhere when her twin sister,
Jenna, said, “I know, Ella. Sometimes it’s hard to wait.”
It was a watershed moment. I said, “You’re so right! Sometimes it is hard
to wait, isn’t it?”
Ella said, “Yeah. It’s hard to wait.”
ings were calmer for the rest of the drive home. Jenna understood that
her sister needed empathy, not reasoning, and it was just funny that a fouryear-old knew what to do when her own mother didn’t. I consoled myself
that she was modeling an empathetic response from me on a previous day.
ey already know at age four what I’m just learning now!
• • •
At the end of this chapter you’ll ﬁnd a handy reminder page to copy and
stick on your favorite reading surface. Sure, you’ve done all this reading, but
that doesn’t mean that you can think straight when you’re in the trenches,
under ﬁre. When the baby is crying, the milk is spilled, the toast is burning,
and the dog is running oﬀ with the diaper, you’ll need to be able to review
your options at a single glance!

    REMINDER: Tools for Handling Emotions

1. Acknowledge Feelings with Words
“You were looking forward to that playdate. How disappointing!”
“It can be so frustrating when train tracks fall apart.”

2. Acknowledge Feelings with Writing
“Oh no! We don’t have the ingredients we need! Let’s make a
shopping list.”
“You really want that underwater Lego set. Let’s write that down
on your wish list.”

3. Acknowledge Feelings with Art
“You seem so sad.” (Draw a stick ﬁgure with big tears, or simply
hand over a crayon or pencil.)
“You are this angry!” (Make angry lines or rip and crumple
paper.)

4. Give in Fantasy What You Cannot Give in Reality
“I wish we had a million billion more hours to play.”

5. Acknowledge Feelings with (Almost) Silent Attention
“Ugh!” “Mmm.” “Ooh.” “Huh.”

 • All feelings can be accepted. Some actions must be

limited!
• Sit on those “buts.” Substitute: “The problem is . . .” or

“Even though you know . . .”
• Match the emotion. Be dramatic!
• Resist the urge to ask questions of a distressed child.

 Chapter Two
Tools for Engaging Cooperation . . . Feelings
Schmeelings, She Has to Brush Her Teeth
—Getting kids to do what they have to do
Joanna
Enough with all the talk about feelings. It’s lovely to know we’re enhancing
our children’s conﬁdence and sense of self, but does that actually get us
through the day? Not entirely. We have to get our kids to do things—get in
the bathtub; brush teeth; sit still so I can get your shoes on; climb into the
carseat . . . now, or we’re going to be late; go to bed, PLEASE!
And sometimes, it’s more important to not do things—don’t hit your
sister; stop throwing your food; don’t take those shoes oﬀ when I just got
them on; don’t stick your fork in the electrical outlet; don’t eat the lollipop
that just fell in the dirt; stop pulling the dog’s tail; don’t climb the
refrigerator—those are shelves, not steps. Endless reminding, nagging,
cajoling, demanding. at’s the reality of being a parent.
So our kids get told what to do. All day long. at’s the reality of being a
kid. And they should listen, because we’re in charge and we’re just trying to
do what’s best for them, and keep them from killing themselves, or at least
protect them from stinkiness, rotted teeth, malnutrition, and exhaustion.
e problem is, nobody likes to be ordered around. A parent in one of
my groups put it succinctly: “Even if I want to do something, as soon as
somebody tells me to do it, I don’t want to do it anymore.”
I recently experienced this phenomenon of irresistible contrariness as an
adult, when I saw a stack of books at my local library with a note taped to
the wall behind them. e note read, DO NOT TOUCH THESE BOOKS. I presumed
there was a reasonable explanation. No doubt the books had not been put

 into the system yet. Still, I couldn’t help myself. I veered toward the stack,
stuck out my ﬁnger, and touched the books. “Hah, so there!” I felt a spark of
childish glee.

It’s human nature. We’re stuck with it, and our children are no diﬀerent.
We resist being told what to do. Direct orders provoke direct opposition.
When we give children commands, we’re working against ourselves. Where
we had hoped to inspire obedience, we’ve just stirred up rebellion in their
little hearts.
I like to start this workshop session with a few commands for the participants:

“Hey, you two in the back . . . No talking!”
“Don’t touch those books! Do you see your name on them?”
I toss in some blame and accusation:

“Who le this bag in the doorway? Someone’s going to trip on it.”
And on to some name calling:

“You forgot to bring a pencil again? You’re such an airhead.”
“Don’t interrupt. You’re being rude!”
A few warnings:

“Don’t balance your laptop on the edge of your knees like that.
You’re going to drop it.”
“Don’t move the chairs while you’re on your cell phone. Pay
attention to what you’re doing or you’re going to hurt somebody.”
Some sarcasm:

“One blue sock and one green sock. Nice! Did you unplug your
brain this morning?”

 A few rhetorical questions:

“Why do you keep your bag in such a mess that you can’t ﬁnd
anything?”
“Why can’t you wait your turn to speak?”
A threat:

“Listen, people, if these side conversations don’t stop immediately,
we’re not going to get through all the material and I’m going to have
to keep you here for an extra half hour.”
And of course, a lecture:

“You’re ten minutes late again. is is becoming a pattern with you.
Do you realize what happens when you’re late? You’re holding up
the whole class. Everyone else made the eﬀort to get here on time.
Some of us are paying babysitters so we can sit here waiting for you.
How would you feel if someone did that to you? You know, being
punctual is a life skill. And it’s a skill you better learn if you want to
be successful in life. You need to start making a little more eﬀort.
Get yourself organized ahead of time. Don’t leave everything until
the last minute.”
e group stares at me murderously. “So,” I force myself to ask cheerfully, “is
anyone feeling cooperative?”
e staring continues. I’m getting the silent treatment. I’m feeling a little
uneasy, so I try a diﬀerent tack. “Do we really talk to kids this way?”
Finally someone speaks, “Sure we do!”
“Can anyone think of examples of what we actually say to children?”
Now the ﬂoodgates open. Here are some of the responses from the group.
Commands:

“Is that your bag? Well, pick it up. Now!” “Clean up those blocks.”
“Stop making that noise.” “Turn oﬀ the TV.” “Leave your brother
alone.” “Wash your hands.” “Don’t touch the stove.” “You just
interrupted her. Say you’re sorry!”
Blaming and accusing:

 “If you had screwed the top on the apple juice ﬁrst instead of trying
to grab the last cupcake, it never would have spilled.”
Name calling:

“Hey, come help with this cleanup. You helped make the mess. Don’t
be so lazy.” “Your friends always share their toys when you visit
them. Don’t be selﬁsh.” “You’re pulling the cat’s tail. at’s just plain
mean.”
Warnings:

“Careful, you’re going to get hit by a car.” “Stop wiggling, you’ll fall
oﬀ that stool.” “You’ll make yourself sick if you eat all that candy.”
“Watch it, you’ll burn yourself!” “Get down from there, you’re going
to fall!”
Sarcasm:

“You le your backpack at your friend’s house? at was smart.”
“You knocked down your little sister just so you could be ﬁrst? at
was nice.”
Rhetorical questions:

“Why would you pinch the baby like that?” “Why did you throw the
ball in the kitchen when I just told you not to?” “Is that what you’re
supposed to be doing right now?” “What is the matter with you?”
Lectures:

“It’s not nice to grab. You wouldn’t want anybody to grab something
from you, would you? en you shouldn’t grab from anyone else.
Nobody’s going to want to play with you if you keep this up. You
need to learn to be more patient.”
reats:

“If you don’t put these toys away by the time I count to ten, I’m
throwing them in the garbage.” “If you don’t get in the car right now,
I’m leaving without you.” “If you don’t ﬁnish your vegetables there’ll
be no dessert.” “If you don’t get your seat belt on and stop fussing
I’m not taking you anywhere.” “Get your helmet on now, or the bike
is going back in the garage.”

 e group was a little taken aback by their ability to compile such an
impressive list so easily. But they weren’t ready to throw out the entire
arsenal.
Toni was the ﬁrst to protest. “What you’re calling a threat, I call a
consequence. I’m just telling my child what will happen if he doesn’t listen.
He needs to know!”
“It’s so tempting to toss in a threat,” I agreed. “It does seem kind of, umm,
informational. If you do this, I’ll do that. e problem with a threat is that it
can come awfully close to sounding like a dare. When a parent says, ‘If you
throw sand one more time, you’re going straight home!’ the child doesn’t
seem to hear the whole sentence. What the child seems to hear is, ‘row
sand . . . one more time!’ ”

e threat has become an irresistible challenge.
“What if you use the word please?” Sarah asked. “at’s simply good
manners. I tell my children what they need to do, but I say it politely.”
Sometimes, to soen the sting of an order, we toss in a please at the end.
e problem here is similar to that of wings on an ostrich. ey seem like
the right sort of attachment, but nevertheless, that bird is not going to ﬂy. It’s
just too heavy. Please is best reserved for standard etiquette like, “Please pass
the salt.” When you “ask” a child to please hold still . . . or get in his
carseat . . . or put away his blocks . . . you’re not really making a gentle
request. You’re not truly willing to accept “No thank you!” as an answer.
“If I started the session by telling you all to ‘Please sit still and stop
talking,’ how many of you would feel warm and cooperative?” I asked the
group.
No one raised a ﬁnger.
Someone sighed. e feeling in the room was clear. Everything we say is
wrong! It was time to move on before these people got too frustrated with
me and staged a rebellion of their own. I plunged ahead.

 “So what can we do when we need the cooperation of a small, illogical,
and unruly creature such as a human child? If we can’t tell him what to do,
what’s le?”

TOOL #1: Be Playful

e ﬁrst tool I have for you is not one that can be used in all weather. You
have to feel at least partly sunny. Even though it’s a part-time tool, I’m
oﬀering it to you as a ﬁrst resort because of its unusually powerful eﬀect.
Let’s call it the art of being playful. What’s that, you say? You don’t feel
playful when children are being uncooperative? And what does that word
mean, anyway? Isn’t it a bit vague?
All valid criticisms. And yet, if you try it, you just might ﬁnd you like it.
So if you’re in the mood, read on.
One technique, sure to be a hit with the seven and under set, is to make
an inanimate object talk.
Lonely shoes can whine, “I feel cold and empty. Won’t somebody put a
nice warm foot in me?” Hungry toy boxes can demand, “Feed me blocks! I
want the green crunchy ones!” Cups can screech, “Don’t leave me out here
by myself! I gotta get in the sink with my buddies.” Toothbrushes can use
their best tough-guy voice, “Lemme in dere. I think I seen a germ hiding
behind dat molar.” All of these clamoring objects will bring a smile to a
child’s face and a more willing attitude toward participating in the mundane
chores of life.

 Another playful technique is to turn a boring task into a
challenge or a game.
Instead of, “Look at this mess. You’re supposed to put your dirty clothes in the basket.”

Try, “How many seconds do you think it will take to toss all your
dirty clothes in the laundry basket? . . . Twenty? Oh dear, I don’t
think so. at is way too much work to do in just twenty seconds.
Okay, I guess it’s worth a try. Ready . . . set . . . go! . . . Holy cow, you
did it in ten! You beat the clock.”
Instead of, “Get in the car now. I don’t want to have to ask you again.”

Try, “We have to get all the way from the door to the car. Let’s try
hopping. It won’t be easy!”
Instead of, “If you don’t get into pajamas right now, there will be no story time.”

Try, “Do you think you can get your PJs on with your eyes closed?”
Beyond talking objects and making a game out of a chore, the ﬁeld is wide
open. Experiment with your silly side. Instead of just telling a child what to
do in your regular voice, talk like a duck, or a sports announcer, or your
child’s favorite cartoon character, or sing it with a country twang. Devise
ways of leaving a friend’s house that involve avoiding lava, quicksand, or
alligators. Instead of telling a classroom of preschoolers to sit still and be
quiet, have them freeze like statues. Tell them they’re “as still as an iceberg,”
or “as quiet as a little mouse hiding in the grass from a cat.” Give them an
“energy pill” (a single raisin carefully placed in the palm) to give them the

 strength to clean up. Almost any tedious task can be transformed if it’s
infused with the spirit of play.
e group looked at me with various expressions, ranging from intrigued
to annoyed. Michael was smiling. I could tell he was already coming up with
a wild idea. Maria looked a little bit exasperated. “Aren’t there times when a
child should just do what his parent tells him to? Do I really have to make
every little thing into a game? You’re making me feel tired!”
In my experience, if you can muster up a little playfulness, it actually
takes less energy than having to deal with all the whining and resistance you
get from a direct order. It also sets a nice tone. Even if orders are more
eﬃcient, the mood will be brighter with playfulness. It makes people feel
more loving and cooperative.
You’re also teaching kids how to turn a tedious task into a pleasant
activity. We can grumble and mope over a sink full of dirty dishes, or we can
put on some lively music, work up the suds, and dance and sing our way
through the mess. at’s a valuable life skill.

Michael’s Story: Clothing with Character
Kara hates to get dressed in the morning. Now my wife and I oﬀer diﬀerent
characters to dress her. Roger Robot (that’s me) uses a mechanical voice and
jerky motions. “This . . . arm . . . must . . . be . . . inserted . . . in . . .
sleeve.”
en there’s Kermit the frog, who talks in a Kermit voice. Mrs. Meanie
(that’s my wife) is rough and screechy: “What? A child without clothes? at
is terrible! Get over here now!” Gentle Jennifer (also my wife) is extremely
sweet and says things like, “Oh dear, could I possibly put this sock on your
poor little foot. Oh, I’m so terribly sorry, I bumped your poor little toe with
my nose.” Silly Sally always gets it wrong and has to be corrected by my
daughter. “Does this sleeve go over the toes? I think the sock should be on
your ear, right?”
Obviously my wife’s favorite character is Mrs. Meanie and unfortunately
she doesn’t get too many requests for that one. But Kara is excited to get
dressed in the morning now. She doesn’t run away from us anymore. at’s
maddening when we’re running late, which is pretty much always.

 Toni’s Story: Fly Away Home
I’ve always had a heck of a time getting the twins out of the car and into
school in the morning. ey get engrossed in arguments with each other,
they insist on counting each step they take, or picking up pebbles, whatever
it takes to make us late. Last week they were talking about dragonﬂies, so I
said, “Let’s pretend we’re a family of dragonﬂies and we’re ﬂying to our home
in the classroom.” We all spread our “wings” and “ﬂew” through the parking
lot and into school. It worked so well, I did it again the next day. en we
pretended to be butterﬂies, then ladybugs, then hawks. e next week, as
soon as I got out of the car, the security guard in the parking lot raised his
eyebrow at me and asked, “What are you this morning?” I felt a little
embarrassed, pretending to ﬂy in public, but hey, it beats yelling at the kids.

Maria’s Story: The Very Hungry Nail Clipper
Benjamin always objects to having his ﬁngernails clipped. He doesn’t like to
sit still. Last night I pretended the nail clippers were talking to him. “Oh
Benjamin, I’m so hungry. Won’t you let me have a little bite of your pinky
nail?” He stuck out his little ﬁnger, and the nail clipper had a delicious snack:
“Oh, thank you. Yum, yum! is is such a tasty little nail. May I have another
one?” He stuck out his other ﬁngers. en he had a very serious
conversation with the nail clippers about his dinosaurs while I ﬁnished
clipping his nails. e nail clipper was very interested in the biting abilities
of the vegetarian and carnivorous dinosaurs. Benjamin was happy to
expound on his favorite topic.

TOOL #2: Offer a Choice

 e second tool for engaging cooperation is to substitute a choice for a
command. Choice, you ask? What choice? ere is no choice. She has to get
dressed, she’s not going to school in her pajamas. He has to wash his hands,
he’s not eating a sandwich right aer playing with frogs. She’s not riding her
bike without a helmet. It’s simply not negotiable!
I’m not suggesting that you make uncomfortable compromises or that
you put a three-year-old in charge of the whole show. I’m just saying that
human beings, including small ones, like to have some input and control
over their lives. ere are plenty of options we can oﬀer our children, short
of handing over the car keys and the credit card.
Instead of, “Get in the car, now!”

Try, “Would you like to bring a toy or a snack for the ride?” “Do you
want to take giant steps to the car or do you want to skip to the car?”
Instead of, “If I have to tell you one more time to get into that tub . . .”

Try, “Do you want your bath with bubbles or boats?” “Would you
like to hop to the tub like a bunny, or crawl like a crab?”
Instead of, “Get your homework started. No more excuses!”

Try, “Would it be easier to get your homework over with right away
and be free of it, or would you rather have a snack ﬁrst?” “Do you
want to do it in the kitchen while I cook dinner, or in your room
where it’s quiet?” One parent had great success with, “Do you want
to do your homework on top of the table or under the table?” (I
think you can guess which her daughter chose.)
Instead of, “Pajamas now!”

Try, “Do you want to put your pajamas on the regular way, or inside
out?” “Do you want to jump ﬁve more times before putting on your
PJs, or ten? Okay, let’s make them big ones. ONE . . . TWO . . .
THREE . . .”
Each of these statements says to your child, “I see you as a person who can
make decisions about your own life.” And every time your child makes a
small decision, she’s getting valuable practice for some of the bigger
decisions she’ll be making down the road.

 Joanna’s Story: Choice Cuts
is choice thing doesn’t always go according to script. When I told Dan
that he was not allowed to give the carpet a haircut with his scissors, I
followed up with a perfectly reasonable choice. “You can cut paper or
cardboard. You decide.”
Dan’s response: “NO!”
Sometimes a parent must persist. “I don’t want my carpet cut. What else
can you cut?”
Now I had his interest. He looked around. “I can cut string, I can cut
tissues, I can’t cut the laundry. I know! Weeds!” He ran outside to trim the
dandelions.
Notice that I put Dan to work making up his own choices. Why should I
have to do all the mental gymnastics?

Toni’s Story: Picture Perfect
We had our relatives over for a family reunion. My cousin wanted to get a
group photograph, but her four-year-old daughter refused to cooperate. She
wouldn’t sit with the group, no matter what her mom said. I don’t know why.
I think she just started out not wanting to sit still and then it became a battle
of wills.
I went over to her and said that I needed her to decide if we should take
the picture with everybody standing or with the kids sitting on the picnic
table. She stopped in her tracks and stared at me. en she said, “Picnic
table,” and went over and sat down. I was the hero of the day!

Michael’s Story: A Tub of Trouble
I’ve been oﬀering Kara choices about the tub. It worked really well to ask her
if she wanted a carrot stick or an apple slice while she took a bath. I know it
sounds unusual, but she likes to eat in odd places. e mistake I made was
the day we had pancakes for dinner. Kara still had a pancake in her hand, so
I asked if she wanted a plain bath or a bath with pancakes. You know which
she chose. Don’t do what I did. Pancakes dissolve surprisingly quickly in

 water. And I don’t even want to talk about the syrup! It was a pretty big
mess.
My wife was mad when she got home and saw the bathtub. But you’ll be
proud of me because I accepted her feelings! I said, “I can see that you’re
really upset about this mess! I’m taking care of it as soon as Kara’s asleep.
Just back out slowly and pretend you never saw this.”

Joanna’s Story: Kids Take Over
ree-year-old Dan and his friend Chris were playing with plastic animals.
e tiger and lion were ﬁghting. Dan was pressing the tiger down on Chris’s
hand, which was holding the lion. Chris was using his other hand to press
down on Dan’s hand.
“Let go! You’re hurting my hand!” cried Chris.
“You’re hurting my hand. I have to hurt your hand because you’re holding
my hand down.”
“But you’re holding my hand down!”
Neither boy was willing to yield. Voices were becoming angry and tearful.
I sighed. I’d have to step in and break up the wild animal ﬁght. Just as I
started to open my mouth to interfere, I heard Dan say, “Christopher, here
are our choices. We can keep on playing with the animals and not hold each
other’s hand down . . . or we can play with something else. Which do you
choice?”
Christopher replied, “Let’s play with something else.”
ey both got up and le the animals in the dirt.

Don’t turn a choice into a threat.

 When giving a choice, it’s important that both options are pleasant!
Satisfying as it may be to say, “You can come with me now, or I can leave you
here for the wild dogs to chew on. You decide, honey!” try to resist that
impulse. Also not qualifying for the child’s choice award is this father’s
statement, in which both options are unpleasant. “I can spank you with my
right hand or my le. It’s up to you!”

TOOL #3: Put the Child in Charge

A common complaint among parents of toddlers is, “He won’t do what he’s
told because he just wants to be in control!”
My response is, “en let’s put him in control.” Whenever you can put
your child in charge of his own behavior, you come out ahead. Whether
you’re a toddler, a teen, an adult, or an entire country, you probably react
badly to being controlled. Human beings of all ages yearn for autonomy and
independence. How about that Boston Tea Party? If it had been a bunch of
toddlers we would’ve called it the Boston Temper Tantrum. So let’s think
about how we can put our kids in control.
Anna gave me a quizzical look. “But wait, isn’t that like letting the
animals run the zoo?”
“Well, yes, sort of. But it doesn’t mean that there are no boundaries. You
can put the lions in charge of their own turf without inviting them into the
snack bar and gi shop. At least not until they’re ready to exercise a certain
level of restraint.”
As a parent you can deﬁne the job that needs to get done, but let your
child be in charge of the details. Delegate! It’s less work for you in the long
run, and your child will enjoy some independence.
For example, if you ﬁnd yourself arguing with your child every morning
about whether or not he needs a jacket, you may want to make a

 temperature chart.

Joanna’s Story: You Don’t Need a Weatherman to Know
Which Way the Wind Blows
When Dan was ﬁve, he refused, on general principal, to wear a coat. e
dialogue was boring and predictable.
“You need a coat. It’s cold outside.”
“No, it’s not.”
“Yes, it is!” And so on.
One aernoon, when I was feeling artistic, I sat down with some paper, a
pack of markers, and a large, outdoor thermometer. I called Dan over. “We
need some pictures for this thermometer.”
We made a bathing suit and stuck it to the thermometer at the 90-degree
mark. We made a coat and taped it to the 40-degree mark. Hat and mittens
at 32, ready for snow! en we ﬁlled in the rest with a T-shirt at 70,
sweatshirt at 60, and a jacket at 50. We covered the drawings with clear tape
to make them rainproof and hung the thermometer outside. A good hour’s
work.

 But well worth it! From now on Dan was the weather master. Instead of
telling him what to wear, I asked him to check the thermometer so that he
could tell me what to wear. Once he was in charge, his protests dissolved.
• • •
Sarah was bursting to speak. “I have another good way to use this tool. You
can put kids in charge of time! You know how we’re always nagging our kids
‘Ten minutes le to play’ or ‘Hurry up, we have only ﬁve minutes ’til the bus
comes,’ and they never seem to get it? We have this handy little timer in our
classroom. When you twist the dial it shows a slice of red. So if you set it for
30 minutes, half the clock face is red. Fieen minutes, a quarter of the clock
face is red. e slice of red gets smaller as the time gets used up, so the kids
can see time go by. at way we can put them in charge of taking turns, or
knowing when it’s time to clean up, instead of nagging them. I’ve actually
heard them warn each other, ‘We have to hurry. ere’s only a sliver of red
le!’ ”

 I wish I’d had one of those timers when my children were young. Time is
such a diﬃcult concept for children to grasp. It’s this abstract, invisible,
intangible thing that adults are obsessed with. We live in a world of minutes
and seconds ticking by at an alarming rate. A world of, Go, go, go, we’re going
to be late! Kids inhabit a diﬀerent world. eir world is, Oh, hey, look at that
spider hanging from the ceiling. . . . Ooh, we could pull these cushions oﬀ the
couch. . . . I wonder if a dog will lick applesauce oﬀ the carpet. We get furious
with them for not sharing our urgency. I love the idea of putting a child in
charge of time.

Joanna’s Story: On the Nature of Time
Years ago I had the following conversation with my son’s four-year-old
friend Noah:
Me: Noah, Dan has to leave in ﬁve minutes.
Noah: How much time is ﬁve minutes? Is it long or short?
Me: Well, that depends on how you feel. If you’re having fun it feels
like a short time. If you’re in pain, like if you had a clothespin stuck
on your nose, it feels like a long time.
Me (a few minutes later): Noah, why do you have a clothespin
stuck to your nose?
Noah: So we can play for a longer time.

TOOL #4: Give Information

 You don’t always need elaborate preparation to put your child in the driver’s
seat. Oen it’s enough to give her simple information instead of an order.
Here’s how it works. You give your child information. en she has a chance
to ﬁgure out for herself what to do. Not only do you avoid the natural
resistance that comes from a direct order, you’re also laying the groundwork
for your child to develop the ability to exercise self-control, whether or not
there’s an adult telling her what to do. A valuable lesson indeed. You’re
oﬀering your child useful knowledge for the future, in place of a rule that
might be followed only when you’re around to enforce it.
Instead of, “Stop banging on that keyboard. You’re going to break it!” (To which the inevitable reply is
an oﬀended, “No, I’m not!”)

Give information: “Keyboards are delicate. All they need is a very
light touch.”
Instead of, “You le the cap oﬀ the glue stick again. Great!”

Give information: “Glue sticks dry out very quickly when they’re not
capped.”
Instead of, “Get your seat belt on, or I’m not driving you to your friend’s house.”

Give information: “e law is everyone has to be belted in before we
can drive.”
Instead of, “What are you thinking? Don’t leave the cheese on the chair like that!”

Give information: “e cheese is in reach of the dog.”
Part of the beauty of using this tool is that it’s not too irritating when it
doesn’t work. When you give a child a direct order— “Buckle your seat belt,
now!”—and she doesn’t comply, it’s infuriating. But when you give her
information and she doesn’t act on it, you can move on to another tool

 without feeling the sting of direct deﬁance. You’ll be in a better mood to try
something else.

Maria’s Story: Air Mail
We were coming home and Benjamin wanted to get the mail from the
mailbox. He carried it inside and immediately threw it up in the air. Instead
of my usual, “Hey, that’s not okay! You need to pick it all up,” I said, “Benny,
the mail belongs on the desk.” He gathered it all up and put it on the desk.

TOOL #5: Say It with a Word (or a Gesture)

Much of what we say to our children when we’re trying to control their
behavior is a repeat performance. ey’ve heard it all before. Many times!
Let’s face it, kids tune out lectures. Grown-ups are no diﬀerent. Which
would you rather hear as you leave this room at the end of the workshop
session?
“You guys le the chairs out again. How many times do I have to tell you?
ere’s no maid to clean this classroom aer we leave.”
Or:
“Chairs!”
“If you said it the ﬁrst way I’d be tempted to throw the chair at the back of
your head,” said Toni.
“I will remember that!”
“Hey, I only said I’d be tempted,” Toni reassured me. “I probably wouldn’t
actually do it. But seriously, I can hear the diﬀerence. When you say ‘chairs!’
you’re giving us the beneﬁt of the doubt. You assume that if you just point

 out the problem, we’ll be glad to ﬁx it. e other way is disrespectful. You’re
implying that we’re lazy, thoughtless people.”
“Yes! You cut to the heart of the matter. It’s more than a tool. It’s a whole
diﬀerent attitude. You’re assuming that your child can tell herself what to
do.”
What happens when your four-year-old hears you say, “Apple core”? She
has to think. Apple core? What about an apple core? Oh, I le it on the couch.
I guess I should put it in the garbage. e child tells herself what to do. She
doesn’t feel bossed around. Now she won’t be tempted to throw the apple
core at the back of your head.
Just be careful that the one word you use is a noun, not a verb. A verb is
more likely to sound like a command. Sit! Come! Quiet! Better for dog
training than for child rearing.
I asked the group for useful examples. Suggestions came ﬂying:
“Seat belt.” (Instead of, “Buckle your seat belt, now.”)
“Jacket.” (Instead of, “Pick your jacket up oﬀ the ﬂoor and hang it on the
hook.”)
“Light.” (Instead of, “How many times have I told you to turn the light oﬀ
aer you leave the bathroom?”)
Toothbrushing gesture.
Finger to lips gesture.
Handwashing gesture.

And ﬁnally, one of the nicest things about the one-word statement is that
you can use it when you’re feeling happy and relaxed, and you can use it
when you’re angry. If you’ve asked your child not to leave her apple cores on
the couch a hundred times already and you just sat down on a slimy, rotten
core and are feeling the wetness seep through the seat of your pants, you can

 stand up and roar, “APPLE COOOORE!” It’s therapeutic for the parent and
not likely to cause long-term psychological damage to a youngster. You
expressed your feelings strongly without resorting to character attacks,
name-calling, or threats.

Sarah’s Story: A Word to the Wise
It’s very hard for me not to lecture the kids about leaving food out. It’s a pet
peeve. Wanna hear my speech? “You le the milk sitting out again. I’ve
already told you, if you’re old enough to take your own snacks out of the
refrigerator, then you’re old enough to put them away. We’re going to have a
whole carton of sour milk. Do you realize how much milk costs?” I can
really go on!
e kids always come back with an excuse.
“It wasn’t me.” “I took it out, but Jake used it last.”
“I don’t care who used it last, just put it away!”
“No fair! Why aren’t you telling him to do it? You only tell me!”
is time I just pointed and said, “Milk.”
Sophia said, “Oh, sorry,” and put it away.
Five minutes later Jake le his orange peels on the counter and I did it
again. I pointed and said, “Compost.”
Jake said, “Oh, yeah,” and grabbed the peels and put them in the compost
without a hint of protest.
It was really quite amazing. ey were so cooperative when I le out the
lecture. My irritation dissolved and I ended up feeling very warmly toward
them.

TOOL #6: Describe What You See

 Sometimes a single word is not enough. You may need to string a few
together. If you can restrict yourself to a simple description, without adding
an irritating command or accusation, you may ﬁnd your child willing to
help out.
Instead of, “Don’t walk away and leave your jacket on the ﬂoor. I’m not going to pick it up for you.”

Describe: “I see a jacket on the ﬂoor.”
Instead of, “You’re making a big mess. Clean that up or the paints are going away.”

Describe: “I see paint dripping.”
Instead of, “Get back here! You’re half naked!”

Describe: “I see a boy who is almost in his pajamas. He has the shirt
on, and soon . . . the pants!”

Appreciate progress before describing what’s left to do.
As you may have noticed in the last example, when you describe what
you see, it helps to describe the positive instead of focusing on the negative.
Describe the progress that you see before pointing out what’s le to be done.
Instead of, “I see you haven’t ﬁnished the cleanup,” you can say, “I see almost

 all of the cars and blocks have been put away! ere’s only one dump truck
and a few road pieces le to go.”

TOOL #7: Describe How You Feel

As parents and teachers we expect ourselves to be endlessly patient with
children. To take deep breaths, count to ten, visualize world peace. To stay
calm and in control at all times. It’s not realistic! We’re humans, not robots.
It’s not a good idea to pretend to be calm until we explode (and most of us
will explode eventually).
It can be helpful for a child to know what another person is feeling. Kids
need to know when their parents or teachers are frightened, frustrated, or
angry. It’s hard for them to ﬁgure out what’s going on when our words don’t
match our emotions.
When you describe how you feel, you’re not only giving children
important information, you’re also modeling a vocabulary of emotions that
they can use when they are frustrated, upset, or scared.

Michael’s Story: A Pressing Concern
I was ironing a shirt when Jamie asked me to help him make a peanut butter
and jelly sandwich. Normally I would have stopped ironing to do it. I’d have
to unplug the iron and put it away so Kara couldn’t touch it. But then I
realized I didn’t want to do that, so I told him, “I’ll get frustrated if I don’t
ﬁnish this shirt ﬁrst. I can help you as soon as I ﬁnish ironing the sleeves.”
Jamie said, “Okay, Dad,” and then he stuck around to watch me iron. I
would never have thought to tell him my feelings before this class. It’s so

 strange to me that I didn’t learn to say things like “I’m frustrated” until I was
thirty-four years old, and my son already knows that at four. He’s way ahead
of me!

Joanna’s Story: No-Fear Mountaineer
My son, Dan, had no sense of fear as a child. My attempts to impress upon
him a sense of his own mortality rolled oﬀ him like water oﬀ a duck’s back.
When we hiked I oen found myself warning him not to go too near the
edge of a drop-oﬀ because “You could fall and get hurt.”
His standard reply? A breezy, “No I won’t.”
It worked much better to tell him, “I get scared when I see a boy so close
to the edge. I worry about broken bones! I’m okay if you go up to this point,
but no farther.”

If he’s in his usual agreeable mood, he’s happy to oblige. If he’s not, I just
have to move him to a less precipitous area! He cannot be convinced to be
afraid, but he’s generally willing to make accommodations for his nervous
mother.

Maria’s Story: Cain and (Is)Abel

 Ever since I had a second child it’s been like Cain and Abel in my house.
When Benjamin hurts Isabel I go crazy. I usually start yelling whatever
comes into my head. “Don’t shove your sister! She’s just a baby! You hurt
her! at’s mean!” He reacts very inappropriately. Sometimes he actually
laughs in my face.
is week I’ve started telling him my feelings instead. “When I see one
child hurting another child I get very upset!”
I have to admit it works! He stops and he doesn’t laugh or run away. Last
night at bedtime he told me his feelings. He was jumping on the bed saying,
“I’m . . . angry . . . at . . . you!” with one word for each jump.
I could guess why. Isabel had a fever and was on my lap all day. I told
Benjamin, “It’s annoying to have a sick sister! She gets all Mama’s attention.”
He jumped until he collapsed on the bed with me admiring each jump.
“Oh my gosh, you almost touched the ceiling. You almost ﬂew like a bird.
You almost went to outer space!”
I told him, “You’re getting good at putting your angry feelings into words
instead of hitting. at’s not easy to do.”
He crawled into my lap and gave me a hug!
I feel like this kind of language is helping us get back to the close
connection we had before Isabel was born, when he became the rough older
brother and I became the angry mother.

When expressing anger or frustration, use the word I, avoid
the word you.
When Maria expressed her angry feelings to Benjamin in that last story,
she did it in a particularly skillful way. She completely avoided the word you.

 She said, “When I see one child hurting another I get very upset!” What she
didn’t say was, “When I see you hurting your sister . . .”
When expressing annoyance, irritation, or anger, it’s important to banish
the word you.
e you is accusatory. As soon as a child hears you, he feels defensive. He
may respond by arguing, laughing inappropriately, running away, or getting
angry in return. If we can avoid you altogether, we’re much more likely to get
a cooperative attitude.
ere’s a world of diﬀerence between, “Look at this mess you made!” and
“I don’t like to see food on the ﬂoor!”
To the ﬁrst statement, a child is likely to respond, “I didn’t do it!” “Why
are you yelling at me? It was Johnny’s fault.” “Who cares?” e second
statement allows a child to think to himself, “Uh oh, Mom really doesn’t
want crackers on the carpet. I’d better pick them up.”
When you see a child doing something dangerous, it doesn’t usually help
to say, “Stop that, you’re going to hurt yourself!” You will most likely get the
classic reply, “No I’m not.”
It’s more eﬀective to describe your feelings without the word you: “I get
scared when I see people jumping around near the stove while I’m cooking. I
worry about burns.”
When your child demands, “Give me juice!” don’t bother telling her,
“You’re rude!” Calling her rude is not going to help her learn to be polite.
She’ll just learn to say, “You’re rude, too!”
It’s more useful to tell her how you feel. “I don’t like being yelled at! at
doesn’t make me feel helpful. I like to hear, ‘Mom, can I have some juice,
please?’ ”
Kids oen respond well when we give them the words they can use to get
what they want. e younger the child is, the more explicit you can be about
giving him the language you prefer to hear.

 Express strong anger sparingly. It can feel like an attack.
Even if you use the perfect wording, it’s diﬃcult for a young child to
handle strong negative emotions from an adult. Use words like angry and
furious sparingly. It’s easier to hear words like upset, or frustrated, or I don’t
like it when without feeling attacked.
I remember a workshop member telling me she was frustrated that we
always ended the workshop late. She explained that she oen had to miss the
end of the session because she needed to get home in time to relieve her
babysitter. I was chagrined. I thought I was being accommodating by
starting late, but it turns out I was making it more diﬃcult for this mom who
had to leave on time. I apologized to her and resolved to announce to the
group that we would honor our start time.
But what if this mom had approached me by saying that she was furious
with me for starting late? I’m sure my reaction would have been diﬀerent. I
would have felt attacked and perhaps wondered if she might be a bit
unbalanced. I might have even tried to avoid her in the future.
Save your outrage for those times when it is unavoidable. Your kid
smacked you in the nose, covered the cat in molasses, ﬂushed your wedding
ring down the toilet. Fury is not a useful everyday seasoning for a
relationship!

TOOL #8: Write a Note

 When you ﬁnd yourself repeating the same plea again and again until you’re
sick of your own voice, it may be time to write a note. Don’t worry if your
child doesn’t know how to read. e written word has a mysterious power
that spoken words do not. A note can be more eﬀective than a nagging
voice.

Joanna’s Story: An Invitation to Bathe
One repeat battle in my home that was eased by note writing was the
dreaded bath time. You can bodily throw a child in the tub, but it takes a toll
on your back. And my kids found so many diﬀerent ways to resist and
procrastinate, I’d be weary and irritable before even starting. I found myself
wondering, “Why are children expected to be clean? How much can I get
away with? Days? Weeks? Would their teachers notice?”
I solved this particular dilemma with a formal notice. I wrote out an
“appointment card” for bath time. I oﬀered various options: the 6:00 p.m.
slot, the 6:15 slot, and the 6:30 slot. e 6:00 p.m. slot was on special oﬀer,
with bubbles. e 6:15 slot oﬀered a happy hour with carrots and rubber
ﬁsh. All the child had to do was check a box with a marker. ey each
happily did so aer giving serious thought to their options. I was amazed at
how well it worked. All I had to do was brandish the card and say, “Your 6:00
p.m. bath is ready, sir!”

 Sarah’s Story: Hours of Operation
I try to get up earlier than the kids so I can have my coﬀee and read the
paper for twenty minutes before going into action. I really need that
transition time. But Mia has been sneaking downstairs early. When I tell her
it’s not time to come down to the kitchen yet, she fools around, putting one
foot in the kitchen and then running back to the stairs. She has this kind of
cute, playful look on her face. I’d throw myself in front of a bus for my
daughter, but I can’t stand it when she does this. I just want those few
minutes!
is week I wrote a note on a big piece of paper and strung it across the
bottom step. It said KITCHEN OPENS AT 7:00. When Mia came down, I asked
her, “Did you see the sign?”
“Mommy, I don’t know how to read.”
“Do you want me to read it to you?”
“Okay.”
I read it to her. She got her timer. I set it for her and she went back
upstairs and waited until 7:00.

TOOL #9: Take Action Without Insult

 None of these tools will work for every child in every situation. You’re still in
charge of the zoo, and you do what you have to do to keep it aﬂoat. (Let’s
imagine the zoo is on a boat, to make this metaphor work. It could be kind
of like Noah’s ark.) e ﬁnal tool of this chapter is to take action without
insult.
If your child refuses to wear his bike helmet in spite of your brilliant use
of playfulness, choice, and information-giving, you can say, “I’m putting the
bike away for now. You’re in no mood to have your head squeezed by a
helmet, and I can’t let you ride without one.”
If your child keeps pounding on your touchscreen, in spite of your
protest that it is delicate, you can remove it, saying, “I see you have a lot of
energy. I’m worried that the screen could break. Let’s ﬁnd something to play
with that can take some rough treatment.”
If your child can’t resist throwing gravel in the park, in spite of your
eﬀorts to oﬀer tempting alternatives, you can say, “I’m taking you home now.
I don’t want anyone to get hit by a rock, even a little one.”
If your child wants to help put pancake batter in the pan, but despite
friendly reminders you can’t convince him not to jump around at the stove,
you can say, “I can’t cook with you now. I’m too worried about burns.”
If your child refuses to get in his carseat, “I can see the seat belt is
uncomfortable. You feel freer without it. I can’t take you to your friend’s
house without the belt buckled.” Or, “I don’t want to be late for work. I’m
buckling you in. I know how much you hate it!”
If your student is ﬂicking the paintbrush full of wet paint at his seatmates,
“I can see you’re in no mood for keeping paint on the paper right now. I
can’t let you splatter the other kids. Let’s move you to the Play-Doh table.
You can squeeze it, pound it, roll it, or smash it ﬂat!”

 Notice that in all these examples the child isn’t being scolded or accused.
e adult is describing her own feelings and actions. She’s standing her
ground, enforcing a limit, or stating her values.
• • •
It had been a long session. e group was looking a little glassy-eyed. I heard
a sigh. Finally Anna expressed the feeling that was in the air. “is is so
much work. I mean, everything here is such a song and dance. Choices,
playfulness, making weather charts, and buying special clocks. Where does
it end? When can I just tell my kid what to do and he does it?”
I shrugged. “It is kind of a three-ring circus. Kids are exhausting. Little
kids are exceptionally exhausting. For me it’s more fun when we’re all tired
and cheerful, instead of tired and irritable. ese tools all help you achieve
the former. And it does get easier. e older they get, the more they can be
in charge of themselves, especially if they’ve had the practice of making
choices and being in charge of their own behavior when they’re younger.”
And for those times when you don’t have the patience or energy to come
up with a really terriﬁc tool, you still have credit in the bank from all those
times you did make the eﬀort. e payoﬀ for taking that extra step to engage
our kids’ cooperation without orders, bribes, and threats is enormous. Study
aer study has found that young children who are not constantly ordered
around are much more likely to cooperate with simple requests from a
parent—for example, cleaning up toys when asked—than children who are
micromanaged and controlled much of the time. ey’re also more likely to
cooperate with another adult, such as a teacher, and more likely to follow
rules when no adults are present to control them. Self-control can only be
developed by practice, not by force!1

     REMINDER: Tools for Engaging Cooperation

1. Be Playful
• Make it a game.
“Can we get all the cars into the box before the timer beeps?
Ready . . . set . . . go!”
• Make inanimate objects talk.
“I’m an empty sock. I need a foot in me!”
• Use silly voices and accents.
“I . . . am . . . your . . . robot . . . Must . . . buckle . . . seat . . .
belt . . . now.”
• Pretend!
“We need to climb this slippery mountain into the carseat.”
• Play the incompetent fool.
“Oh dear, where does this sleeve go? Over your head? No? On
the arm? is is so confusing! ank you for helping me!”

2. Offer a Choice
“Do you want to hop to the tub like a bunny, or crawl to the tub
like a crab?”

3. Put the Child in Charge

 “Johnny, would you set the timer and let us know when it’s time
to leave?”

4. Give Information
“Tissues go in the trash.”

5. Say It with a Word (or a Gesture)
“Trash!”

6. Describe What You See
“I see most of the blocks put away in the toy box. ere are only
a few blocks le to go.”

7. Describe How You Feel
“I don’t like food thrown on the ﬂoor.”

8. Write a Note
“Put me on your head before riding. Love, your bike helmet.”

9. Take Action Without Insult
“I’m putting the paint away for now. I can’t let you splatter the
other kids.”

 • Don’t turn a choice into a threat. Make sure both

options are acceptable to you and your child.
• Appreciate progress before describing what’s left to

do.
• When expressing anger or frustration, use the word

I, avoid the word you.
• Express strong anger sparingly. It can feel like an

attack.

 Chapter Three
Tools for Resolving Conflict . . . Avoiding Combat
on the Home Front
—Replacing punishment with more peaceful,
effective solutions
Joanna
What do you do when a child deliberately does something you’ve just told
him not to? He steals the candy, pulls the dog’s tail, pinches the baby, upends
the egg carton just to see the beautiful sight of a dozen raw yolks oozing out
of their smashed shells into the crack between the stove and the counter.
What happens when you’ve tried all the tools in chapter two, but your child
continues to defy you? Kids can be so frustrating, so irritating, so enraging,
that the impulse to punish is hard to resist. You’ve read this book, you’ve
studied it, and now you want to throw it at them.
Wait! Lock yourself in the bathroom and take a look at this chapter
before you start ﬂinging and the pages start ﬂying.

 Consider this scenario: You take your children to the park one sunny
aernoon. Before you leave the house you remind your four-year-old that he
needs to hold your hand in the parking lot and stay in sight at the
playground. And don’t forget to take turns and play nice.
What do you do when little Buckaroo decides to ignore those rules? He
squirms away and zips through the parking lot, weaving between the cars.
Once in the playground, he runs around with the stroller, bashing it into the
playground equipment. At the top of the slide he impatiently shoves his twoyear-old sister who is taking too long to work up the courage to go down.
Should he get a smack on the bottom? Should he lose out on a treat from
the ice-cream truck? Should he be sent to his room for a time-out when he
gets home, to contemplate his crimes?
Most adults agree that something must be done! A child cannot be
allowed to put himself in danger and freely terrorize all those around him.
People say, “Kids need consequences. ere’s a time and a place for
punishment, and this is the time and place!” “is kid is just not getting it. He
needs to be taught a lesson.” It feels like common sense.
Before we start dutifully doling out consequences and punishment, I’d
like to take a moment to deﬁne our terms. Just what do we mean by natural
or logical consequences? And what lessons are we teaching when we punish?
Let’s start with natural consequences. We can’t give a child a natural
consequence. e only truly natural consequences are the ones found in
nature. ey happen without us having to do anything. If you pull a dog’s
ear, you may get bitten. If you stick your hand in a ﬁre, you get burned. If
you step oﬀ the edge of a cliﬀ, gravity will cause you to plummet to the
ground below.
As for logical consequences, the “logic” is highly debatable. If you
continually arrive late for my workshop, despite my warning that lateness is
unacceptable, I may ﬁnd it “logical” to lock you out of my classroom. Or
perhaps it would be more “logical” to keep you locked in aer class for the
same number of minutes you were late. Or maybe my “logic” demands that
you miss out on the snacks. As you may be starting to suspect, these are not
true exercises in logic. ey’re really more of a free association, where we try
to think of a way to make the wrongdoer suﬀer. We hope that the suﬀering
will motivate the oﬀender to do better in the future.

 Let’s be honest. From the point of view of the child, getting a
consequence and getting a punishment are two diﬀerent names for the same
thing. Even if we modernize it by calling it a natural or a logical
consequence. e traditional parent may say, “You are being sent to your
room . . . losing your computer privileges . . . getting a spanking . . . as a
punishment for your behavior.” e modern parent may say, “You are being
sent to your room . . . losing computer privileges . . . getting a spanking . . .
as a consequence of your behavior.” e child is experiencing the same
emotional distress or physical pain no matter what label we paste on our
actions. Either way, our intent is to ﬁnd some way to make the child suﬀer,
or at least feel bad, in the hope that she will be discouraged from repeating
her unacceptable behavior.

For the purposes of this discussion, I’m going to use the term punishment
to refer to any unpleasant experience imposed by an adult with the intent of
changing a child’s behavior.
I asked my workshop group why people punish kids. Here are their
responses.
Michael: Listen, some boys are hardheaded. I was a pretty wild kid. I
didn’t listen to my mom when she told me not to do something.
She had to hit me just to get my attention!
Toni: We can’t give up our authority as adults just to be nice. I don’t
advocate physical abuse, but sometimes punishment is the only
thing a child understands. A smack on the bottom is worth it, if it
stops a child from running into the street.

 Sarah: I don’t believe in punishment as a regular, everyday tool, but
kids have to know there’s a limit, don’t they? As a teacher I don’t
necessarily know why a child is acting out, but that doesn’t mean I
can give him a pass on following the rules. We would never hit a
child at school, but they can lose privileges, or be sent to the timeout corner.
Maria: Sometimes a child does something dangerous or hurtful, but
he doesn’t seem to care. Giving him a consequence makes him “feel
the pain” so that he won’t do it again, even if he isn’t old enough to
understand why. ey need to know they can’t just get away with
doing anything they want.

“Now I want to hear the other side of the story,” I say to my group. “Can
you remember being punished as a child? Did it inspire you to change your
bad behavior?”
A big grin spread over Michael’s face. Clearly he was having some fond
memories of past misadventures. “Oh no! Getting in trouble was much more
fun than punishment was bad. It was totally worth it to be spanked. My
mom didn’t hit that hard.”
Toni looked like she was trying to suppress a smirk. “I remember getting
grounded for lying about a sleepover. I learned to lie better the next time. I
was pretty sneaky. When I got older I used to climb out the window.”
“I don’t actually remember getting punished as a child,” said Sarah. “I
guess I was that good little girl who always wanted to please. But I can tell
you that the kids in my preschool who get put in the time-out corner and
lose privileges are the same ones week aer week. I have to admit, it doesn’t
seem to change their attitude.”
“One time my little sister and I shoplied candy together,” said Maria.
“My mom found the candy and punished me, but my sister got oﬀ free
because she was younger. I had to miss my best friend’s birthday party. I
remember being outraged at the injustice of it. I don’t think I shoplied
again, so I guess you could say it worked. But I was angry at my sister for a
long time. I got back at her. I would tease her until she tried to hit me, so
she’d get in trouble with my mom.”
Anna looked distressed. “I hate to say it, but punishment did work for
me. My father didn’t spank soly. He hit hard, with a belt. Sometimes my

 mother made me kneel on rice with bare knees. It was painful and
humiliating. It stopped me from doing anything that I thought might get me
in trouble. But I was a miserable, terriﬁed little kid. I don’t want my own kids
to feel that way.”
ese experiences illustrate some of the problems with punishment.
While it may produce quick results, it can lead to many pitfalls:
• When you’ve committed yourself to using punishment to solve a
conﬂict and the punishment isn’t harsh enough to be eﬀective,
you’re in a dangerous position. You may ﬁnd yourself locked in to
using harsher and harsher punishments.
• e punishment doesn’t address the underlying problem. A child in
preschool who has trouble socializing with other children may be
punished for shoving or biting, but that doesn’t help him acquire
the social skills he needs to get along with his peers.
• Oen a strong-willed child who is punished becomes more
determined to defy authority. Studies ﬁnd that kids who are
punished are more likely to misbehave in the future. Punishment
actually increases the undesired behavior.1
• Punishment can distract a child from the important lesson she
needs to learn. Instead of feeling an urge to ﬁx the problem or
make amends, punishment prompts a child to think selﬁshly. What
television shows will she be forced to miss? What dessert will she
have to give up? She’s likely to be ﬁlled with resentment instead of
remorse.
• Even when punishment does work to eliminate an unwanted
behavior, the victory may come at a high cost. A child who is
punished harshly can develop other problems, from fear and
timidity to aggression toward other children.
• And ﬁnally, the punishments we mete out to our children give
them a blueprint for how to approach conﬂict in their lives. We
have to ask ourselves if we want them to use these methods on
their peers and siblings.
is last point was graphically illustrated to me when Dan, at four years old,
kept poking his little brother in the head no matter how much I explained

 that this was not a pleasant sensation. I could not fathom the pleasure he
took in this activity. Finally, at my wit’s end, I yelled, “DAN, YOU ARE NOT
UNDERSTANDING ME! I have to show you what this feels like.” Fueled by
the intensity of my frustration, I gave him a forceful poke on the head. “Do
you like that?”
He cried. “No!”
“Okay, then . . . Don’t. Do it. To your brother!” Point made.
e very next day I heard his logical little voice from the living room
speaking calmly to his younger brother. “Sam, I have to show you what this
feels like.” Hysterical wailing from Sam. Okay, wrong point made.
It is kind of stunning how much our kids really do want to emulate us.
And how much they focus on our overall strategy. It’s a tired old phrase but
true: children will do as you do, not as you say.

e key question is: how do we want our children to approach conﬂict? Do
we want them to think about what they should do to the other person—take
something away or inﬂict pain—or do we want them to think what can I do
to solve this problem?
Sounds a bit idealistic, doesn’t it? What about that child careening
through the parking lot and shoving his sister on the playground? What can
a parent actually do with all this philosophy in the face of an out-of-control
child?
We need practical tools to put philosophy into action. Here’s how it might
look when we apply our tools to the young ruﬃan who pushed his little

 sister at the top of the slide.

TOOL #1: Express Your Feelings . . . Strongly!

“HEY, I don’t like to see people being pushed!”
Sometimes that will be enough. You’ve avoided the command: “Stop that
right now!” You’ve avoided character attacks: “Bad boy! at’s mean!” You’ve
avoided threatening: “If you don’t stop it right now, there’ll be no ice cream
for you!” You stayed away from all those reactions that cause natural
resistance.
But it still might not be enough to stop your wild child. He’s having fun
and he doesn’t truly understand the possible repercussions of pushing a little
kid at the top of the slide. Heck, he was just helping her get going.

TOOL #2: Show Your Child How to Make Amends

“Your sister got scared when she was pushed. Let’s do something to make
her feel better. Do you want to oﬀer her some apple slices, or do you think
she’d like to play with your sand bucket?”
e quickest way to change a child’s behavior and attitude is to get him
involved in ﬁxing his mistake. e best way to inspire a child to do better in
the future is to give him an opportunity to do better in the present. A

 punishment makes him feel bad about himself. Making amends helps him
feel good about himself, and helps him to see himself as a person who can
do good.

TOOL #3: Offer a Choice

“We’re going to give the slide a rest for now. I can see you’re in no mood to
wait for a turn. You can swing on the swings or you can dig a big hole in the
sand. You decide.”
Sometimes a youngster needs help to redirect his energy. A choice can
help him move on to a more acceptable activity.

TOOL #4: Take Action Without Insult

If your little ﬁrecracker continues to pose a hazard to himself and others,
you may have to take action:
“We’re heading home. We’ll try the playground another day. I’m too
worried about children getting hurt right now.”
“Aha! So you do believe in consequences!” I hear you cry. “What was all
that ﬁne talk about how consequences are really punishments, and
punishments are bad?”

 Here’s how I see it. I take action in order to protect, not to punish. I take
action to protect my child from harm, to protect others from being harmed
physically or emotionally, to protect property, and to protect my own
feelings.
• • •
I may have to snatch my child’s arm in the parking lot or require that he ride
in the stroller to protect him from being hit by a car.
“I’m buckling you in so you won’t get hurt by a car. I know you don’t
like it! As soon as we get out of the parking lot, you can be free!”
I may have to remove him from the playground to protect other children
from being hurt by his rambunctious behavior.
“I’m taking you to the grassy ﬁeld. Let’s bring the ball. We need a
place to play where a person can run around without worrying
about bumping into anybody.”
I may take away the stroller to prevent him from breaking it.
“I’m putting the stroller in the car so it won’t get broken. Let’s ﬁnd
something else to play with. Something tough that can take a good
banging!”
I may even place a moratorium on trips to the playground until we come up
with a better plan to protect myself from a stressful outing.
“I’m not taking you to the playground today. I don’t want to end up
getting mad and yelling again. We need to come up with a new plan
ﬁrst.”
Notice that we are giving a very clear message to the child that we are not
acting to punish, but to protect. We don’t say, “You behaved badly at the park
yesterday, so you don’t get to go today.” We don’t say, “You were too rough
with the stroller, so you’ve lost the privilege of pushing it.” We focus on safety
and peace of mind for the present, and solutions for the future.
It’s a lesson kids can take forward with them into adulthood. When you
have a problem with an adult—say, for example, you have a friend who’s
always borrowing things and returning them late or broken or not at all—

 you probably don’t think about how you can punish that person. You think
about how to respectfully protect yourself. You don’t say, “Now that you’ve
given me back my jacket with a stain on it, and broken the side mirror oﬀ
my car, I’m going to . . . slap you.” at would be assault. Or “. . . lock you in
your room for an hour.” at would be imprisonment. Or “. . . take away
your smart phone.” at would be the. You’d probably say something like,
“I don’t feel comfortable lending you clothes anymore. I get very upset when
they come back damaged. And, I can’t lend you my car, which I just got
repaired. I need to have it in working condition. In fact, I’d appreciate some
help with the repair bill!”
Your friend may very well learn a lesson from your actions. He learns that
you have a limit and that he has stepped over that limit. If he wants to do
any borrowing in the future he’ll have to change his behavior. Not because
you did something to make him suﬀer, but because you acted ﬁrmly to
protect yourself.
Of course, children are diﬀerent from adults, and sometimes a whole lot
wackier. Here are more examples of how to take action with children
when all your other tools have failed.
“I’m putting the blocks away for now. I can’t allow throwing. I’m too
worried about broken windows and broken heads.”
“I’m separating you from your brother! I can see how angry you are
and I don’t want either of you to get hurt.”
“We’re leaving the library. I can’t let books be pushed oﬀ the shelves.”
“I’m putting the food away. I can see you’re not hungry and I don’t
like food to be smeared on clothing.”
Taking action to protect yourself and those around you is an essential life
skill for adults and a powerful way to model for our children how to deal
with conﬂict. is approach is a world apart from the tactic of thinking up
ways to cause discomfort in the hope that a lesson will be learned.
“But what about that lesson?” you ask. “What about the next time we go
to the park? If I just keep gently preventing my child from causing harm—to
himself, to others, or to property—what is going to inspire him to change his
behavior? With no punishment, isn’t he ‘getting away with it?’ ”

 Don’t close the book yet! We have a tool for you that will be more
eﬀective than punishment in motivating your child to change his behavior in
the future. is tool is invaluable when you have an ongoing problem that
resists a quick ﬁx. It can’t always be used in the moment. Some situations are
unsalvageable. But as you drag your child screaming and kicking from a
store or playground, you will have this comforting thought in the back of
your mind: Later, when things calm down, I’m going to try problem-solving,
and the next time will be better!
Here’s the way it works.

TOOL #5: Try Problem-Solving

One of the keys to successful problem solving is to wait for a time when the
mood is right. It can’t be done in the midst of frustration and anger. Aer
the storm has passed, invite your child to sit down with you.

The first step of problem-solving is to acknowledge your
child’s feelings. is is the most important step, and the most frequently

skipped! Without acknowledging feelings ﬁrst, you won’t get far. Your child
needs to know that you can see things from his point of view and
understand what he’s feeling, or he won’t be open to any of the suggestions
that follow.
“I can see that you don’t like your hand held in the parking lot. You’d
rather be free to run!”
“You certainly don’t like having to wait a long time to go down the
slide. It’s annoying to be blocked by a little sister who can’t decide
whether to go down or not.”

 If your child has something to add, continue to listen and reﬂect feelings.
“Ah, so you hate it when I squeeze your hand. And you wish you could have
the playground all to yourself sometimes!”

The second step is to describe the problem. Here’s where you can

talk about your feelings or other people’s feelings. Unfortunately this part has
to be short. You can’t go on and on, or you’ll sink the ship before it sails.
“e problem is, I worry about cars hitting children in the parking
lot.”
“Being pushed at the top of the slide can be scary to a little kid. She
could fall and get hurt.”

The third step is to ask for ideas. For this step you’re going to need

paper and pencil. Be sure to write down all ideas, no matter how outrageous.
If you start rejecting ideas at this stage of the game (“Oh no, that would
never work!”) your child will quickly lose interest. As a matter of fact, it’s
nice to start out by putting some truly preposterous ideas on your list.
“We need some ideas so we can go back to the park and have a good
time without people getting mad or scared or hurt. What can we
do?”
• Make the cars disappear.
• Fly over the cars like a bird.
• Instead of holding hands, hold on to a belt.
• Instead of holding hands, hold on to the stroller and help push it.
• Pretend Mommy is lost. Hold her sleeve and lead her through the
parking lot.
• Squirt water on the slide so nobody else will use it.
• Put a sign on the slide that says NO BABIES. ey can use the swings.
• If a kid is scared, oﬀer to go down the slide together.
• If the slide is crowded, go to the climbing house.
• If the slide is crowded, jump down from the ladder, get out the
bucket and shovel, and go play in the sandbox.

 The fourth step is to decide which ideas you both like and cross
out the ones that neither of you like.

“Hmm, it would be nice to ﬂy like a bird, but I don’t think I can do
that. How about helping push the stroller? Oh, you like the idea of
leading me by the sleeve. Let’s circle that one.”
“I guess we can’t really put water on the slide. at would make
people mad. And we can’t keep the babies away. e park is for
everyone. How about the climbing house idea?”

The last step is to try out your solutions. Get a magnet, stick your

list of ideas on the refrigerator, and wait for opportunity to strike. Bring your
list to the park. Take it out before you leave the car and double check the
plan with your child.
“So, you’re ready to lead me to the playground? Okay, grab my sleeve,
I’m ready to follow!”
• • •
Chances are that if your child participated in coming up with solutions, he’ll
be eager to try them out. You’ll ﬁnd yourself at the park, feeling good, with a
cooperative child who is getting valuable practice in solving the thorny
problems of life. You skipped the whole punishment phase of the parenting
journey and went directly to solving the problem.
But what if it doesn’t work?
en it’s back to the drawing board. You need new ideas. e beauty of
problem-solving is that, unlike punishment, it oﬀers endless possibilities. If
you’re committed to punishment and your child continues to misbehave, all
you can do is punish more severely. You might hit him harder or take away
more privileges, but chances are you won’t get any closer to your goal of
having a cooperative child. And you’ll create a lot of ill will in the process.
With problem-solving, you can always go back and brainstorm some more.
When you put your heads together, you’re bound to come up with
something that will work for both of you.

 If nothing is working, you may have to reconsider your basic
expectations.
When children are not ready to behave in a way that is safe for
themselves and others, we default to managing the environment. We don’t
expect babies to keep their ﬁngers out of electrical sockets. We cover them.
We don’t build playgrounds next to highways and expect toddlers not to run
into traﬃc aer a rolling ball. We fence in the playground. We don’t leave
bowls of chocolate bars in the middle of the table and expect preschoolers
(or their parents!) to eat just one. We give one to each person and put the
rest out of sight. We give babies board books so they won’t rip the pages out
with their chubby, determined ﬁngers. If Grandma has a house full of
fascinating, delicate china dolls displayed on low shelves, you don’t expect to
spend a relaxing time there with your two-year-old. You invite Grandma to
visit her granddaughter at your house.

Library Mayhem
When Dan was almost two, the library was a very interesting place. He loved
books. No, not in that way. Not to read! He loved the physics of shelved
books. His favorite activity was to race down the aisles, pushing on the
spines of the books as he sped by, so that the books on the other side fell
down with a series of satisfying clunks. en he’d race down the next aisle to
see the result of his experiment with mass and gravity. I decided that library
visits would be suspended for a while, until my little scientist became more
interested in what was inside of books.

 Blocked
On Dan’s second birthday, my parents proudly presented us with a
wonderful gi: a full set of large wooden blocks. I’m sure they envisioned a
creative explosion of architecture. Castles, skyscrapers, roadways with
bridges and tunnels for toy cars to traverse, entire cityscapes. Dan had other
ideas. He found it fascinating to launch these heavy, rectangular projectiles
into the air. He thrilled to the soaring arc and the crashing ﬁnale. Aer
trying numerous approaches, I conceded defeat. In the interest of protecting
the structural integrity of our windows and our heads, I packed the blocks in
boxes and stored them in the basement. ey reemerged when Dan was
three. Construction projects resumed, now ﬁrmly rooted to the ground. A
wonderful gi. It’s all in the timing!
• • •
But let’s assume that you are asking for behavior that is age appropriate and
within your child’s skill set. Here are some real life examples of parents using
alternatives to punishment. Although you may wonder if skipping the
punishment lets a child oﬀ the hook and deprives him of learning to take
responsibility for his actions, you’ll notice that in all these examples, the
opposite is true.
In this ﬁrst story, learning that he has the power to make amends gives a
child the courage to face a mistake.

 Michael’s Story: Truckful of Trouble
I walked into the living room to ﬁnd that Jamie had been using his dump
truck to transport ﬂour. ere was a huge mess all over the ﬂoor. I yelled,
“Who made this big mess?”
Jamie said, “Trouble!” and ran and hid behind the couch.
I saw that I had scared him, and that made me feel bad. So I said, “Oh no,
we have a problem. What should we do to ﬁx it?”
He stuck his head out and yelled, “Water!” He ran to the kitchen and got
a wet paper towel.
Jan and I usually get upset with Jamie because when we scold him he tries
to run away instead of saying he’s sorry. But with this new approach, I see his
whole attitude changing. e other day he was in the living room ﬂipping
through the pages of a book of animal photographs while I was in the
kitchen. He came running in looking very worried and said, “Daddy, I
ripped a page. What should we do to ﬁx it?”
I gave him tape. I think in the past he would have closed the book and
hidden it.
• • •
And then there are times when it’s enough for a parent just to express her
feelings strongly.

Maria’s Story: Escape Artist
We have a fenced yard, so sometimes I let Benjamin play outside while I’m
working in the house. I keep an eye on him through the window. Yesterday I
looked out and saw him climbing the fence. I’ve punished him several times
for that very activity with a smack on the bottom and a time-out. ere’s a
busy road on the other side, so it’s very dangerous. is time I yelled as loud
as I could, “I see a boy on a fence and I’m afraid he’ll get hurt!” Benjamin
jumped down and ran over to me. I hugged him and said, “at made me
very, very scared!” He said, “Sorry, Mommy!”
• • •

 Sometimes you’ll need an assortment of tools in combination. In this story
see if you can spot acknowledging feelings, expressing feelings strongly, giving
choices, and taking action.

Joanna’s Story: Slip Sliding Away
We were at an outdoor birthday party at a public mini golf course with a
large group of seven-year-old boys. ere was a dancing area with a live
band. A light drizzle had made the dance ﬂoor slick in spite of the canopy
covering it. Kids in our party realized that they could take a running start
and go sliiiiding across the wooden ﬂoor. What fun! Except that other people
on the dance ﬂoor were clearly uncomfortable with this activity. Parents
were grabbing their toddlers so they wouldn’t get knocked down by these
wild boys. Some elderly people were ﬂinching in fear of being toppled. I
looked to the parents of the birthday boy to lay down the law. Aer all, it
was their party. ey seemed reluctant to ruin their son’s special day by
chastising him.
I felt too uncomfortable to ignore the mayhem, especially since my own
son was participating.
I yelled out in a loud voice, “Hey, no sliding on the dance ﬂoor! I can see
it’s really fun. e problem is people are dancing here and they don’t want to
be knocked down. You can dance on the dance ﬂoor, or slide somewhere
else, oﬀ the dance ﬂoor.”
Some of the kids stopped, including mine. A few kept running and
sliding, including the birthday boy. I grabbed each of those kids by the arm
and repeated the choice. ey went running oﬀ to play elsewhere and a few
people on the dance ﬂoor mouthed thank you!
ese boys weren’t trying to terrorize anyone. ey were just having
some lively seven-year-old fun, oblivious to the needs of others. I
acknowledged their feelings and let them know how other people felt,
without attacking their character. I gave them a choice. And I took action by
stopping the ones who couldn’t quite manage to stop themselves. Nobody’s
feelings were hurt and the party proceeded with everyone in a merry mood.
• • •

 And then there are those trying times that call for the more elaborate
activity of problem-solving.

Joanna’s Story: Dirty Kid
Bath time had become an enormous battle. It was so unpleasant that I’d
allowed the intervals between baths to grow from a few days to more than a
week. How long could I stretch it before people started to notice? e
sticking point was the washing of the hair. Five-year-old Zach hated it. I had
tried humor, choices, giving information, and was now using the default
option—force. I had to do it. Nobody else was sending their kid to
kindergarten with sticky, smelly hair. I would start out trying to carefully
rinse the shampoo out of Zach’s hair, and then as he struggled and refused to
cooperate in any way, soapy water would get in his face and he would start to
scream. Since he was already mad as a hornet, I’d just hang on to his slippery
arm and dump more water on his head to ﬁnish the job. Much sputtering
and more screaming would ensue. No mother-of-the-year awards here.
I decided to try problem-solving.
I sat down with Zach one evening and heaved a big sigh. “Boy, you really
don’t like having your hair washed. If it were up to you, that would just
never, ever happen!”
“Yeah! e water blurs my face. And you get soap in my eyes!”
“at sounds really unpleasant. No wonder you don’t like it.”
“I hate it!”
“I can tell. And I hate ﬁghting with you about it and making you sad and
mad. e problem is, I’m supposed to send you to school with slightly clean
hair. It’s one of my jobs as a mom. We need ideas for how to do this better.”
I took out a piece of paper and wrote at the top THE PROBLEM WITH
WASHING HAIR.
Underneath I entered Zach’s main complaints, reading out loud as I
wrote: WATER BLURS FACE, SOAP IN EYES
en I wrote my complaint: STICKY HAIR.
And underneath that I wrote SOLUTIONS.
We looked at each other. I ﬁgured I’d go for a lighthearted mood. “Well, I
guess you could wait for the rain and just go stand outside and get clean that

 way.”
I wrote my suggestion down with a little stick ﬁgure in the rain so Zach
would have a picture to go along with the words.
Zach got into the swing of things. “I could be a ﬁsh! ey don’t mind
being under water.”
I wrote it down, with a picture of a ﬁsh.
“Or I could be a cat! ey never have to take baths.”
I wrote it. Luckily ﬁsh and cats were both within my limited drawing
ability.
Zach was still on a roll. “I could wait until I’m as old as Sam. He doesn’t
mind washing his hair.”
Sam was eight years old. I drew a stick ﬁgure with a number 8 over his
head.
I was thinking that I’d better turn the conversation toward something a
little more realistic or it might be three long years before Zach’s next bath.
at would really be stretching it!
I wrote down a suggestion that Zach could stand in the tub and bend
over to dunk his hair in the water, then quickly put a towel around his head
so the water didn’t drip in his face. I wrote that Zach could rinse oﬀ by
himself, using the detachable showerhead. Zach countered with the
suggestion that I take him to a pool because he didn’t mind water on his face
at a pool.
“Hey, wait a minute. Why is that? Why don’t you mind getting water in
your face at a pool?”
“Because I wear goggles in the pool.”
“Ohhh.”
A breakthrough! “What if we get some goggles for the bathtub?” I wrote
it down.
We looked over our list. Standing out in the rain got a check mark. All
the other ideas were crossed out as being unrealistic or unpleasant, except
for the goggles. at held promise. In the months that followed, all hair
washing was done with goggles. Occasionally water seeped through, but it
seemed to be okay because even if the solution wasn’t perfect, it was ours.
What a relief!

 • • •
Problem-solving doesn’t always have to be a laborious, time-consuming,
multistep activity. Sometimes it’s a simple shi in perspective. Instead of
thinking, “How can I control this child?” we can think of our child as being
on the same team and invite his help and participation.

Julie’s Story: Dirty Mother
When Rashi was a newborn and Asher was three, it was a challenge to take
care of my own essential needs. Taking a shower oen didn’t make the cut.
One morning Rashi was taking one of his unpredictable naps and it
struck me that with a little luck I might be able to take a shower before he
woke up. e problem was that if I le Asher unsupervised, he was sure to
make a beeline for the crib and do something to wake the baby.
I found Asher in the kitchen holding his Magic Mitts—plastic discs
covered in velcro that you strap on your hands and use to catch a fuzzy ball.
“Mommy, you throw the ball!”
Darn it. Asher had other ideas for this precious nap period. If I wanted to
be clean I was going to have to be skillful. Rashi was a light sleeper.
“Oh, you want to play with the Magic Mitts now.”
“row it!”
“I want to take a shower now. What should we do?”
Asher thought for a moment. “I can get the tape player and listen to
Sesame Street in the bathroom.”
“I like that idea. Let’s do it!”
I got my shower that morning. A clean victory!

 • • •
Here’s another story where an attitude of problem-solving led to a quick ﬁx.

Joanna’s Story: The Trouble with Trikes
It was one of those miserable, cold, rainy days that parents of young children
dread. Outside, the unpaved driveway was a sea of mud. Luckily two-and-ahalf-year-old Danny was having a ﬁne time riding his tricycle in the kitchen.
e problem was that he only wanted to ride it unnervingly close to sixmonth-old Sam, who was on the ﬂoor trying to crawl.
“Dan, not so near the baby!” “Dan, you’ll hurt his little ﬁngers.” “Dan, I’m
going to have to put the trike away if you keep doing that.”
Dan ignored my warnings and threats, supremely conﬁdent of his ability
to pilot around his helpless brother. I didn’t really want to put the trike away.
It was keeping him happy and occupied. So instead of making good on my
threat I decided to try something new. I knew he was still too young for
problem-solving. He wasn’t even talking much yet. But I felt like I had
nothing to lose. I said, “Danny, I can see you’re enjoying riding your trike in
the kitchen. And Sammy is enjoying watching you.” (at was the accepting
feelings part of the formula.)
“e problem is, I’m worried about his little ﬁngers being hurt by the
wheels.” (at was the describing the problem part.)
“What should we do? We need an idea!” (at was the asking for
solutions part.)
Danny gazed thoughtfully into the distance and pronounced, “Danny
ride ovah heah.”
He pushed his trike to the other side of the kitchen, away from his
brother. I was astounded. My terrible-two-year-old was perfectly willing to
cooperate as long as he could be the idea man. Aer that incident, “Danny
have a idea!” became an o heard phrase in our house.
• • •
And another problem-solving ﬁx, not quite so quick.

 Joanna’s Story: Miss Liberty Pitches In
It wasn’t until Danny was two years and eight months old that we had our
ﬁrst formal problem-solving session, complete with pencil and paper and a
list of ideas posted with a magnet to the refrigerator door.
I remember his exact age because I was so eager to have a child who
could deposit bodily ﬂuids in a potty, that I was counting the months. Heck,
I was counting the minutes. We talked about “that feeling you get” when the
pee wants to come out, and how hard it is to stop what you’re doing and get
to the bathroom, pull down your pants, and sit on the potty in time. We
spent a few housebound, winter days practicing, with Dan sitting on the
potty at random intervals waiting for the magic to happen.
Finally, it all came together. I had a boy who was toilet trained. My ﬁrst
ever! And then a few weeks later, he lost interest. e bloom was oﬀ the rose.
e potty was old news. He would clutch his crotch while playing and insist
that he did “NOT need to go to the bathroom!”
When he could hold it no longer, he would let loose a stream on the
carpeted ﬂoor. en he would run to the kitchen, drag the stool to the
supply cabinet so he could reach the foam action carpet cleaner, and
enthusiastically scrub away at the carpet. My toilet training triumph was
crumbling before my eyes.
I got out my pencil and paper and started in, reading aloud as I wrote.
“Dan does not like to stop playing to go to the bathroom!”
“Mom does not like pee on the carpet.”
“What are you doing?” asked Dan.
“We need ideas for this problem,” I announced.
I wrote numbers one through four along the margin of the page. I was
feeling hopeful. I looked at Dan. He looked back at me. I knew I was
supposed to let the child go ﬁrst, but this child wasn’t saying anything. I
realized I hadn’t thought this through ahead of time. I didn’t have anything
creative or clever to oﬀer. But I had started this and I was going to go with
the ﬂow, even if it was just an ooze.
I read aloud as I wrote, “Number one, Mom will remind Dan in a friendly
way to go to the bathroom.”
Now Dan was ready to jump in. “Number two, Dan will clean the ﬂoor
with carpet cleaner.”

 I gritted my teeth and wrote it down without protest. Next I oﬀered,
“Number three, Dan can wear diapers if he doesn’t want to pee in the potty.”
Dan was gazing vacantly around the room. His eyes lighted on a green
plastic Statue of Liberty souvenir I had purchased on one of my school trips.
“e little green man will tell me, ‘peepee in the pot.’ ”
I thought, Oh well, this is not working. But I forged ahead. “Let’s look at
our list and see which ideas we like and which we don’t like.”
Number one: the friendly reminder. Dan strongly objected. We crossed it
out.
Number two: Dan liked this one but Mom didn’t. e carpet was getting
too smelly. ere’s only so much action in that foam. We crossed it out.
Number three: Dan was happy to go back to diapers, but Mom objected
to her own idea. We crossed it out.
Number four: the little green man. It was all we had le. I had my doubts
but I managed to sound enthusiastic as we both put big check marks on
number four.
I posted the list on the refrigerator and waited for the next crotchclutching incident. It happened at dinner time. Dan was squeezing and
wiggling, making no move to get up. I picked up Miss Liberty, held it to his
ear, and whispered, “Peepee in the pot,” in my best raspy, bronze statue–like
voice. Dan took the statue and whispered something back (I never found out
what) and then jumped up and went to the bathroom!

For the next few months I carried that “little green man” everywhere with
me. It was my emissary to my son’s bladder. No longer did I have to suﬀer
the embarrassment of a teenaged grocery clerk telling me, “Excuse me,

 Ma’am, your son needs to go to the bathroom,” while I shrugged helplessly.
Now I could whip out the little green man and oﬀ we’d trot to the lavatory.
ere was one bit of social awkwardness when my Swedish friend spotted
me clutching my statue. “My, aren’t we patriotic. Should I be carrying the
Swedish ﬂag?”
• • •
And while we’re on the topic of toilet training, here’s a much shorter
problem-solving session with my youngest son, Zach. As you will see, I
didn’t follow the correct protocol: accepting feelings, describing the
problem, and asking for ideas. Nevertheless, we muddled through.

Going Natural
Frustrated Mother: Zach, let’s give the potty a try.
Recalcitrant Two-and-a-Half-Year-Old: NO!
FM: It could be fun to see if you can ﬁll the pot with pee. en you
wouldn’t have to wear a diaper.
RTAHYO: I’m not “instrested” in that.
FM: You do it when we’re outside. You know how to stop playing and
pull down your pants and pee in the bushes.
RTAHYO: at’s because I’m peeing on leaves. I LIKE to pee on
leaves!
FM: Okay, let’s go get some leaves.

We go outside and pick leaves. We bring them in and nestle the leaves
into the potty. Zach immediately pulls down his pants and pees on the
leaves.
FM: You did it!
RTAHYO: I told you!

Fortunately there is an endless free supply of fresh leaves in our yard.
Potty training is on!

 • • •
Problem-solving can take on endless variations. It can be an activity for two
or a group eﬀort.

Sarah’s Story: Stop Means Go
My three kids get really wound up at about 5 o’clock in the evening. ey
like to play this crazy game where they go hurtling through the house,
chasing each other and generally crashing into things. It hardly ever ends
well. At ﬁrst they’re all excited and happy, but my youngest, Mia, usually
ends up getting hurt. Or at least upset enough to feel like she’s hurt.
I’ve tried to stop them in the past. It’s just so stressful, waiting for the
disaster and the tears. ey always protest that they’re having fun and
everyone is laughing. Sure, until they’re not!
I tried the problem-solving approach. It was easier than I thought. Here’s
how it went:
Me: You guys love chasing each other around the house. It’s fun. e
problem is I get upset because a lot of times someone ends up
crying. I think we need some ideas for how you can have fun
without anybody getting hurt or even scared.
Mia: When I say stop, Jake and Sophia don’t stop.
Sophia: at’s because you’re laughing when you say stop! You just
want to win all the time.
Jake: Yeah, you act like a baby.
Mia: I’m not a baby, stupid-head!

 Me: Hey, no name-calling. We’re trying to think of ideas here! Maybe
“stop” isn’t a good word because sometimes people say “stop” when
they’re just playing and sometimes they say “stop” when they’re
scared or hurt. It can be confusing. Maybe we need a better word
that means “really stop, I’m not kidding around.”
Mia: (She climbed up on a chair and put her ﬁnger in the air to make
her pronouncement.) I know! We can say “PAUSE THE GAME!”

Sophia and Jake agreed. “Stop” will mean go. “Pause the game” will mean
stop. ey went back to running around. Whenever Mia started to feel a
little bit overwhelmed, she wielded her new power. “Pause the game!” Every
time she said it, all the children froze. ey didn’t seem to mind the new
twist to the activity. en she’d yell, “Play!” and they’d go back to running.
is is absolutely better than threats and ultimatums. It’s teaching them
how to play together and be more aware of each other’s point of view.

Show respect for the conflict. Don’t minimize the problem.
When there’s ongoing conﬂict between kids, we get worn down. We just
want it to go away. “Stop already! It doesn’t matter!” But all our attempts to
sweep the problem under the rug do not result in peace and harmony. We
keep tripping over that lumpy rug.
e battle over the TV remote control may seem petty to you. Who cares
whether the kids watch a show where various objects are blown up in the
name of science, or a cartoon about a fruit-dwelling sponge creature?
Keep in mind, this conﬂict matters just as much to your children as any
dispute with a coworker, friend, or relative matters to you. Children need
practice resolving their “childish” disputes so they can become grown-ups

 who can peacefully resolve their adult disputes. is is the work of
childhood.
Instead of saying, “Oh please, again with the remote? You’re being silly.
It’s not worth ﬁghting over.”
You can say, “is is a diﬃcult problem. Two children want to watch two
diﬀerent shows.”
You’ll have to resist the urge to take sides. “You always get your way. Just
let your little sister watch her cartoon so she doesn’t make a fuss.” Avoid the
temptation to solve their problem for them. “Let your brother watch his
show today and then you can watch yours tomorrow.”
But you can’t just walk away, either. (Sorry if you were hoping for that!)
Unless your kids are already experienced problem-solvers, they’ll still need
your help and guidance.

Remove the disputed object temporarily.
When the disputed object is in one child’s hand it will be hard for them to
think clearly. e struggle will continue. You’ll need to say, “I’ll put the
remote control up on the shelf for now, while we ﬁgure out what to do. I bet
if we put our heads together we can think of a solution that feels fair to both
of you.”
Your next job is to listen and reﬂect back each child’s perspective. You’ll
ﬁnd yourself saying, “Oh, so all day you’ve been looking forward to watching
the explosion show. ey’re going to blow up a whole stack of watermelons
and you don’t want to miss it.”
en you’ll turn to your other child and reﬂect her feelings. “Ah, so you
feel like you never get to watch your cartoon. It’s not fair. Your brother

 always grabs the remote and you have to miss your sponge guy. And he’s
really funny!”
Back to the ﬁrst child, “I hear you saying that the sponge cartoon is on
every day, sometimes twice a day, and your show is only on once a week.
is is your only chance to see it!”
en you’ll say, “Hmmm, what can we do so that both of you get to see
the show you like? Should we take turns? Should we make a schedule and
have certain days for each person to decide? What do you guys think will
work?”
Your kids will be pleased with themselves when they come up with their
own plan. What’s more, they’ll be learning to ﬁght less and negotiate more
when they have conﬂicts in the future.

The Trouble with Rewards
What about rewards? you ask. If you didn’t have time for problem-solving,
couldn’t you oﬀer a reward? at’s a positive solution, isn’t it? And positive is
good, right?
Let’s take a moment to think about how it feels to be oﬀered a reward in
return for a change in behavior. Imagine that you’ve been turning out some
delicious late-night dinners for your family on your night to cook. You’re
pretty pleased with yourself. Between work, shopping, cleaning, and
supervising kids, it’s remarkable that the family is getting healthy, homecooked meals instead of take-out pizza. But your spouse isn’t happy and says
to you, “I need you to make dinner earlier on week nights so I can get to bed
earlier. Listen, I’m going to oﬀer you a reward. For every ﬁve nights that you
get dinner on the table by 6 p.m., I’ll take you out to a restaurant of your
choice. I made a sticker chart so I can track your successes!”
What’s wrong with this scenario? Why do we suddenly have the urge to
serve dinner at midnight . . . burnt?
Well, ﬁrst of all, does your spouse even care about your feelings? Does he
not recognize the eﬀort you put into all this food production? Does he
realize how diﬃcult it would be to get it all done earlier? And what if you get
dinner on the table early four nights in a row, and then mess up on the ﬁh?
Do you have to start from square one because of a single misstep? Is it even

 worth the eﬀort? What about that reward? Maybe a new car would be a
better incentive. Maybe you should be getting rewards for all the other
things you do around the house. A new pair of boots for folding the laundry,
a ﬂat-screen TV for cleaning the toilet.

Rewards have many pitfalls. ey don’t address the cause of the problem.
ey are used to manipulate the other person rather than work with her,
which can lead to resentment. ey are subject to inﬂation. And they have a
dark side. A reward is oﬀered with an implied threat: If you don’t do what I
say, you’ll miss out on something good.
Most people would prefer a partner who is willing to work with them to
solve a problem. Someone who might say, “Gee, I really appreciate all these
delicious meals. My problem is, I’m frustrated with the late nights. I feel like
I’m not getting enough sleep. Is there anything we can do to get dinner on
the table earlier? What could I do to help make that happen? Let’s think of
some ideas!”
• • •
Here’s a report from the frontlines of a reward gone bad.

Sarah’s Story: Gum Grievance
I had a bunch of tedious errands to run and three young children to drag
along. I promised them each a stick of chewing gum once they got to the
grocery store if they could cooperate at the bank and post oﬃce. e kids
were excited. Yes, gum!

 But my youngest and liveliest daughter, Mia, could not control herself.
She managed to sit quietly at the drive-through bank, happily watching the
vacuum tube suck up the deposit slips. But by the time we got to the post
oﬃce she was out of her carseat and crawling around the van causing
mayhem. No gum for her! e well-behaved siblings got their treats, and
Mia cried and raged all the way through the grocery shopping. It was a
miserable day.
• • •
What went wrong? e corollary to “you can have this wonderful thing if
you do as I say” is “you can’t have this wonderful thing if you don’t do as I
say.” e reward slips its mask and reveals itself as a punishment in disguise.
And more important, it doesn’t help a little girl stay in a carseat. If Sarah had
talked to her kids about how boring errands are and how diﬃcult it is to stay
belted in for a long time, then challenged them to come up with ideas for
how to amuse themselves and one another while imprisoned in their
carseats, they might have had more success. ey could have come up with
games, songs, or stories to make the car ride more bearable. And what’s
more, they would have been learning important skills for dealing with
adverse circumstances. More time-consuming than oﬀering a stick of gum,
but more useful in the long run.
e same is true for siblings ﬁghting, toilet training, good grades in
school, or eating broccoli. No promise of reward will help a child learn how
to get along with a younger brother, ﬁgure out when his bladder is full, learn
addition facts, or enjoy healthy food.
If this sounds overly idealistic to you, consider the latest research on
motivation. An eye-opening study found that when people are oﬀered large
monetary rewards to complete a challenge, their creativity and engagement
in the task plummets. Rewards helped people perform well on some very
simple mechanical tasks, but as soon as they needed cognitive skills, rewards
interfered with their ability to function. ese surprising results have been
replicated in study aer study. It turns out that the three factors that
motivate people most strongly are a sense of autonomy (the drive to be selfdirected), mastery (the intrinsic drive to develop competence), and purpose
(a sense that our actions are meaningful and have value).2

 “So we’re not supposed to use any kind of incentive, ever? You’re making
my life more diﬃcult!” complained Anna.
I’m not saying you shouldn’t use incentives. Just use them for your kids
the way you use them for yourself. You might tell yourself, Aer I get through
this sinkful of dirty pots and pans, I’m going to sit down with the paper and a
nice cup of tea. It helps to give yourself something to look forward to when
faced with an unpleasant task.
In the same spirit, you might tell your children, “Let’s think of a good
snack we can have on the ride home. at way we can look forward to
getting into the car, even though it’s sad to leave your friend’s house.”
e diﬀerence is that you’re not saying “if you get in the car, then I’ll give
you a treat.” You’re planning your exit strategy together as a team.
You can let them know that fun activities await them when chores are
ﬁnished.
“As soon as we get our teeth brushed, we can have bedtime stories.”
“As soon as the blocks are put away, we can go to the park.”
You’ve avoided the unpleasant and manipulative “If you do this, then I’ll
give you that” statement, and replaced it with information.

The Trouble with Time-Outs
Toni had her hand in the air. “Okay, so no punishments and no rewards.
What I want to know is, how do you feel about time-outs? Are you going to
take that away from us too?”
I hated to be the eternal naysayer. I took a deep breath and shrugged
sadly. Toni threw up her hands in mock despair.
Usually when people ask me what I think of time-outs, they want to
know what they’re doing wrong. Why is this technique not working for
them? It doesn’t seem to lead to improved behavior and it’s diﬃcult to
enforce. How do you make a child stay in a time-out chair? My answer is
that the reason time-outs aren’t working for you is that time-outs don’t
work.3 e main weakness of the “time-out” is that it doesn’t address the
problem. Let’s say your son shoves his little sister away from his blocks, and
you grab him by the shoulder and rush him to the time-out chair. What do
you think he’ll be saying to himself as he sits in that chair?

 We’d like to imagine that he’s thinking, Gee, this chair time is helping me
realize that I should show a lot more love and tenderness to my dear sister.
Aer all, we do have shared genetic material. As the older child I should learn
to be more patient, even when she’s irritating me.
Unfortunately it’s more likely that his thoughts will run along the lines of,
It’s not fair. I hate her. She pushed me ﬁrst. She’s always ruining everything.
Mom always takes her side. Or he may be thinking, I’m mean to my sister. I’m
a bad person.
And that’s if you can get him to stay in the chair in the ﬁrst place!
If our intent is to foster a better relationship between siblings, time-out is
not the answer.
So what can you do? First you can comfort your daughter and express
your feelings strongly to your son. “I don’t like to see people pushed! Even
when you’re angry!”
You can invite your son to make amends, if the mood is right. “Ella is
crying. How can we make her feel better? Can you ﬁnd her a toy? Or do you
think she’d like a pretzel?”
Once the drama is over, you can have a conversation about how diﬃcult
it is to build with blocks when a little sister is around. A big brother needs
ideas for what to do next time so he won’t end up hurting his sister. Maybe
he can play with blocks in his room. Maybe he can make a tower for her to
knock down. Maybe he can have a special word that he uses when he needs
you to come and help very quickly. Any of these solutions will help him to
see himself as a responsible older brother who can coexist peacefully with a
little sister.
is is not to say that you won’t sometimes have to separate a child from
a situation that is overwhelming him. If you really want to use the phrase
time-out in a positive way, you can say, “We need a time-out so nobody gets
hurt! Quick, omas to the kitchen, Jenna to the living room!” You may
even say, “I’m getting frustrated. I need a time-out. I’m going to my
bedroom for a few minutes to calm down!” is kind of time-out is intended
to protect, not to punish. It’s a way of letting our children know that
sometimes we need to take a break before we can solve a problem.
I watched my neighbor use this technique with her three-year-old
daughter, who would oen become overstimulated when playing with other
children and behave roughly with the smaller kids. Her mom would say

 warmly, “Jackie, come over here and sit with me for a little while. We need
some time-out.” She’d sit with her arm comfortingly around her daughter for
a few minutes, then ask her if she thought she was ready to go back to
playing. ere’s a very diﬀerent feeling to that kind of time-out. It doesn’t
say, “I’m banishing you because you were bad.” e message here is, “I’m on
your side. It’s not easy to play with a bunch of kids. Let’s take a break
together.” Some people call this a time-in: taking a break with a child, and
refreshing the sense of connection between the two of you.

Michael’s Story: Sad Sister
Jamie and Kara get into a lot of conﬂicts, which almost always end up with
Kara crying. Of course, she’s only two and Jamie is four, so there’s really no
contest. Jan and I used to remind him constantly that Kara is just a baby and
he needs to be patient with her. Jamie doesn’t want to hear it. I can see it in
his face even if he doesn’t say anything. No fair, you always take her side. We
also were giving him time-outs for being rough with her. at didn’t make
things better either, but it was all we had.
Now that we’ve been using the problem-solving approach I see a real
change in Jamie. ey still have ﬁghts, but when Kara cries, I say to Jamie,
“Oh no, Kara is sad. We need an idea to make her feel better.” It’s hard to
believe, but it actually transforms him. He gets very serious. “I think she
needs her teddy bear to hug,” or “Can we give her some apple slices with
cinnamon?” He’s really thinking about how to make his sister happy. And
he’s more patient with her in general. At ﬁrst I thought the “no punishment”
thing was a bit over the top, but this is the better way!

 You don’t have to wait for a problem to occur in order to use
problem-solving. When possible, plan ahead!
Here’s a story that involves prescient parenting—solving a problem before
it happens. When we know we’re headed for trouble, like the proverbial Boy
Scout, we can be prepared! We don’t have to wait for disaster to strike. When
you plan ahead with your children, so much the better! Toni managed to
turn a dreaded ordeal into a well-choreographed success, with some
creative, preventative problem-solving.

Toni’s Story: The Opposite of Winging It
My in-laws were having a family reunion and they expected us to be there.
ey don’t have any memory of what it’s like to have young children. ey
actually insisted it would be a nice vacation for us. e thought of ﬁve and a
half hours on a plane with my kids was daunting. I had to prepare them if
we were going to survive!
I lined up the kitchen chairs so they could practice walking down a
narrow aisle. I gave each of them a backpack to carry, and I walked behind
them and announced when we reached our row. en I had them sit in
chairs, one behind the other, and stuﬀ their packs under the seats. I told
them to kick the seat in front of them and notice how annoying it felt,
especially while trying to draw or read. We practiced sitting in the chairs,
keeping our feet oﬀ the chairs in front of us. We repeated the whole routine
every day for three days before the ﬂight.
en we made a list of things you can do while stuck in a seat. It included
reading, drawing, and a game called a Million Questions—they didn’t like
the idea of only twenty questions. I took them to the library and they each

 picked out a book for me to read and to the dollar store to pick out their
own “magic” coloring books, activity books, and more food! ey each
packed a bag full of loot for the trip.
I knew I would need some surprises up my sleeve so I also collected a
bunch of things to pull out during the ﬂight. I stuﬀed my pockets with
stickers, ﬁnger puppets, and little packets of goldﬁsh crackers.
e ﬂight went smoothly. e kids didn’t kick the seats or throw their
toys, and they were excited about all the new things in their backpacks. e
ﬂight attendant actually complimented me on how well-behaved my kids
were. If she only knew!
e minute we got to my in-laws’ house, Jenna threw up. Turned out she
had a stomach virus. My husband and I spent the entire “vacation” taking
turns in the hotel room. I think we’ll wait a few years before our next family
trip.
• • •
And then there are those parenting moments when everything falls apart.
You didn’t know the bridge was out, and you’re on track heading at full
speed for the ravine. e train wreck is unavoidable. Creating a family
atmosphere of seeking solutions rather than inventing punishments will still
stand you in good stead in the long run.

The Cliffhanger
Five-year-old Zach had a ﬁt at bedtime when I ﬁnished reading a chapter
and told the kids it was time for sleep. He wasn’t used to chapter books and
had a hard time accepting that we couldn’t ﬁnish the whole book in one
sitting. But he still wanted to join in on his older brothers’ story time. “It’s a
two-hundred-page book!” I protested. “I can’t ﬁnish it in one night, and
besides, Sammy’s already asleep.”
“But it’s a clianger!” he screamed. How could I leave him like this, not
knowing the ending to the story? In a ﬁt of rage he grabbed an empty plastic
seltzer bottle (you can see how neat my house is) and ﬂung it at my head.
His aim was true. e lovely story time ended with me yelling, “I will never
read you a story again!” while my husband carried Zach, hysterically

 sobbing, oﬀ to his bedroom, away from his raving mother. ere was just no
salvaging the situation. I was furious. Is this supposed to be part of
motherhood? Having projectiles lobbed at my head? Good thing it was plastic,
not glass! Good thing I’m not a single mom right now.
Problem-solving? Punishment? Forget about it. Survival is all we’re
striving for here.
e next night at dinner I said, “I don’t know what to do. I want to read
more of the book, but I don’t want screaming and I don’t want bottles
thrown at me.”
My husband laid down the law. “Everyone has to promise to go to bed
without fuss when the chapter is over.” I’m very dubious about extracting
promises from children. Apparently Zach was just as reluctant to commit to
a promise. “What if it’s a clianger?” His older brothers had taught him
that word and he relished it!
Ten-year-old Dan had an idea. “I know! We can make predictions, like in
school.”
Zach was intrigued. “What’s a prediction?”
His two brothers launched into a spirited explanation with many
examples. Later that night, aer I ﬁnished reading the agreed-upon chapter,
I closed the book with a sense of trepidation. What will happen this time?
Would Zach hold it together, or are we in for another explosion? Zach sat
straight up and said, “Okay, now it’s time for predictions. I predict that they
will lock Lassie up even more tightly but she will still escape and go back to
her family.”
en he trotted oﬀ to bed. I was truly amazed at both his equanimity and
his accuracy.
• • •
ere’s no telling what solution kids will come up with when a problem is
put in their hands. When the solution is their own, it will usually work for
them. And when you have multiple kids, you have multiple problem-solvers
instead of just multiple problems.
When we use problem-solving in place of punishment, we are truly
modeling the attitude we want our kids to take toward conﬂict in their lives.
Not “I’m a bad kid who doesn’t deserve a bedtime story.” Not “I’m a failure
as a mom because I screamed at my kid,” but rather, “How can I ﬁx my

 mistake?” “How can I make things work better?” “What should I try next
time?”
e larger message is: When there is conﬂict between us, we don’t need to
put our energy into ﬁghting each other. We can combine forces to search for
a solution that respects the needs of all parties. e child is an active
participant in solving his problems. is will stand him in good stead in the
years to come.
Punishment has a short shelf life. Little kids grow quickly. It’s diﬃcult to
physically punish a child who is larger and stronger than you are. As
children become more independent it becomes harder to enforce
punishments. How do you ground a teenager or take away his screen
privileges without becoming a prisoner of your own punishment?
is cooperative approach to conﬂict will grow with your child. As
youngsters mature, their ability to problem-solve grows with them. When
your children are out in the world you won’t be able to keep them safe by
force. e most powerful tool you can wield is their sense of connection to
you. e fact that you are willing to consider their feelings and solicit their
opinions will keep their hearts and minds open to your feelings and
opinions.

    REMINDER: Tools for Resolving Conflict

1. Express Your Feelings . . . Strongly!
“HEY, I don’t like to see people being pushed!”

2. Show Your Child How to Make Amends
“Your sister got scared on the top of the slide. Let’s do something
to make her feel better. Do you want to oﬀer her some pretzels?
Do you think she’d like to play with your sand bucket?”

3. Offer a Choice
“We’re going to give the slide a rest for now. I can see you’re in no
mood to wait for a turn. You can swing on the swings or you can
play in the sandbox. You decide.”

4. Take Action Without Insult
“We’re heading home. We’ll try the playground another day. I’m
too worried about children getting hurt right now.”

5. Try Problem-Solving
Step One: Acknowledge your child’s feelings
“I can see that you don’t like your hand held in the parking lot. It
makes your ﬁngers feel squeezed.”
Step Two: Describe the problem
“e problem is, I worry about cars hitting children in the
parking lot.”
Step ree: Ask for ideas

 “We need some ideas so we can go back to the park and have a
good time without people getting mad or scared. What can we
do?”
Step Four: Decide which ideas you both like
“So you like the idea of holding on to my sleeve and leading me
to the playground. Let’s circle that one.”
Step Five: Try out your solutions
“Here we are at the parking lot. Grab my sleeve and show me
which way to go!”

• If nothing is working, you may have to reconsider

your basic expectations.
• Show respect for the conflict. Don’t minimize the

problem.
• Remove the disputed object temporarily.
• You don’t have to wait for a problem to occur in

order to use problem-solving. When possible, plan
ahead!

 Chapter Four
Tools for Praise and Appreciation . . . Not All Odes
Are Equal
—Ways to praise that will help, not hinder
Julie
You’ve read the chapter title, and I know what you’re thinking: Really? Does
everything have to be complicated? Sure, we all need help with children who
scream and hit and run away in parking lots. But praise?
Sorry to say, praise can be complicated. Research and observation suggest
that it’s not a matter of how much praise we dole out, but the way we praise
that makes the diﬀerence.
Consider these scenarios:
1. You’re an elementary school teacher. Aer a tough morning with a group
of wild, quarrelsome, unfocused kids, there is a momentary lull. When your
supervisor walks in, the kids are quietly listening to a story. e supervisor
says: “You are the best instructor here. You have excellent control of your
class.”
What is your reaction to this praise? Are you glowing with pride of
achievement? Or are you focusing on your weaknesses: Are you kidding me?
I couldn’t control an elderly basset hound on a hot summer day. I just got
lucky. I don’t know if I should even be in this profession.
2. You don’t have any formal musical training, but you’ve always liked to sing
in the shower. You decide to take it on to dry land and join a choir. Aer the
ﬁrst few sessions, you’re still struggling. e harmonies are diﬃcult and you
can tell that much of the time you’re not singing the right note. You say to

 the choir director, “I don’t know if I should keep on with this. I’m just not
getting it.”
He replies, “Don’t worry, you’re doing ﬁne! You sound really good out
there.”
Would that praise help you feel more conﬁdent? Or would you wonder, Is
he mistaken, or is he lying? Maybe he just didn’t hear me because he was
listening more to the sopranos. Maybe he’s trying to make me feel better. Or
maybe he just needs my membership fee for his next car payment.
3. You spent weeks working on a proposal for a new reading program at
your child’s school. You send it to the director and wait eagerly for his
response. e next day you get an email saying, “Great job. anks.”
Are you elated that the director admired your groundbreaking ideas? Or
are you wondering if he really liked it? Did he notice all the thought you put
into your presentation, the way you backed up your ideas with the latest
research, and solved the problem of funding? Or is he just checking oﬀ his
to-do list—clear email inbox—before he goes home for the weekend?
4. You enjoy basketball. It’s a fun way to get a workout, but you’re only a fair
player. You’re shooting baskets at the gym and just as you ﬁnally sink one,
some guy you don’t know walks in and says, “Nice! You have a perfect jump
shot!”
What’s your reaction? Do you want to play a pickup game with this guy,
or are you more likely to hurry home before you dispel the good impression
with a series of bungled shots?
• • •
What are we trying to accomplish when we oﬀer our children praise? Most
people say something like, “We’re trying to make them aware of their own
strengths.” Or “We want to encourage them to do more of the same.” Or “We
want them to feel conﬁdent . . . or try even harder.” It seems only natural that
if we’re trying to boost self-esteem, we’ll tell our children frequently and
enthusiastically, “You’re great, smart, wonderful, beautiful, the best!”
But when we use words that evaluate, we oen achieve the opposite
eﬀect. As you probably noticed when reading the scenarios above, praise
that judges or evaluates can create problems.

 It can make us focus on our weaknesses rather than our strengths. I’m not
really that great. You should have seen me ten minutes ago.
It can make us doubt the sincerity of the person oﬀering the praise. Does
he really mean it or is he just trying to make me feel good? What does he want
from me?
It can feel dismissive. Did he even look at all that work I did? Maybe it
wasn’t worth the eﬀort.
It can make us feel threatened. What if I can’t do it again?
It can even cause us to give up completely—to stop what we’re doing and
walk away.

I observed this phenomenon at a music festival a few years ago. A group
of jugglers were encouraging the public to try out the tools of their trade. I
noticed a young boy, who was more persistent than most of the adults
around him, managing to keep several beanbags in the air at the same time.
“Hey, look at that kid,” I said to my husband. “He’s really good!”
e boy looked up at me with a startled expression, put down the
beanbags, and walked away.
What happened? Why did spontaneous praise from a bystander cause
him to stop?
is boy was deeply engrossed in the process of learning something new
and challenging. Suddenly he is being judged. Now, instead of focusing on
the task at hand, he has to worry that he may fumble the next throw and
have this bystander judge him as inadequate. Better to quit while you’re
ahead. What a miserable thing I did to this poor kid!
e ﬁrst rule of praise is that it’s not always appropriate to praise.

 When a child is engaged in an activity, there is no need to disturb her
concentration by looming over her and oﬀering unsolicited comments. Give
her space! ink about how you would feel if you were cooking dinner with
your partner sitting a few feet away saying, “Nice technique slicing those
onions. Good choice of cooking oil. e carrots are very evenly diced. You’re
displaying a very eﬀective grip on that can opener.” How many minutes
could you put up with that before screaming “Leave me alone!”
But what about those times when kids do want a reaction? ey run up to
us, sticking their crayon drawings under our noses, saying “LOOK! Do you
like it?” What kind of response will inspire rather than discourage?

TOOL #1: Describe What You See

A more useful way to praise is to resist the impulse to evaluate and instead
to simply describe what you see (or hear or notice with any of your ﬁve
senses).
Instead of, “at’s a beautiful picture!”

Try, “I see green lines that are zooming up and down the page. And
look how they connect all these red shapes!”
Instead of, “Good job!”

Try, “I see you picked up all the cars and all the books, and you even
picked up the dirty socks! I see bare ﬂoor. at was a big job.”
Instead of, “Excellent work.”

Try, “I see you circled every single picture that begins with the letter
B.”
Instead of, “Good job following directions.”

 Try, “You found your spot in the circle as soon as you heard ‘circle
time.’ ”
Instead of, “Nice try.”

Try, “at ball reached the ﬁh row of tiles on the wall. It’s getting
closer to the basket almost every time!”
Or, if you’re not in the mood for a lot of words, you can simply say
“You did it!”
All of these statements let a child know that you noticed and appreciated
something he did—without evaluation or judgment, which could discourage
him from future eﬀorts.

Sarah’s Story: Fish Tale
ere’s a little girl at preschool who’s always showing me her drawings.
“Teacher, teacher, look!”
I say, “Very nice, that’s beautiful.”
en she drops it on the ﬂoor and walks away. It’s pretty much scribble,
so there’s not much else to say.
is time I said, “I see wiggly lines on the top and lots of blue on the
bottom. It reminds me of the wind and sea.”
She looked very intently at her own picture and pointed to a tiny squarish
scribble that I hadn’t noticed. “Do you see that? at is a little tiny ﬁsh!”
She went back to the cra table to draw more tiny “ﬁsh.”
It seemed that my looking at the picture closely made her appreciate it
more herself and want to work harder on it.

 Consider asking questions or starting a conversation instead of
praising.
“Oh, look what you made! Tell me about this.”
“How did you get the idea to do this?”
“How did you make this?”
“Show me how this works.”
“is makes me think about outer space. What does it make you think
about?”
“I wonder what you’re going to make next.”

Michael’s Story: A Boy’s Best Friend
I tried starting a conversation, and I almost got more than I bargained for.
Jamie showed me one of his animal drawings and instead of the usual “Very
nice,” I said, “Oh, look at this! It makes me think of how much you like
dogs.”
“Yeah. is is the dog I’m going to have when I’m ﬁve years old. It’ll have
brown fur and I’m gonna teach it to sleep in my bed. And his name will be
Slinky Dog. And he’ll go to school with me every day . . .”
He went on describing his day with his dog and all the things he would
teach it (to make his bed) and feed it (half of his peanut butter and jelly
sandwich). I never knew he had such elaborate plans. I’m hoping he forgets
about this by the time he turns ﬁve.

TOOL #2: Describe the Effect on Others

 We all want our kids to be good citizens. We’d like to encourage their eﬀorts
to help others. But we need to beware the temptation to judge their
character. Stick with description!
Instead of, “You’re a good girl.”

You can say, “You carried those grocery bags all the way to the
kitchen. at was a big help!”
Instead of, “You’re the best big brother!”

You can say, “e baby loves it when you make those funny sounds.
I see a big smile on her face.”
Instead of, “You’re such a thoughtful little girl!”

You can say, “You helped Johnny zip up his coat. Now he’ll be nice
and warm when he goes outside.”
Instead of, “Good boy. I knew you could be nice to the kitty if you tried.”

You can say, “I hear Sparky purring. She likes that gentle petting.”

Michael’s Story: Go-Getter
My two-year-old, Kara, was asking for blueberries. I was ignoring her
because I was trying to ﬁnish a work email. Finally my four-year-old, Jamie,
dragged a stool over to the refrigerator and got her the blueberries. I said,
“Wow, Jamie, you just made two people happy. You made Kara happy
because she got her blueberries, and you made me happy because I got to
ﬁnish my work.”
All week Jamie’s been jumping up to get things for me and his sister. He’s
usually very demanding—“Get me this, get me that”—and I’m always trying
to encourage him to ask politely. Now he’s the getter!

 Sarah’s Story: Praise Rephrase
I used to believe girls were easy because my oldest has always been
exceptionally cooperative. But lately my three-year-old, Mia, has been doing
everything she can to annoy or defy me. When we have to go somewhere,
she squeezes behind the back seat of the van and refuses to climb into her
carseat, making the whole family late. When we have to get out of the car
she bolts into the parking lot. She breaks her siblings’ crayons, yells when my
sister’s baby is sleeping, even shoves big kids in the playground. If it’s known
as bad, you name it, she does it.
I’ve really tried hard not to put her in the role of the “Bad Child.” As a
matter of fact, I was making a big eﬀort to tell her what a good girl she is.
e funny thing is, it seemed to make it even worse. At dinner I was telling
my husband what a good girl she was at story hour at the library, and Mia
said, “No, I wasn’t good. I knocked the books down on the ﬂoor. I was loud.”
She was angry and pouting all evening. It’s like she wanted to remind us
that her sister is the good girl, and she’s the bad one.
Aer our session on praise, I switched tactics. I told my husband how
Mia helped me at the library by carrying all the heavy books down the stairs
and checking them out by herself. Mia smiled from ear to ear. You could see
how proud she was. She stuck out her chest and said, “I did do that. And I
held the door for the stroller, too!”
When I described what she did, she praised herself! I have to admit, Mia
has not been magically transformed from a tiger to a pussycat. But this new
way of praising is changing the way she sees herself.

TOOL #3 Describe Effort

 A researcher at Stanford University, Carol Dweck, formally studied the
eﬀects of evaluative praise on children. She was interested in exploring the
phenomenon of bright children who do very well in elementary school and
then seem to lose conﬁdence and stop trying by the time they reach middle
school, despite repeated reassurance that they are smart, gied, talented . . .
exceptional!1
She designed a study in which two groups of children were given a sheet
of math questions to solve. When the task was completed, the ﬁrst group
was given evaluative praise. “Wow . . . that’s a really good score. You must be
smart at this.” e message is clear: You are a bright child, talented at math.
e second group was also told that they had done well. But they were
not labeled or evaluated. Instead their process was described with
appreciation. “Wow . . . that’s a really good score. You must have worked
really hard.” A diﬀerent kind of message: You stuck with it. You kept trying
until you ﬁgured out all the problems.
Now the two groups were asked if they would like to try an even more
challenging set of math questions. Guess who said yes and who said no. If
you guessed that the ﬁrst group said no, give yourself some praise! When a
child has done well and been told that she’s gied and talented, why would
she risk her status by trying something more diﬃcult? She might fail. It may
turn out she’s not gied aer all. She’s just ordinary.
e children in the second group, whose eﬀorts had been described, were
enthusiastic about taking on a more challenging task.
Both groups were then given a new sheet of math questions. But this time
the ﬁrst group, the children who had been showered with evaluative praise,
did worse. eir conﬁdence was shot. In contrast, the children whose eﬀorts
were appreciated did better.
It’s no surprise that children who are told they are smart and talented
oen fall apart when they encounter their ﬁrst real challenges. When things
are easy for them, their label is conﬁrmed. ey are the best and the
brightest. But when they ﬁnd themselves struggling, as eventually they will,
their faith in themselves is shaken. Maybe I’m not so smart aer all. Better to
stick to the safety zone and not reveal weakness.
As you can see, praise is indeed powerful. Used the wrong way, it can
deter children from activities and behaviors that we mean to encourage.

 Maybe all of that “overpraising” of children is really just the wrong kind of
praise.
Here’s how it sounds when you praise eﬀort instead of evaluating the
child:
Instead of, “What a smart boy you are!”

You can say, “You kept on working on that puzzle until you ﬁgured it
out.”
Instead of, “You’re very talented at gymnastics.”

You can say, “I saw you climbing onto that balance beam again and
again until you walked the whole beam without falling oﬀ.”
Instead of, “Good job dressing yourself.”

Try, “You kept working on that button until you got it into that little
buttonhole.”

Sarah’s Story: Ready or Not
Every spring I’m required to give my ﬁve-year-olds a screening test. e
children are supposed to ﬁll out a twenty-page packet of written activities to
assess their readiness for kindergarten, from shape recognition, to math
puzzles, to cutting and tracing. In all the years I’ve done this I’ve never been
able to get more than a few kids to complete the whole packet, in spite of my
best eﬀort to give positive feedback: “Nice job.” “You’re doing great.” “Keep
up the good work.” “Just do your best.”
is year I used what I learned in our session on praise. Instead of
evaluating, I described their eﬀort, “I see how hard you’re working!” “You’ve
been concentrating hard for a long time!” “Looks like you’re really using a
lot of brainpower to ﬁgure this out.”
I thought it would help a little, but I was amazed that not a single child
gave up. Even when recess came, several insisted on continuing until they
completed the packet.

TOOL #4: Describe Progress

 One advantage of descriptive praise is that you can use it even when things
aren’t going particularly well, by pointing out what has been achieved so far.
When a child is making a mess or struggling with a task, it’s tempting to
point out what she’s doing wrong. Aer all, won’t that help her improve?
e problem is, criticism in the midst of a struggle can be discouraging.
On the other hand, inauthentic praise (“Don’t worry, you’re doing ﬁne!”) can
be infuriating (“No, I am NOT doing ﬁne!”).
With descriptive praise, we can point out progress in a way that feels
supportive and genuine. Oen pointing out one positive thing is more
eﬀective than pointing out ten negatives.
Instead of pointing out what’s wrong . . .
“is handwriting is so sloppy it’s almost impossible to read, honey. It
looks like a chicken with muddy feet walked across your paper. You
need to at least try to get the letters on the line.”
. . . you’ll have a more motivated child if you point out what’s right:
“Look at this letter B! It’s a real beauty contest winner. It sits so
politely on the line. It’s not busting through the ﬂoor and bothering
the downstairs neighbors. It’s not ﬂying up in the air and banging on
the ceiling.”

 “Look at the big spaces between these four words. is part is very
clear and easy to read.”
Sometimes we do need to point out what’s wrong. Kids don’t always
notice on their own. In a case like this it’s important to appreciate the
positive ﬁrst. If you want a criticism to be accepted graciously, a good rule to
follow is to notice three positive things before mentioning the negative. And
even then it’s most useful to put your criticism in positive terms. Talk about
what “needs to be done” rather than what is still wrong.
Instead of criticizing an unﬁnished task . . .
“Are you kidding me? You think you’re ﬁnished? is room isn’t even
close to being clean. ere are blocks all over the ﬂoor and your desk
is under a pile of trash!”
. . . you’ll be more likely to inspire a child to ﬁnish cleaning if you notice
what he has accomplished so far:
“I can see you got your dirty clothes in the laundry basket, you hung
up your wet towel, and there’s a clear path from the door to the bed!
Now all this room needs to be ready for company is for the blocks to
be tossed into their box and the dirty tissues on the desk to be thrown
in the garbage can.”
Instead of focusing on the mistakes . . .
“I can see you haven’t been practicing. You’re playing a lot of wrong
notes, and your rhythm is wrong, too. Quarter notes aren’t the same
as half notes!”

 . . . you’ll give a child the conﬁdence to tackle the hard parts if you start by
focusing on what he’s accomplished so far:
“ose ﬁrst two measures make me want to dance. I get a lively
feeling when I hear the staccato notes. I can imagine a little frog
jumping. e second line has a tricky rhythm. Let’s work on that
next.”

Toni’s Story: DIY Disaster
Grandma was visiting and brought a kit to make a gingerbread house. It
should have been a lovely opportunity for the generations to bond.
Unfortunately the icing was stiﬀ and the gingerbread was crumbly. omas
was getting frustrated. Grandma tried to encourage him: “omas, that’s
really good!”
omas was red-faced and angry. “No it’s not! e blue is all smushed on
the side and the edge broke oﬀ!”

I could see it coming. He was about to stomp oﬀ and my mother was
going to be very disappointed that her gi didn’t work out.
I knew what to say! “omas, I see you got half of the window done, even
though the icing is so stiﬀ.”
omas sighed. “Yeah, I’m getting the other half now.”
Whew! Good save, right?

Anna’s Story: Beginning Reader

 Anton sounded out his ﬁrst few words and actually read a sentence. I was
very excited and about to say, “You are a great reader!” but I caught myself
and came up with, “You sounded out each of the letters and you put them
together. You read a whole sentence!”
Anton grinned. “Let’s do another one!”
• • •
Are you getting the idea that description is more genuine than the old style
of praise? We don’t have to be inauthentic and tell a child he is wonderful
and his work is great in order to inﬂate his ego. We can give him speciﬁc
descriptive feedback that is realistic and helpful.

Sometimes acknowledging feelings can be more helpful than
praise.
Sometimes a kid is not happy with the results of his labor. His picture of a
bicycle doesn’t look like a bicycle. Our impulse is to oﬀer encouraging
words: “No, it’s really good, honey. It does look like a bicycle. You did such a
nice job!”
is kind of response oen produces rage and wailing: “No it doesn’t. I
HATE it!”
But we don’t want to show a lack of faith in his ability, either. “Oh dear, a
bicycle is too hard to draw. Why don’t you just draw a ball for the letter B?
Your teacher will be happy and all you have to make is a circle. You can do
that!”
Time to switch gears and acknowledge feelings. When kids are unhappy,
we don’t have to prop them up with frantic praise. It’s more helpful to say,
“Ugh, you are not happy with the way that bicycle came out. It doesn’t look

 like what you see in your head. It’s not easy to draw a bike. It’s hard to put
something from real life onto a ﬂat piece of paper and get it to look right.”
Your child may respond with renewed eﬀorts to draw that infernal twowheeler. Or he may decide on his own to draw a ball instead. Either way,
your emotional support helped him through his moment of frustration, and
he can think more clearly.
Another situation in which our impulse is to oﬀer reassuring words of
praise is when a child compares himself to his peers and ﬁnds himself
lacking.
“Everybody can climb the monkey bars except me! I can’t even get across
two. I’m the worst in the whole class.”
“Ethan and Jason can already read chapter books. I’m the slowest one at
reading.”
Our instinct is to jump in with words of praise to bolster our child’s
ﬂagging self-esteem.
“Oh no, honey, you’re really good at climbing.”
“You’re a really good reader! You’re doing an excellent job. I’m sure there
are lots of kids who aren’t as good as you are.”
is kind of response usually does not achieve the intended eﬀect. Kids
will protest even more vehemently that they are indeed the worst, the
slowest. When a child is feeling down, it’s more helpful to acknowledge
feelings ﬁrst, instead of oﬀering empty reassurance:
“It’s frustrating to see other kids get across all the monkey bars when
you can’t do it yet.”
“It sounds like you’re feeling discouraged about reading. It’s annoying
to be stuck with a picture book when you want to be reading chapter
books.”
If you think the mood is right you can try giving wishes in fantasy:
“Wouldn’t it be nice if you could just eat three magic raisins and . . .
zip across the whole playground hand over hand without getting
tired! . . . read a thick chapter book and know all the words?”

 But that’s not the end of the conversation. When a child is feeling low,
you’ll want to give him a picture of himself that inspires him to strive.

Give a child a new picture of himself.
It’s time to tell your child a story about himself. And this is a story only
you can tell. You know your kid like no other!
“I’m pretty sure that if you want to master those monkey bars you will
get there. When you want to do something you are a pretty
determined kid. I remember when you were just ﬁve months old, too
young to crawl. But you wanted to get to that dog bowl. You kept
trying and trying. I had to go to the bathroom, and I thought it would
be okay to leave you alone for just a minute. But when I got back,
there you were, munching on Rover’s dog kibble. You made it all the
way across the kitchen on your own. Nothing was safe from you!”
“It’s weird. Each person is diﬀerent. Some kids, like Ethan, learn to
read chapter books before kindergarten, but they can’t ride a twowheeler yet. And some kids, like you, learn to ride a bike without
training wheels when they’re only three, and they’re still working on
reading a chapter book. Some kids learn reading faster and some kids
learn riding faster, but they all learn to read and they all learn to ride.
I’ve seen you sounding out words and reading sentences, so I know
you’re learning. And I’ve seen Ethan working on balancing on his
bike, so I know he’s learning. I just hope you don’t start reading while
riding. at could cause a big crash!”

 Another way to give a child a new picture of himself is to give him
opportunities to demonstrate his competence.
“Rashi, can you help me with this key? It’s sticking in the lock again.”
“Asher, I have to put away groceries and Shiriel needs someone to
read the ings at Go book to her. Can you do it? She likes hearing
it read by her big brother.”
You may ﬁnd yourself “needing help” a whole lot in the near future, with
opening jar lids, ﬁlling juice glasses, ﬁnding your glasses, tightening screws,
buckling the baby into the carseat, feeding the animals, arranging dessert on
a plate, handing out art supplies, collecting papers, shutting doors, and
turning oﬀ lights. Don’t forget to enlist your competent child or student to
give you a hand. And then be sure to appreciate the help with descriptive
praise.
Maria had her hand up in the air. “How about telling your child ‘I’m
proud of you’? Isn’t that one more way of making a child feel good about
himself?”
Here’s my reservation about that statement. When a parent or teacher
says, “I’m proud of you,” she’s taking credit herself for the child’s
accomplishment. When she describes what the child has achieved, the child
gets the credit. When in doubt, credit the child.
Instead of, “You’re riding without training wheels. I’m so proud of you!”
You can say, “You did it! You ﬁgured out how to balance on your bike
without training wheels. You must be pretty pleased with yourself!”

Resist the urge to praise by comparison.

 It can be tempting to parents of more than one child to praise by
comparison. We fall into the trap of trying to boost the ego of the “big boy”
at the expense of the baby. It seems like a harmless ploy. Aer all, the baby
can’t understand what we’re saying. “You got your shoes on by yourself. Your
little brother can’t do that. He’s just a baby.” “You’re such a neat eater. e
baby makes a big mess.”
Sometimes we want to give a little boost by comparing a child favorably
to his peers.
“You can already ride a two-wheeler. None of your friends can do that.”
“You’re the best reader in the class. Not many ﬁve-year-olds can read a
chapter book!”
So what’s wrong with that? Proud parents and teachers, happy kids, right?
e problem is, we don’t want a child to feel that our pride in his success
comes at the expense of others’ failures. We don’t want him to feel
threatened by the accomplishments of his rapidly growing sibling, or the
triumphs of his classmates.
Instead you can stick with describing his actions, his efforts, his
progress, and his effect on others:
“You got your shoes on by yourself. I guess I know who’ll be teaching
the baby to tie his shoes when he gets a little bigger.” (Now he can see
himself as a teacher of his little brother instead of as a rival.)
“anks for putting the dishes in the sink. I like having a cleanup
partner.”
“You did it! You ﬁgured out how to get that bike to balance without
training wheels. at is tricky.”
“You ﬁnished the whole book. Did you like that funny part where
frog and toad hid the cookies?”
In desperate times, you need to be a praise ninja. In this story, Michael uses
every tool in the chapter (and some other chapters besides).

 Michael’s Story: Preschooler on Ice
Jamie was very excited about our ﬁrst trip to the skating rink. In the car on
the way over he told me he knew he’d be good at it. He was so conﬁdent, he
was setting himself up for a fall . . . literally. He started oﬀ wobbly, falling
every ten seconds, and by midway around the rink he declared he’d never
skate again and he wanted oﬀ.
I was glad I had my tools. First, I acknowledged his feelings. “It’s
frustrating to learn something new, especially balancing your body on
something so slippery. It’s not easy. In fact, it’s really tough! It doesn’t feel
good to fall down on hard ice.”
I didn’t argue when he wanted to take a break. I didn’t push him to stick
with it. I suggested that we get a snack to get our strength up before giving it
another try.
Aer our snack, he was not quite convinced to go back out, so I asked if
he’d be willing to try with me again aer three or ﬁve minutes. (A choice!)
He agreed to three minutes. When we got back out I gave him descriptive
praise, telling him I could see that he was using his arms to balance himself
and pointing out how much farther he’d gone from our last round.
When he got frustrated, I showed him how to take it out on the ice by
stomping along, doing “angry skating.” We made it three or four more times
around, and at the very end, he let go of my hand and made it back to the
gate all by himself without falling.
ere were so many moments where it was getting bad and it could have
been a disaster, but all of the elements we’ve been talking about in the
workshop helped me to keep him in the game. He was so proud of his
improvement. It melted my heart!
• • •
If you still have doubts about praise that evaluates versus praise that
describes, try it on yourself. Here’s the scenario: Your partner arrives home
from work to ﬁnd that you’ve cleaned up the kitchen, gotten the kids bathed
and PJ’ed, and prepared a hot meal for the family. Using the language we so
oen apply to our kids, your partner says enthusiastically, “Wow, you are
such a good spouse! What a perfect marriage I have. Great job, honey. I’m
proud of you!”

 Did you feel patronized? Did you feel a little oﬀended by the assumption
that you wish to be judged? Did you wonder, So what if I’m tired and order
pizza, does that make me a bad spouse? Did you think, I’d better not bring
expectations up like this again! Did you wonder why your partner is proud
when you’re the one who did the work?
Okay, new scene.
Your partner comes home to the same setup and says, “Wow, you got the
kids ready for bed and you took care of that big mess we le in the kitchen
this morning and you made dinner for us, all right aer work! Sit down,
honey. Let me get you a drink.”
Now you might think, Hey, it was worth the eﬀort. My partner appreciates
what I do around here. Maybe I’ll even do it again sometime.
By praising descriptively—by looking, listening, and noticing—we hold
up a mirror to our children to show them their strengths. at’s how
children form their image of themselves. ese are more than nice
individual moments. We’re creating a stockpile of memories that cannot be
taken away.

“Good boy” can be canceled out the next day by “bad boy.” “You’re a
smart girl” by “What a stupid thing to do!” “Careful” by “Careless” . . . and so
on.
But you can’t take away the time he shoveled the whole walkway even
though his arms were tired and his toes were frozen.
Or the time he made the baby laugh with his goofy faces when the
babysitter couldn’t get her to stop crying, or found his mom’s reading

 glasses, or ﬁgured out how to make the alarm on the cell phone stop going
oﬀ when no one else could do it.
ese are the things he can draw upon to give himself conﬁdence in the
face of adversity and discouragement. In the past he did something he was
proud of, and he has, within himself, the power to do it again.

   REMINDER: Tools for Praise and Appreciation

1. Describe What You See
“I see green lines that are zooming up and down the page. And
look how they connect all these red shapes!”

2. Describe the Effect on Others
“e baby loves it when you make those funny sounds. I see a
big smile on her face.”

3. Describe Effort
“You kept working on that button until you got it into that little
buttonhole.”

4. Describe Progress
“You sounded out each of the letters and you put them together.
You read a whole sentence!”

• Consider asking questions or starting a conversation

instead of praising.
• Sometimes acknowledging feelings can be more

helpful than praise.

 • Give a child a new picture of himself.
• Resist the urge to praise by comparison.

 Chapter Five
Tools for Kids Who Are Differently Wired . . .
Will This Work with My Kid?
—Modifications for kids with autism and
sensory issues
Julie
is chapter is for those of you who are thinking, “is all sounds very nice,
but you haven’t met my kid. is will never work with him!”
Some of you have children who are particularly sensitive, rambunctious,
or strong-willed. Others have children who have been diagnosed with an
autism spectrum disorder or sensory processing disorder. Many of these
children have outsized reactions to ordinary, everyday experiences—the
ticking of a clock, ﬂuorescent lights, socks with seams, getting bumped by
another kid. Others are underresponsive, like the child who seems not to
feel pain. Sometimes they talk too loudly, hug other children too tightly, or
seem not to have any interest in interacting with people at all. ey might
insist on talking about only one subject—train schedules or maps. ey
might fall apart if their rigid routines aren’t followed precisely. Many have
great diﬃculty with transitions and cannot bear to be rushed from one
activity to another. Much as we try to minimize their distress, we cannot
create a world that is comfortable for them.

 If you don’t have a child who is wired diﬀerently, you might be tempted to
skip this chapter entirely. But if you have a spare moment, you may discover
that the tools in this chapter help with some of the challenges that are still
lingering aer you’ve gone through the earlier chapters.
• • •
I used to read about what to expect aer my ﬁrst baby was born. e books
reassured me that babies vary in how quickly they develop. So I didn’t worry
that the other babies in my mothers’ group were crawling and standing,
when all Asher could do was sit. At his one-year checkup, Asher’s
pediatrician asked me if I was concerned about his progress. I remember
telling the doctor that if he wasn’t worried, I wasn’t, either. Two months later
the pediatrician suggested I see a specialist, and I was told my baby was
“very developmentally delayed.” By then I noticed the disparity—the other
babies in our group had turned into toddlers, toppling over Asher as they
staggered around the room, while Asher shrank from them in fear because
he could only do a slow sit-scoot. I still remember the oﬀense I took when
another mother suggested I was being overprotective of my son, as if it were
somehow my fault that he was not yet mobile. Beneath my anger was the
fear that she might be right.
And it wasn’t just his physical development that was diﬀerent. I started to
notice that his sensory system was diﬀerent, too. As a baby Asher couldn’t
tolerate having his feet touched, and he resisted being held in a standing
position. is obviously did not bode well for learning to walk, which would
require that he touch his feet to the ﬂoor. In his physical therapy sessions I

 learned a brushing technique to desensitize him to being touched. I was
supposed to brush his arms, legs, and back every two waking hours. It added
to my guilt that I found this schedule impossible to keep.
When my second baby, Rashi, looked “diﬀerent,” too, I told myself it was
no big deal—I can handle this. I didn’t bother reviewing the what-to-expect
books and took him directly to the child development specialists. I thought
it’d be easier to navigate the emotional roller coaster the second time around,
but I found myself in unfamiliar, scary territory again. Rashi was unlike
Asher in many ways. Asher had been a ﬂoppy baby, but Rashi was stiﬀ.
Asher cried when his legs or feet were touched; Rashi didn’t even cry when
he got a vaccination in his thigh. If we took Asher somewhere with lots of
new sights, sounds, and people, he would get wound up and cry; Rashi
would just shut down and fall asleep wherever he was. For a while I was
scheduling them for back-to-back appointments with the pediatric physical
therapist.
By the time my third child came along, I ﬁgured it was standard
procedure to take a baby of mine for a checkup with the developmental
pediatrician. I was shocked to ﬁnd out Shiriel was developing typically. As a
toddler she was jealous that her older brother got to go to “O.T.”
(occupational therapy) and she wondered when she could have a turn, too.
From the time my children were little, I have led “How to Talk . . .”
workshops. Even though Asher had sensory processing disorder (SPD) and
Rashi was eventually diagnosed with Asperger’s Syndrome (now known as
an Autism Spectrum Disorder), the skills I was teaching were just as useful
in raising my two boys as they were for the parents whose kids were
neurotypical. Over the years, I connected with other parents of children
with SPD and autism, and I led workshops speciﬁcally for parents and
professionals who live or work with children with special needs.
What I learned, both from my participants and from my own experience,
is that the core principles of the “How to Talk . . .” approach apply whether
children are “typically developing” or diﬀerent in their various unique ways.
All kids want to connect, all kids want to be understood, all kids want a say
in what they do and how they do it. e challenge for those of us with
diﬀerently wired kids is to ﬁgure out how to achieve all these noble goals
without getting mired in frustration, or blaming our kids, when they are . . .
well . . . diﬀerent.

 • • •
Imagine you’re at home alone, reading an engrossing book and enjoying a
cup of tea, when a neighbor you hardly know walks in without knocking.
She’s standing too close, staring straight into your eyes, and she’s chatting
loudly as she shakes your chair. “Hello! How are you? What are you reading?
Do you wanna play cards? Can you make me a sandwich? Please?”
How would you feel? A little scared, perhaps? How did she get in?
Annoyed by the interruption? Confused by the questions? Disturbed by her
loud voice? Wanting to get away from her? I’m guessing you’re not likely to
throw together a grilled cheese sandwich in that moment.
is exercise helps me relate to some of what makes daily life such a
challenge for kids on the spectrum. Kids whose bodies don’t process sensory
experiences such as sound, light, movement, touch, or taste in a typical way
can get overwhelmed by any or all of these. Sometimes even interactions
with their own parents can feel like an assault on their senses. It’s no wonder
they have a harder time feeling close and comfortable with other people.
Better to ﬁnd a place to hide from all those sensory intrusions!
is doesn’t mean they can’t develop strong connections with people, but
we may have to work at it.
Admittedly, this can feel like an impossible task, especially with a child
who appears to be in his own world and who wants to stay there by himself,
thank you very much! It’s tempting to try to drag that child out of his world
and into ours. Aer all, he’s going to have to learn how to get along in a
world where people do talk in voices above a whisper, or accidentally bump
into each other; where kids yell and run around on the playground; where
supermarkets have harsh ﬂuorescent lighting and crowded aisles.
e problem is, our world feels wrong to him—too loud or too quiet, too
much touching or not enough, too much to look at, and too exhausting to
make sense of it all. Before we can hope to acknowledge feelings or engage
cooperation or solve problems, we need to connect.

TOOL #1: Join Them in Their World

 e next time your child seems to be in her own world, uninterested in
relating to you or anyone else, and you have a little extra energy to spare, try
getting down on the ﬂoor (or wherever your child happens to be) and
joining her in her world.

For example:
If Angela is lying on the ﬂoor in a quiet room, watching her ﬁngers
make shadows on the wall, instead of saying, “Angela, come here! I’ll
read you a book!” try getting down on her level and adding your own
ﬁnger shadows.
If Peter likes to talk about train schedules, talk about train
schedules with him.
If Evan is repeatedly banging his light saber on the ﬂoor, grab a
wooden spoon and bang along with him.
If your child usually prefers to be alone, you may have already suﬀered the
sting of rejection so oen that it’s hard to believe you’ll have any success with

 this. People in my groups looked downright skeptical at these suggestions,
but they were willing to give them a try. Here are some of their stories:

Head in the Tent
Aiden would spend all his time in his tent playing on the iPad, if we let him.
He goes in there and he’s in his own little world. He won’t look at me, he
won’t talk or answer a question, and he certainly won’t play with me. is
past week, when he went in the tent again, I went over very, very quietly, and
I tapped on the tent. It’s just fabric, so he could barely hear it. I said very
quietly, “I want to watch you play.” I just sat outside the tent and watched for
a while.
I asked him, “What game are you playing?” And he answered me—which
was surprising! He was playing the Bubble Game. I said, “Oh, can I see?” It’s
a tiny little one-person tent, but he let me stick my head in.

I asked if I could play, too, and at ﬁrst he shook his head no, but then he
said he would show me how. We ended up passing the iPad back and forth
and playing this bubble video game. It’s the ﬁrst time he’s ever done anything
like that. I always thought he didn’t want anyone to be near him, but now I
think we’ve been trying too hard to force him to do what we want, without
playing the way that he likes.

Train Connections
Henry is very logical. He doesn’t respond to silliness or fantasy. He spends a
lot of time playing alone with his train set and he doesn’t like to be
interrupted.

 Yesterday, when he went to the train table, I sat down with him and
picked up one of the trains. He said, “Mama!”
I said, “I want to be this train!”
“No, you can’t be that train! at’s not your train.”
So I grabbed one of his toy guitars and said, “Is this a train?”
“at’s not a train!”
“Well, what do you do with it, then?”
“You play it!”
“With your hands or your toes, or your knees or your nose?”
He thought this was hysterical. “Say it again! Say it again!”
I started playing the guitar with my hands and my toes, and knees and
nose, and then he tried to do it, too. And he loved it! Normally he would
have spent all that time alone.

Cave-Boy Play
Peter was learning about caves at preschool and he became obsessed with
the topic. It can get pretty tiresome, talking about caves all the time, so I’m
always trying to change the subject and get him interested in something else.
But this week I tried “joining him in his world,” or in this case, in his cave.
We talked about his new favorite word (spelunking!), the special
headlamps that cave explorers wear, and how sometimes they have to slither
through tiny cracks in the ground to climb into a cave. I suggested we build
a cave in our living room with the couch pillows. At ﬁrst he was
disappointed that we couldn’t go to a real cave, but then he got excited about
the project. We covered the pillows with blankets to make it dark and then
we climbed in. We had a sweet time together, and he was in a really happy
mood aerward.

TOOL #2: Take Time to Imagine What Your Child Is
Experiencing

 When a child is being diﬃcult, our impulse is to focus on what we want him
to do. He has to get those socks on, eat breakfast, take a bath, start therapy.
We don’t stop to think about how he’s feeling. And even if we do, it can be
hard to ﬁgure out just what the heck those feelings are. Kids on the autism
spectrum can be insistent on routines and sameness in a way that completely
baﬄes us. We adults don’t fall to pieces when a meeting is rescheduled. We
don’t refuse to wear socks if our favorite pair is in the laundry.
When my own son’s behavior is bewildering, it helps me to try to imagine
myself in a situation that would bring up the same emotions that he’s feeling.
Here’s an example. My son refused to start physical therapy until the
chairs in the waiting area were in the same alternating pattern—red, yellow,
red, yellow. No amount of logic would convince him to leave the chairs as
they were.
What was the big deal? Can I imagine a situation where I, too, would be
bothered by the arrangement of chairs? What if I were leading a workshop,
and I arrived to discover the chairs were in rows, instead of the usual
circular setup. Would I insist that they be returned to the “proper”
arrangement? You bet I would! If the room manager explained to me that it
was “no big deal,” and I should “just be ﬂexible,” would that help? Not at all!
I’m not claiming that the arrangement of the chairs in the waiting room
was as important for my son’s physical therapy as the arrangement of the
chairs is for my workshop. But we would both have similar feelings that
things were not right, and we’d both be similarly upset if we were unable to
make things right again.
What we’d both want to hear is, “Oh, you don’t like the chairs this way.
ey’re arranged all wrong.” en, of course, we’d want to return the chairs
to their proper places!
Understanding that this was how my son felt, I made a point of arriving a
few minutes early so we could get the chairs “right.” Inevitably, though, the

 waiting area would be missing a chair, or people would be sitting in the
chairs, and we couldn’t rearrange them. Tempted as I was to lecture him
(Really? You’re going to cry because there’s an extra yellow chair? Honey, you
can’t always have everything exactly as you want it!) I knew that would only
make it worse. Again I imagined myself in a similar situation. What if the
chairs at the workshop were bolted down in their rows? What would help
me deal with an uncomfortable situation?
is is what I said to Asher: “Oh no! You want a red chair here. at’s
frustrating.”
Asher repeated, “Fustating!”
“You wish we had a red chair to put here.”
He replied, “Put here.”
I said, “Hmph,” he said, “Hmph!” And then he took my hand and walked
into therapy.
You don’t need to run down the hall looking for a red chair, or ask the
nursing mother, or the elderly lady, to get up so you can move her chair.
ere is value to giving a child the experience that he can handle frustration,
with your sympathy and support. When we demonstrate generosity of spirit
by accepting feelings, we help our children become more resilient, and we
increase their ability to deal with the inevitable bumps and detours in the
road of life.

Scratchy Grass
Last Saturday was a warm day—shorts and T-shirt weather at last, aer our
brutal winter! I took Ivan to the park. We sat on the grass to eat a snack, but
he wouldn’t stay put. He kept popping up and running around me in circles.
I told him he needed to sit while he was eating, but he yelled, “No!”
is wasn’t like him. I wondered what was going on. Did he suddenly
have attention deﬁcit disorder? I tried to imagine what he might be feeling,
and that’s when I realized the grass was probably bothering his exposed legs.
Maybe the grass was tickling him, or maybe it felt like sandpaper. I said,
“You don’t like sitting on the grass!” He said “No!” I laid my sweater out for
him to sit on. Suddenly he was happy to sit and eat the rest of his snack. e
sensation of grass on his legs had been too much to bear. I remember

 thinking, “Wow, people are diﬀerent in ways I didn’t even know they could
be diﬀerent.”

Seams of Socks
Jack has lots of socks in his drawer, but there are only three pairs that he
likes. When I have to get him to school in the morning, it’s always a battle if
none of his favorites are clean. In the past I always said things like, “Don’t
make such a big deal about a pair of socks,” and “ere’s nothing wrong with
the other socks.” Sometimes I ﬁgured he was making a fuss because he didn’t
want to go to school. I wasn’t going to stand for that!
When you told me about how sensitive your son’s feet were when he was
younger, I wondered if maybe my son really can tell the diﬀerence between
these three pairs of socks and all the rest. I bought another package of his
favorite socks, and you know what? We didn’t have one sock ﬁght all week.
at is, until his babysitter came one day and insisted he wear one of the
pairs he doesn’t like. I snapped at her, “Jack can feel the diﬀerence between
those socks and the ones he likes! You need to listen to him!” en I realized
that I was mad at her for doing the same thing I’d been doing for months. I
had to apologize. Anyway, now I know, my son feels what he feels . . . but he
sure didn’t get his sensitive feet from me!

Julie’s Story: Soccer in the Summer
I signed Asher up for a week of soccer camp, and it turned out to be one of
the hottest weeks of the summer. e temperature was expected to hit 90
degrees. Asher has always refused to wear shorts. He can’t stand the feeling
of air on his legs, and he always insists on wearing thick cargo pants. So of
course, he wore his pants to soccer camp.
I foresaw trouble. e woman in charge of signing kids in was going to
insist he wear shorts, which would be reasonable if Asher didn’t have such
sensitive legs. So I taught him to say, “I have hypersensitivity in my lower
extremities.”
Well, when he told her that, she was drop-jawed. She let him sign in
without any protest. I felt good about empowering Asher. Now he could let

 other people know how he’s feeling all by himself, instead of needing his
mom to interpret for him and protect him. And those were pretty big words
for a little kid!

Gummed Up
My six-year-old son Evan is very sensitive. is is a mixed blessing to say the
least! A few weeks ago he had a bad experience during lunch at school. One
of the kids at his table had a pack of wintergreen gum and shared it with the
other kids. e smell nauseated Evan so much that he couldn’t eat. Aer that
he got upset whenever he saw someone chewing gum. Even if he saw their
mouth moving as if they were chewing gum, he imagined the smell and he
couldn’t eat.
Last week it got worse. He would eat a few bites and then give up because
he was thinking about gum. I tried telling him to just not think about it, but
that made him cry. I started looking into child psychiatrists.
Aer the workshop last week I spent some time trying to understand
what Evan was experiencing. It’s not that strange if you really think about it.
We’re all taught not to discuss certain topics at the dinner table. Why?
Because even the thought of something disgusting, like vomit or feces,
makes us lose our appetite. (For some reason my brother-in-law has a hard
time with that concept. He works at a hospital and he’s infamous for talking
about the gross details of his job while we’re eating.)
I started writing a list of ideas to help Evan. Could he substitute a
diﬀerent thought? Could he substitute a diﬀerent smell? Maybe he could test
diﬀerent spices and ﬁnd one he likes. en if he started thinking about gum
he could take a whiﬀ of cinnamon or oregano.
At dinner that night, it happened again. Evan couldn’t eat, he was crying.
I said, “Ugh, the smell of wintergreen gum is so disgusting to you that the
very thought of it makes you lose your appetite. at’s a tough problem. It’s
not easy to eat when you have those thoughts in your head. And it’s really
hard to control your thoughts. Even grown-ups have lots of trouble doing
that.”
He looked at me with relief, and said, “Yeah.” He walked away from the
table, then came back as we were ﬁnishing the meal, took a few bites, and

 wandered oﬀ again. For the next few meals I followed the same script. By the
end of the week he was eating normally. Just knowing that I understood
what he was going through relieved a lot of his tension. I never even got to
try out any of my other ideas.

TOOL #3: Put into Words What Kids Want to Say

It can be hard to ﬁgure out what little kids, wired diﬀerently or not, want to
say. Maybe it’s because their brain-to-mouth connection hasn’t matured.
(“Ungh. Ungh!”) Or their tongues and lips aren’t yet coordinated. (“Yook, a
ef-lent.”) Or they just don’t have the vocabulary to express themselves.
(“Want dat!” “What is it you want, darling?” “Want dat! Dat! DAT!”)
Even when we can ﬁgure out what they’re trying to say, we may not want
to give them what they want. It can be tempting to ignore them, or act like
we don’t understand.
How to respond in these situations? Let’s do a thought experiment.
Imagine you’re learning a language called Kwarben, with diﬃcult
pronunciation and complicated grammar, and you’re utterly dependent on
people who speak only this language. You’re very hungry. You try your best
to ask for scrambled eggs—kwazikrai—but the only response you get is,
“F’wij troyk thwarpel, brigahzee par klaﬁk” (which means, “I don’t
understand you; speak more clearly”). Feeling frustrated, you try again,
shouting “Kwazikrai!” Your host responds in Kwarben, saying, “I can’t hear
you when you shout.” How long will it be before you give up, or cry, or
throw a shoe at your host?
Even if my host can’t ﬁgure out exactly what I want, I would feel better if
she said, “You want something! You need it right away!” Ah, I’ve

 communicated at least part of my message. She’s getting it! I’ll keep trying.
Like us, children who have diﬃculty communicating still want to express
themselves and be understood. We can help by putting into words what they
want to say, as best we can.
For early talkers, this may mean picking out the few words we do
understand (“Oh, an elephant! You’re saying elephant!”). For more advanced
talkers, we can expand on their words and acknowledge how they’re feeling.
When the child says, “No Daddy go!” we can say, “You don’t want Daddy to
go! You miss Daddy. You wish Daddy could stay home.”

Parents and teachers in my workshop were surprised to discover that
putting children’s feelings and desires into words is helpful, even when we
can’t give them what they want. When kids feel understood they also feel
more calm, connected, and able to tolerate frustration.

Trapped in the Kitchen
My older son was playing with a friend in the backyard. Jacob, who is
nonverbal, was with me in the kitchen when he noticed his big brother
outside. He started banging on the door, and it was clear he wanted to go
outside, too. Normally I would’ve been afraid to acknowledge that he wanted
to go out because I knew I couldn’t watch him out there at that moment—I
was in the middle of making dinner. But this time I tried putting into words
what I thought he wanted.
“You see Andy and Max playing outside. You want to go outside, too. I
wish I could take you outside, but I’m making macaroni and cheese for

 dinner. You can help me make dinner, and then aer we eat I’ll take you
outside.”
To my amazement, he came back into the kitchen and started playing
with the pots and pans! I always thought if you acknowledge what a child
wants, you have to give it to him or he’ll have a ﬁt. is was a real eye opener
for me.

Repeat After Me
Elliot’s speech is still pretty hard to understand. We’ve had a lot of
“conversations” where he says something incomprehensible, and I say,
“What did you say? Say it again.”
He tries again, and I still can’t make sense of most of it. “Slow down,
Elliot. Say it clearly. I can’t understand you.”
e next thing you know, he’s screaming his head oﬀ.
I started trying to let him know the words I do understand by repeating
everything I could ﬁgure out. So if he says, “mumble mumble mumble BALL
mumble,” I say, “You said something about a BALL.”
He’ll try again, and I’ll catch another word, so I repeat that, too, “Oh, you
said a GREEN BALL.”
Now whenever he says anything, he waits patiently for me to repeat back
his words.

Dinner Disappointment
My son, Will, is four, and he’s a screamer. He oen has a ﬁt when he doesn’t
like what’s for dinner. Last night we were having chicken, and he pointed at
the plate and started screaming. Normally I’d get angry and tell him to be
quiet. But this time I said, “Oh no! You’re upset! You wanted mac and cheese
and you got chicken.”
“Mac and cheese!”
“You really wanted mac and cheese!” I pounded on the table.
He pounded along with me, “Mac and cheese, mac and cheese!”
I sang, “Oh mac and cheese, I wish you grew on trees, I love you more
than peas, without you my heart will freeze, I want to smear you on my

 knees . . .” I was emoting with him, hamming it up.
e freak-out was over. He wasn’t screaming anymore. We looked at the
food on the table. He decided he’d have some of the potato with cheese on
top and some of the carrot sticks. Aer he polished oﬀ those, he ate a little
chicken. I didn’t say a thing!

Written Record
Sometimes Peter gets so upset he has trouble speaking. It can take him a
long time to get the words out. It happened last week aer he came home
from school. He was crying and gasping for breath between words. I really
wanted to scream at him, “WHAT HAPPENED?? JUST TELL ME!!” Of
course that would only make him more upset and slow him down even
more.
I decided to try writing down everything he was saying—mostly to give
myself something to do. But it also helped him calm down faster. I literally
wrote down every word he said: “e . . . teacher . . . said . . . the . . .
fastest . . . person . . . to . . . clean . . . up . . . would . . . win . . . a . . . prize. . . .
But . . . she . . . made . . . me . . . stop . . . to . . . give . . . her . . . the . . .
science . . . worksheet. . . . It’s . . . not . . . fair! . . . She . . . made . . . me . . .
lose!”
He made me read it back to him several times as he was telling the story,
and listened with great satisfaction. Crisis over.

Rain, Rain, Go Away!
I teach kindergarten. We couldn’t go outside for recess as usual because it
was raining (and if you don’t live in California you may not realize what a
rare event that was!). Johnny normally has a ﬁt when the schedule changes.
He throws himself on the ﬂoor or bangs on the window.
He said, “I want outside!”
I said, “I know, you really like to go out for recess. You don’t like being
inside.”
“I want outside!”
“I bet you wish the rain would stop!”

 “Outside!”
We were stuck, so I said, “Let’s go outside to see if it’s still raining.”
We went outside and stood in the rain. I shook my ﬁst at the sky and said,
“You, rain! You took away Johnny’s recess!”
en I turned to Johnny and said, “It’s still raining. Let’s go inside and
play bowling.”
He wasn’t happy about it, but he was much calmer than usual. He went
inside and he got involved in bowling.

After-hours Agony
When Dustin lies down to go to sleep he can get sensory overload. Without
the distraction of being in motion, discomforts crowd in on him. Last night
he was having an especially hard time. He complained about the sheet
rubbing against his feet. He had an uncomfortable feeling in his throat when
he swallowed. His ﬁngertips had an unpleasant tingling because I trimmed
his nails earlier in the day. He brushed his teeth ﬁve times to get rid of a bad
taste in his mouth. We did our regular routine of me karate chopping his
back, scratching his back, lightly tickling his back. He was screaming and
agitated. I was at a loss for how to help him feel better.
Dustin asked me, “Can I say a bad word?”
I said, “Sure, you say as many bad words as you want.”
He started yelling. I asked, “Can I yell with you?”
He looked surprised but he nodded. I yelled with him, cursed the awful
feelings he was feeling in his body, yelled that it isn’t fair, IT JUST ISN’T FAIR!!
(ese are things he has said to me in the past.) And then the magic
happened. I saw it in his face. He sobbed with relief, hugged me as hard as
he could, and said, “I love you so much, Mommy!” We held each other and
cried. at was the turning point. A few minutes later he was able to dri oﬀ
to sleep.

TOOL #4: Adjust Expectations: Manage the Environment
Instead of the Child

 One of the (many) challenges of raising children who are wired diﬀerently is
ﬁguring out what we can reasonably expect of them, and what is too much.
Even those of us who aren’t child development experts have a sense that
three-year-olds should be able to eat without throwing food, at least most of
the time; that four-year-olds should be able to pee in the toilet instead of in
their pants; that ﬁve-year-olds should be able to play nicely with a friend;
that six-year-olds should be able to get themselves dressed independently.
It’s hard not to worry when our kids don’t ﬁt the norm. Are they being
intentionally oppositional? Is their demand for help a sign that we’ve spoiled
them? Are they more impaired than we realize?
It’s disheartening when seemingly normal, enjoyable activities are
irritating or overwhelming to our kids: a friend’s birthday party that results
in a show-stopping tantrum; a family dinner celebration that ends in an
embarrassing meltdown. It can be hard not to feel resentful when our own
social lives are aﬀected by our children’s sensitivities. And even if we’re
willing to avoid situations that might feel intolerable to our kids, it’s
impossible to anticipate all the challenges we’ll encounter at home or out in
the world with our diﬀerently wired children.
What to do? People in my workshops were quick to share what doesn’t
help:
Commands: “You need to get yourself dressed, now!”
Shaming: “You’re too old to be peeing in your pants.”
Denial of feelings: “Come on, this is fun. I don’t want to hear any
more complaining.”

 Lectures: “We can’t leave, honey. Your relatives came a long way so
they can see you and visit with everybody. It’s going to be over in
a couple of hours. You need to be polite to your cousins. ey
just want to play with you.”
Questions: “Why did you do that? Didn’t I tell you not to stuﬀ
bread in the heating grate?”
reats: “I’m counting to three! One . . . two . . . two and a half . . .”
Kids might not be developmentally ready to meet our expectations. We
may be better oﬀ skipping the loud, crowded party at the indoor playground
and instead arranging a short playdate to celebrate a friend’s birthday. As
cute as those new Mary Jane shoes are, we may decide to let our sensory girl
wear her old, worn-out comfy shoes to Grandma’s dinner party.
Once people made the shi from trying to change the kids to changing
their expectations, they found many ways to make life more pleasant for
their children and themselves.

Julie’s Story: Shorter School Days
Rashi never had a particularly hard time separating from me in preschool,
but aer a week in kindergarten he started clinging and crying. It was awful.
I tried acknowledging his feelings. “You don’t want me to go!” I tried telling
him when I’d be back. “I’ll see you at the end of aernoon circle time.” I tried
getting him interested in an activity. “Look, blocks!” and having a teacher
talk with him. “Ms. Jones, Rashi brought a magic trick to show you.”
Nothing helped.
One day I had to take Rashi out of school early for a doctor’s
appointment. I told him, “I’m going to pick you up right aer story time.”
at day he didn’t cry at all when I dropped him oﬀ. But the next day, when
he was staying the whole day, he cried again.
I wondered if the full day was just too long for him. I decided to
experiment. I made up an excuse to pick him up early, and again that day he
didn’t cry when I dropped him oﬀ. I talked to the teachers, and we all agreed
I would start taking Rashi home right aer lunch. Not only did he stop

 crying at morning drop-oﬀ, but the teachers said he also started talking and
participating in class. ey didn’t realize he could talk!

Julie’s Story: Info Relay Delay
One of the lessons I learned about communicating with my son was to
adjust my expectations of how long it should take him to respond. Here’s a
typical interchange before I learned my lesson:
Me: Hey, Rashi, do you want a peanut butter and jelly sandwich or a
turkey sandwich? (ree-second pause.) Rashi . . . ? Okay ﬁne, if
you’re not going to answer me you’re getting peanut butter.
Rashi: Waaaah! I want turkey!

I ﬁnally learned.
Me: Hey, Rashi, I have a question for you. Tell me when you’re ready
for it.

I wait 10 seconds.
Rashi (looks up): What?
Me: Do you want a peanut butter and jelly sandwich or a turkey
sandwich?

(I wait twenty long seconds. I’m so impatient I actually count the seconds
in my head to distract myself from shouting just tell me!)
Rashi (finally!): Turkey.
Me: Okay. anks for telling me.

Playdate Pusher
I invited my friend Alice to bring her daughter, Charlotte, over for a playdate
with my son, Marcos. ey’re both in a special class for kids with autism.
ey seemed to be having a good time, and Alice and I were enjoying our

 chance to chat. Aer about an hour and a half Marcos started getting cranky,
but I guess I didn’t want my playdate to end, so I kept encouraging him to
“play nice.” All of a sudden he shoved Charlotte hard enough to knock her
over.
I was so embarrassed. My ﬁrst impulse was to punish Marcos even
though Charlotte wasn’t really hurt. But part of me realized I had pushed
him past his breaking point. So I told Marcos, “Charlotte doesn’t like to be
pushed. It looks like you need a break from playing together.” Alice was
understanding and took Charlotte home. We’re going to limit the next
playdate to an hour.

Julie’s Story: Potty for a Printer
It was taking forever to potty train Rashi. All the other kids in his class had it
down. When he seemed to have some control I put him in underpants, but
then he peed and didn’t even notice that his pants were soaked. I didn’t like
the idea of using a reward system, but everyone—the pediatrician, his
teacher, even the occupational therapist—told me I should try rewards. ey
wore me down. Rashi was ﬁxated on getting a color printer. We had an
ancient black and white one that we’d been thinking of replacing, so I told
him that if he stayed dry for three days in a row, we’d get a new printer.
e ﬁrst day he did pretty well. He had just one tiny accident, and he was
trying so hard I told him it didn’t count. But he couldn’t make it through
three days in a row. It was heartbreaking. He’d mostly make it through a day
or even two, but then he’d have a major accident and he’d cry his eyes out, he
was so upset with himself. It became crystal clear to me that the problem
wasn’t that he lacked motivation. He really could not stay focused on his
body signals and feel when his bladder was about to burst. He had low
sensitivity in his legs, so I shouldn’t have been surprised that this was
especially hard for him.
I ﬁnally decided to end the torture. I told him, “Your body isn’t ready to
always tell you when your bladder is full. We can try again when you’re a
little older, but in the meantime I think we need to replace our printer now.”
He was so relieved.

 e hardest part was admitting to myself that he wasn’t ready to get rid of
the pull-ups.

Dinner Isn’t Served
We have a regular dinner with extended family, but it’s too loud for our son,
Cameron. He just cannot sit there. He gets overwhelmed by all the crossconversations. So now we feed him ahead of time, and while we eat dinner
he gets to hang out in the playroom. It causes some friction with the family.
ey say, “Why can’t he sit and eat with us?” “Why can’t he behave?” “When
I was a child, I was expected to sit at the table and visit with the family.”
Well, they didn’t have autism! We’re not going to put our son in a stressful
situation just to satisfy their deﬁnition of “normal.” It’s better for us to take
the heat from the family than to make our son (and ourselves) miserable at
dinner.

Don’t expect new skills to be used consistently.
“He knows how to sit still . . . tie his own shoes . . . use the potty . . .
behave in the grocery store. . . . He’s just being contrary!”
Just because your kid did something yesterday doesn’t mean he can do it
today. Just because he can do something in the morning when he’s fresh,
doesn’t mean he can do it in the aernoon when he’s tired. Kids aren’t
consistent in their use of new skills. It makes having realistic expectations
even harder for parents and teachers. But who ever said it was going to be
easy?

 Diaper Vacation
Every time Emily peed in her pants I got upset with her. “Why didn’t you go
to the bathroom when I asked you?” “I’m not taking you out if you’re going
to keep peeing all over yourself!” I made her feel really bad for having
accidents. I knew she could use the potty if she put her mind to it. She’s done
it before.
Aer our session on developmental readiness, I ﬁnally got it through my
head that she doesn’t have the ability to control her bladder all the time. It
depends on how tired she is and how engrossed she is in an activity. I started
saying, “Your body sure can be tricky, not telling you when your bladder is
full and then giving you a big surprise.”
She was so grateful when I showed her I understood, I decided to take oﬀ
the pressure altogether. “Would you like to have a break from having to go to
the bathroom all the time? We could have a ‘diaper vacation.’ ”
Well, she loved that idea. She was so excited, I was a little nervous she’d
never wear underpants again. On Saturday morning, she put on a diaper. I
have to admit, it was a nice break for me, too, not worrying about ﬁnding a
puddle of pee somewhere, or trying to keep track of how long it’d been since
she’d used the potty. I was surprised that aer three hours she said she was
ready to wear underpants again.
We have a long way to go with potty training, but now our relationship is
not so antagonistic. I still have to constantly remind myself that she isn’t
doing this to spite me or because she’s lazy or unmotivated. It’s easy to jump
to conclusions like that, even now. Most kids her age have had control for
years. I have to accept that when it comes to potty training, she isn’t like
most kids.

TOOL #5: Use Alternatives to the Spoken Word: Write a
Note, Use a Gesture, Draw a Picture, Sing

 Kids who are wired diﬀerently oen have more diﬃculty making sense of
what we say to them. ey beneﬁt from multiple ways to process
information. Parents and teachers got creative designing charts, singing
directions, and making colorful checklists. Here are a few examples:

Wardrobe Checklist
Rudy is six. It used to be that if we didn’t help him get dressed he wouldn’t
do it. It’s not that he was resisting. It’s just that he’s easily distracted. If I’d tell
him, “Go get dressed,” I’d ﬁnd him in his room thirty minutes later, half
naked, stuﬃng cars into his pillowcase. Honestly, that kid can be distracted
by a speck of dust. So I made a checklist and I put it at his spot on the
kitchen table.
He ran to his room to get his T-shirt on, and then ran back to the table to
see what was next on the list. Aer a few weeks, I taped the list to the wall in
his room, and he got himself completely changed without supervision or
help. I made sure to notice, “You did everything! Shirt, pants, socks. And
secret undies we can’t see.” He looked pretty pleased with himself.

 Missing Mom Blues
I teach preschool. I had a little girl who was waiting for her mom to come
pick her up, and she was distraught that she had to wait. So I made up a song
for her:
(To the tune of “Clementine”:)
I want my mommy, I want my mommy, I want my mommy, right
now!
I want my mommy, I want my mommy, I want my mommy, right
now!
Where IS she? Where is she, Where is she, right now!
Where is she? Where is she, Where is she, right now!
e song helped her calm down. She actually seemed to enjoy it. She gave a
little smile every time I yelled right now.

Plan in a Pocket
Jeremy gets upset if he arrives at school and discovers his teacher is out for
the day. Sometimes he refuses to go in. So now she lets us know ahead of

 time when she’s going to be absent. I drew a picture of the substitute teacher,
Mrs. Kay, on a little card. Jeremy knows if he has the card in his pocket, Mrs.
Kay will be his teacher for the day. I don’t know if he ever takes the card out,
but it reassures him to have it there.

Your Table Is Ready
Nick is six and can be very rigid about routines. His little brother Charlie is
four. ey ﬁght us over where they’re going to eat dinner. ey don’t want to
eat at the table with us, ever! ey want to eat at their own little table. We
allow it on the weekends, but they want to eat at the little table every night.
ey’re always asking, “Why can’t we?” We tell them we need to eat as a
family. ey don’t like that reason.
Finally I put a chart on the wall. It has all the days of the week, with “LT”
and “BT,” for Little Table and Big Table. ey looked at it and Nick said,
“Really? is is what it is?”
“Yup, this is what it is.”
I explained the chart to Charlie and he said, “Well, what about tonight?”
I said, “Let’s look it up. Let’s see, it’s Tuesday. Nope, not tonight. It’s not
going to happen tonight.”
ey said, “Aww . . .” And they sat down at the big table without any more
fuss.

Joanna’s Story: Silent Cynthia
In my job as a resource room teacher in West Harlem, I had to give children
screening tests to see if they needed extra help in reading and language
development. When Cynthia was brought to me for testing, the counselor
shrugged and said, “Do what you can.”
Cynthia was a ﬁve-year-old Haitian girl who did not speak. At the
beginning of the year many of the teachers and classroom aides made an
eﬀort. ey’d crouch down to her level and say, “Cynthia, what’s your name?
Tell me your name!” I guess they were trying to give her an easy question.
But Cynthia would just stand and stare, expressionless, arms limp at her
sides. Eventually she was le alone to sit at the back of the classroom where

 she bothered nobody. Finally she had been ﬂagged for screening, and now it
was my turn to try.
I sat down with her and opened my book. I was uneasy; I didn’t want to
be one more adult harassing this sad little girl with tests and questions. But I
had to do my job. “Hey Cynthia,” I whispered. “I’m Ms. Faber. I need your
help. I want you to make a special sign. It’s the wiggly ﬁnger sign.” I wiggled
to demonstrate. “I’m going to say a color and you wiggle your ﬁnger over the
color that I say.”
Cynthia wiggled her ﬁnger and identiﬁed all the colors correctly. For
“same and diﬀerent” we did thumbs-up and thumbs-down. She didn’t smile,
but she was very intent. She didn’t miss a single one. Finally I needed her to
name pictures of animals and common objects. I said, “is time I’m going
to try to read your thoughts. I don’t know if I can do it! Just move your lips
but don’t say the word out loud. I’m going to concentrate as hard as I can to
see if I can do this.”
I pointed to the tiger. Cynthia mouthed the word tiger.
I leaned my head toward her. She leaned into me. Our foreheads touched.
“Did you just think tiger?” I asked.
Cynthia nodded.
“I did it, I did it! I read your thought!” I was truly pretty thrilled.
Cynthia’s mouth twitched into a tiny, swi smile.
“Do you want to try another one?”
Cynthia nodded. We ﬁnished all the questions. According to the test she
was a very bright little girl. Aer that, whenever I saw her in the hall or at
recess, she would run over to me and mouth words. Eventually she started
gently pulling my head down and whispering in my ear. I never had her as a
student and I don’t know if she ever talked to anyone else at the school.

TOOL #6: Tell Them What They Can Do, Instead of What
They Can’t

 I remember waiting to cross the street with my mother when I was about six
years old. I was just learning to read, and I ﬁgured out that the sign said
DON’T WALK. I was proud to have read the sign, but I was confused. I’m not
supposed to run in the street. But the sign says not to walk. How will I get
across? I would have understood better if the sign had said WAIT.
Even when children understand our individual words, they may fail to
grasp what we’re trying to say. is is especially true of children who are on
the autism spectrum or have other developmental delays. ey tend to
interpret words literally, which can lead to misunderstandings. When you
tell a child what not to do, you may be confusing him. You can’t assume that
he’ll automatically know what to do.
e next time you need to stop your child, try redirecting him instead.
ink of a runaway train heading for a precipice. It’s better to switch tracks
to avert catastrophe than to try to stop all that momentum cold.
As a bonus, by oﬀering an acceptable activity, you’ll encounter less
resistance than you would have with warnings and reprimands.
Our group worked on a “track-switcher” for adults.
Adult wants to say:

Tell them what they can do:

“Don’t chase the kitty.”

“You can wiggle this yarn for the kitty.”

“Don’t wake the baby.”

“Let’s use our whisper voices.”

“Don’t run in the parking lot.”

“Hand-holding time.”

“Don’t throw sand.”

“Sand is for pouring and digging.”

“Don’t be so bossy.”

“I like to be asked, ‘Can you please help me?’ ”

“Don’t wiggle while I’m trying to tie your
shoelaces.”

“Time to freeze like a statue!”

“Don’t throw laundry.”

“You can throw your stuﬀed animals.”

 “Don’t jump on the couch.”

“You can jump from the bottom step to the beanbag
chair.”

TOOL #7: Be Playful!

Kids on the autism spectrum take longer than neurotypical kids to move
from the stage of literal thinking to imaginative play. It can be a challenge to
ﬁgure out how to appeal to their sense of fun. Here are some examples of
parents who discovered ways to encourage cooperation and connection with
a bit of silliness:

Food Magician
Mornings during the week are hard. Jason gets distracted when he’s
supposed to be eating, even when he’s clearly hungry. We have very little
time for breakfast because school starts so early. I’m always saying, “You’re
not eating. Why aren’t you eating?” is week I tried being more playful.
Anytime he takes a bite of something I say, “Oh my, the apple is
disappearing from your plate.” When he gets distracted, I try to catch myself
and say, “e food isn’t disappearing. What’s going on?” en he’ll put the
food in his mouth and start eating it. It’s great. He’s eating, and I’m not a
tyrant anymore.

 Underwear Options
Justin is six. He has high-functioning autism. He still sleeps in a pull-up at
night. Every morning I remind him to go to the bathroom and change out of
his pull-up. And he says, “I don’t want to.”
is week, instead of telling him what to do, I pulled out two pairs of his
underpants. I said, “Do you want omas, or omas?” He thought that was
hysterical. at’s our new morning routine. He likes choosing his
underwear, and then he goes to the bathroom, and it’s not a big deal.

Cleanup Crawl
My son hates to cleanup. I’ve tried telling him, “It’s cleanup time.” “You have
to put back what you took out.” “You have to put the blocks away before you
take out the train set.” Nothing works.
It occurred to me that he loves to play a game he learned in physical
therapy. I put him on his stomach on the big therapy ball. I hold on to his
ankles and he crawls out on his hands to reach a little stuﬀed animal I’ve
thrown for him to retrieve. So this time I said, “Let’s do wheelbarrow
cleanup.” I got out the therapy ball, grabbed his ankles, and steered him to
the block pile. He grabbed one, I pulled him back, he put it in the block bag,
and then went out for another. It took longer than doing it myself, but this
way I don’t get mad at him. And it has the added bonus of giving him a
workout!
• • •
Kids who are wired diﬀerently may be delayed in their developmental
milestones. ey may be ever-so-much-more-so in their sensitivities. But
they have a commonality with all children. ey want to be understood, to
act autonomously, and to feel competent. ey need adults in their lives who
can connect with them and support them in their quest. We hope these tools
will make it easier for you to do just that.

    REMINDER: Tools for Kids Who Are Differently Wired

1. Join Them in Their World
“Can I play the Bubble Game with you? Will you show me how?”

2. Take Time to Imagine What Your Child Is
Experiencing
“So to you, the seams of the socks are very irritating!”

3. Put into Words What Kids Want to Say
“You bad old rain! You took away Johnny’s recess!”

4. Adjust Expectations: Manage the Environment Instead
of the Child
“Let’s take a diaper vacation. We need some time to relax and not
worry about peeing in the potty.”

5. Use Alternatives to the Spoken Word: Notes,
Checklists, Pictures, Songs, Gestures

 6. Tell Them What They Can Do, Instead of What They
Can’t
“You can throw your stuﬀed animals.”

7. Be Playful!
“It’s time to put away the blocks. I need help from the human
wheelbarrow!”

• Don’t expect new skills to be used consistently.

 Chapter Five and a Quarter
The Basics . . . You Can’t Talk Your Way Out of
These
—Conditions under which the tools won’t work
Julie
Before we move on to part two, I’m going to take a fraction of a chapter to
state the obvious, because the obvious can be easily overlooked by a weary
parent: We need to meet basic needs before any communication tools will
work for us. For example, if there’s a carrot stuck in your throat you need air
before you need empathy. If your leg is broken you need a cast before you
need encouragement to walk.
e ﬁrst two basics of everyday parenting are food and sleep. If your
child is overtired or hungry, it’s likely that none of the communication tools
in the previous chapters will work for you.
Remember the ﬁrst rule of chapter one? Kids can’t act right when they
don’t feel right. Little kids aren’t always aware that they’re feeling bad because
they’re tired or hungry. It’s up to us to keep those possibilities in mind and to
oﬀer sustenance and slumber when those two vital ingredients might be
lacking.

 Cheese to the Rescue
I had an appointment in the aernoon, so I le Rashi with our familiar,
longtime babysitter. I came home several hours later, and he walked down
the hall to greet me but stopped halfway. “What’s wrong?” I asked.
He started to cry. “Oh no! What is it? You’re crying.” He couldn’t talk. I
asked the sitter if she knew what the matter was. She had no idea.
“What time did you give him lunch?”
“I thought you fed him lunch before you le . . .”
Realizing that Rashi hadn’t eaten a thing since breakfast and it was now
late aernoon, I ran to the kitchen, grabbed a stick of cheese, and put it in
his mouth as he stood in the hallway. He chewed and swallowed. I gave him
some more. He calmed down and was able to walk to the kitchen table for a
very late lunch. No amount of talking would have helped as much as that
stick of cheese.

Sleepless in San Francisco
I got a distressed call from a couple I’d been working with for a year. eir
normally cooperative son, Gavin, had suddenly become obstinate and
diﬃcult. For the past two days he refused to get ready for school on time, he
was whiny and uncooperative, and he was making his little brother
miserable as well. ey had tried the How to Talk tools without success.
When I asked for details, I learned that Gavin had gone camping with his
father over the weekend. ey’d slept out Friday night, staying up late to set
up the tent, and then gotten up with the sun for an adventure-ﬁlled day of

 hiking and ﬁshing. Saturday they were up late making s’mores over the
campﬁre. Sunday they were up late again unpacking gear from the trip. By
Monday, Gavin was dragging, and by Tuesday, he had become a little terror,
which is when his parents contacted me.
Rather than giving them tools to try, I suggested they get him to bed
early. ey had not made the connection between lack of sleep and
challenging behavior. As soon as Gavin started getting more sleep, the
diﬃcult “phase” disappeared.
• • •
Since this chapter is far from a quarter full at this point, I’m going to throw
in a few more basics that may be a little less obvious than food and sleep.
One of these is the biological need for recovery time. When we get angry,
our bodies are ﬂooded with hormones. Our heart rate increases and our
blood pressure rises, making us more likely to withdraw or react with
aggression. Most people have heard of the ﬂight-or-ﬁght response. You
learned about it in your high school biology class, but you probably haven’t
given much thought to it since. One of the best things we can do for children
in times of stress is to give them time to recover from the physical changes
of anger, fear, and frustration. Don’t expect a child to be able to “snap out of
it” immediately.
And don’t forget that adults need recovery time, too. Give it to yourself if
you can. Instead of trying to force yourself to act calm when you’re feeling
anything but, let children know, “I’m still very upset! I need some time to
feel better. I’ll be able to help you in a few minutes.”

Joanna’s Story: The Terrible Bus Ride
I got distracted and didn’t make it to the top of the driveway in time to get
Zach oﬀ the kindergarten bus. I called the school to let them know I was
home, and 30 minutes later the bus returned. e big yellow doors opened
to reveal a hysterically sobbing ﬁve-year-old. e driver informed me that
my son had kicked him.
Zach tumbled into my arms, barely able to breathe from crying. “I hate
him, I hate him!”

 is was not the time for a lecture on violence. I hugged him tight,
saying, “at was scary, being stuck on the bus.”
“He didn’t let me oﬀ. I told him you were home. He didn’t believe me!”
I repeated, “You knew it would be okay for you to get oﬀ, but he didn’t let
you. You knew that I was home.”
Zach was shaking. “He grabbed me! He wouldn’t let me go!”
“You didn’t like that!”
Zach ﬁnally calmed down enough to go inside and get a snack. I let the
topic drop.
A full hour later, when Zach was completely calm, I sat down next to him
and said, “I know you hated what the bus driver did. e problem is, the
driver is actually supposed to keep kids on the bus so they won’t go home to
an empty house. He was actually doing his job. He could actually get ﬁred if
he lets kids oﬀ without an adult there.” (Note that “actually” was one of
Zach’s favorite words at this point in his life, hence my overuse of it.)
Zach started sniﬄing again. “I know!”
I doubted that he knew much about the job requirements of a bus driver,
but I wasn’t going to argue.
“I think we need to say sorry to the driver for kicking him and for me
being late.”
Together we wrote an apology letter and we both signed it. Zach ﬁlled a
carton of eggs from our chickens to add to the apology.

e next morning the driver accepted the note and the eggs graciously.
Zach and I decided that if I was late again Zach would know to stay on the

 bus, and I would get in my car and follow the bus to the next stop so he
wouldn’t have to wait so long to get home.
A ﬁve-year-old made the transition from physical assault to socially
acceptable grace. He and his mother solved a problem and made amends. It
could not have happened without ﬁrst waiting for the panic and fury to
subside.
• • •
e next basic need I want to address in this fractional chapter is the need
not to be overwhelmed. If too many demands are made and too many
frustrations have piled up, even a simple, respectful request can be the
proverbial straw that breaks the camel’s back. We need to be aware of when a
child is nearing his breaking point so we don’t add that last seemingly
harmless straw.
Let’s see what this ﬁnal straw might look like.

Unenchanted Evening
My son, Eli, is four years old. We recently moved to a diﬀerent state and we
no longer have the au pair who lived with us since Eli was two. Aer the
move, we enrolled him in full-day preschool since both my husband and I
are now working full-time.
Last night I picked Eli up from aer-school care at 5 o’clock. When we got
to the house, Eli said, “Mommy, let’s play.”
“I can’t do that. It’s late. I need to start cooking so we can eat.”
“No, Mommy! Don’t make dinner. Play with me. Play the tickle game.”
I told him I have to cook right now. He looked like he was going to start
crying so I told him he could be my assistant chef.
He went to get his apron. I told him he needed to wash his hands ﬁrst. He
made an angry grunt and threw the apron down.
I took him into the bathroom to wash his hands and noticed he needed
to poop. I could see him dancing around in that way. While he was sitting
on the potty I noticed his ragged ﬁngernails, so I got the scissors and started
cutting them. He started to cry and said he wanted his video game. I
reminded him that we don’t play video games on school nights.

 At that point he jumped oﬀ the potty and began to scream. “NO! NO!
NO! I’m playing. You can’t stop me.” He was running around with no pants
on. It was a bad scene and it didn’t get any better. I could go on, but suﬃce it
to say that he cried himself to sleep.
• • •
Such simple requests. Such a diﬃcult child! Take another look with eyes on
those straws piling up.
A long day at school and aer-school care, the loss of a familiar au pair, a
new school, a new house, new teachers, a new schedule, a distracted mom,
an unpleasant chore of cutting nails—Eli might have been able to handle any
one of these things, but all together, it was too much!
e moral of the story is: watch out for all those “straws,” both hidden
and obvious, that may be overwhelming your child. When the load is getting
heavy, spend more time relaxing and reconnecting and less time making
demands—of yourself or your child.
• • •
Finally, we need to match our expectations to the child’s stage of
development and level of experience. is is not the book to turn to
for an exhaustive discussion of developmental stages,1 but we can’t get away
without mentioning it. When things are going badly it may be helpful to ask
yourself, Am I expecting my child to behave in a way that is beyond his
current level of ability?
Here are a few stories of parents with unrealistic expectations.

Downhill Ride
It seemed like a great idea at the time. We hadn’t had a vacation since the
twins were born. Now that they were three, we planned to take them skiing
at this fantastic place that provides all-day classes for the little ones while
their parents ski. Heaven! We live in California and the girls have never seen
snow. ey also love physical challenges. We were pretty sure they’d be
thrilled.

 When we got to the resort, the girls refused to go with the instructor. We
le them anyway, only to be called back 20 minutes later and told that we
had to pick them up because they wouldn’t stop crying. We were not able to
ski and we lost a very large deposit for the lessons. It was a huge
disappointment. What could we have done diﬀerently to make this work?
• • •
What, indeed, could these optimistic parent have done diﬀerently? Well, for
one thing, they could’ve been less optimistic. ree-year-olds are not
generally amenable to so many new experiences at once. e idea that
children of this age will go oﬀ with a complete stranger, in an unfamiliar
setting, wearing strange bulky clothing in freezing cold temperatures they
have never experienced before, to engage in a completely unfamiliar and
diﬃcult activity for hours on end . . . at scenario may exist in a fantasy
novel, but it was too much to ask of the real world. For three-year-olds, an
exciting vacation would be a trip to a new playground for an hour, another
thirty minutes to muck about in a muddy stream, then a nice snack, and
home to sleep in their own bed. Keep your plans simple and humble when
your kids are small, and you will have simple (and less expensive)
disappointments.

Puppy Promises
It was Saturday morning. My husband was asleep, as was our new puppy. My
seven-year-old son, eo, was awake and playing computer games. I realized
we were out of milk, so I told eo that I was going on a quick shop, and he
needed to be sure to let the puppy out as soon as she woke up. I told him it
was very important. He nodded and went back to his game.
When I got back, the ﬁrst thing I noticed was my sandaled foot in a
puddle of urine right by the door. ere was a bad smell, and then I saw dog
poop had been tracked all over the kitchen ﬂoor. Where was eo? Still in
front of his computer, completely oblivious.
I was furious. I yelled at him so loudly the puppy ran under the table and
peed again. I reminded him that he had promised to take care of the puppy
when he begged us for a dog. We even had him sign a contract agreeing to

 feed and walk the dog. I threatened to give her back because he was
behaving so irresponsibly. My son was sobbing his eyes out. Is it too much to
expect a seven-year-old to clip a leash on a puppy and take him out into the
backyard?
• • •
Not necessarily. But just because a child has the physical ability to walk a
dog doesn’t mean that he’s ready to suddenly take full responsibility for a
living creature. Kids aren’t good at splitting their attention and tend to
become absorbed in the moment, especially when the moment involves
computer games. You can’t rely on the fact that he “promised!” Devising a
plan for the future and giving your child plenty of opportunity to practice
will get you where you want to go more eﬀectively than a signature on a
contract.
• • •
So there you have it, folks. When you’re feeling frustrated by a child’s
miserable behavior, do a quick check to see if addressing any of these “deal
breakers” will save the day.

 REMINDER: The Basics–Conditions Under Which the Tools Won’t
Work
• Lack of food
• Lack of sleep
• Need for recovery time
• Feeling overwhelmed (the last straw syndrome)
• Lack of developmental or experiential readiness

 PART II
THE TOOLS IN ACTION

Welcome to part two of our survival guide.
Here we invite you to listen in on some of our “special topic” workshop
sessions about common conﬂicts that crop up in life with little kids. You can
read stories from workshop participants who have tried the strategies in this
book with real-life, nontheoretical children. At the end of each chapter you’ll
ﬁnd a summary page of ideas you can see at a glance.
is section of our book is not intended to be read sequentially. You can
dip into whichever topic you like, in any order you like, without reproach!

 1
Food Fights—The Battle at the Kitchen
Table
Joanna
When food is a source of conﬂict, we’re ﬁghting with our kids every day . . .
many times a day. Parents in the workshop had no problem compiling a list
of ﬂashpoints:

The Battleground
• Getting kids to eat their vegetables instead of just pasta and dessert.
• Getting them to eat what’s served without a mountain of
complaints. (“Eww, that’s disgusting!”)
• Getting them to try new foods. (Why are they so suspicious? Do
they think their parents are trying to poison them?)
• Getting them to eat enough. (How are they going to grow if they’re
determined to survive on air and potato chips?)
Toni was the ﬁrst to weigh in. “Every night is a festival of bargaining and
bribery in my house. I’ll say, ‘Come on, you can’t have your ice cream until
you take three more bites of broccoli.’ omas will say, ‘One bite.’ I’ll say,
‘Okay, how about two?’ It’s ridiculous.”
Maria was nodding in agreement. “Benjamin is on the white-food diet.
All he wants to eat is pasta, bread, and vanilla ice cream. When I grew up
you ate what your mother put in front of you.”
I wondered out loud if the good old days were as good as we remember
them. My mother used to tell me stories about how she dreaded mealtimes.

 One of her earliest memories was of her mother poking more and more food
into her mouth and then patting her cheeks to force her to swallow. My
father had his own battles at the kitchen table. His mother demanded that
the children “clean their plates.” He has vivid memories of being unable to
choke down gluey hot cereal, and being served the same unﬁnished bowl for
lunch, and again for dinner. He stuck to his fast until he fainted from
hunger.
“Well, that is sad,” snapped Toni. “But what are we supposed to do? Let
the lunatics run the asylum? We’ll have candy for breakfast, pasta for lunch,
and potato chips with soda for dinner. I think in this case it’s more
important to make sure your child has good nutrition than to be his best
friend.”
“Let’s look at this from a diﬀerent angle,” I suggested. “We know a lot of
kids are naturally suspicious of new tastes and textures, foods with strong or
bitter tastes, and even foods touching other foods on their plate. ere’s
actually a scientiﬁc explanation for picky eating. Little babies put everything
in their mouths, but around age two they become cautious about new tastes.
at caution protects the freely moving toddler from the danger of eating
poisonous things. In fact, we’re a species of picky eaters, since historically
the pickiest of toddlers survive to reproduce. Picky eating is in our DNA!”1

“It can be worse for kids on the autism spectrum,” Anna added. “Anton
will only eat foods with certain textures, or very bland food. Even though he
likes the taste of apples, he can’t stand the texture, so he won’t eat them.”
Toni looked frustrated. “Fine, so they’re naturally picky. We still need to
get them to eat.”

 I wasn’t done with my science lecture. I told the group about a study in
which very young children were oﬀered a variety of healthy foods and were
allowed to make their own choices. e children did actually choose a
balanced diet on their own. It wasn’t necessarily balanced for that particular
meal, but it was balanced if you looked over the course of a day or a week.
None of them came down with any kind of vitamin or protein deﬁciency,
and they all gained a healthy amount of weight.2
Toni wasn’t convinced. “Well, if that were true, we wouldn’t have to worry
about anything. So why do I read in the news about kids eating too much
junk food and drinking too much soda?”
It was a good point. e researchers had only oﬀered healthy food to the
children. Our craving for sweets and fat would ruin the experiment if soda
and chips were included.
“If you think about it, evolutionarily speaking we haven’t been around
reﬁned sugar and a limitless supply of fat for very long. Kids can’t handle
that.”
“Heck, I can’t even handle that!” said Sarah. “If I see chocolate, I’ll eat it!
e only way I can control my diet is to have certain things out of sight or
out of the house.”
I dove back into my lecture. “Here’s what we have so far. Many children
are naturally picky eaters. It may even be genetic, or developmental. But
given a range of healthy choices, children will choose a balanced diet—so
long as junk food isn’t included in the mix. Children are tempted by sweets
and fried food just as much as we are.
“It seems to me we have two important goals here. e ﬁrst is to provide
kids with a healthy diet, but that’s not enough. We also want to help them
form a healthy attitude toward food, so they can tune in to their own bodies
—eat when they’re hungry and stop eating when they’re full, be open to
trying new things, and enjoy eating food that nourishes them. e big
question is, how do we get there?
“ere’s one thing I’m sure of. We’re not going to get there by demanding
that children eat a certain number of bites of broccoli in order to get to the
dessert. at only teaches them that if they choke down the ‘bad stuﬀ ’ they
get to eat the ‘good stuﬀ.’ e lesson becomes, ‘What I really love is bad for
me and what I really hate is good for me.’ It’s extremely diﬃcult to enjoy a
food that you are being forced to eat.”

 I asked the group to imagine that they were invited to a dinner party
where the host made up a plate for them with a mound of mashed potatoes,
a large pile of spinach, a quarter of a chicken . . .
“Oh, I wouldn’t eat that. I’m a vegetarian,” Sarah said.
I continued the role play. “Sorry, I’m deciding what you eat. Your job is to
clean your plate or you won’t get cherry pie for dessert.”
“I wouldn’t go back to that person’s house for another dinner party!”
Sarah said.
at brings me to the most important recommendation I can oﬀer:

Serve your child an empty plate!

Pretend he’s an adult at a dinner party. He didn’t get to choose the menu,
but he does get to ﬁll his own plate. Let him spoon out his own pasta, put his
own sauce on or not, sprinkle his own cheese on top, and grab some carrots
and string beans on the side for crunch. Or if he’s too young to handle the
serving spoon, at least he can ask you for what he wants and guide the
amounts he gets. It’s a great opportunity for a kid to practice autonomy.
Toni still looked skeptical. “at’s a lot of extra dishes to wash, to put
everything in a separate serving bowl.”
“Oh my gosh, no!” I agreed. “I just put the pots right on the table. Serving
bowls only when we have to impress company!”
“But what if he just wants to eat the dessert?” Toni asked.
Anna raised her hand. “I don’t know if everyone would be comfortable
with this idea, but for me it works better to take dessert out of the equation.
It’s too hard to get Anton to eat a healthy meal when he’s focused on dessert.
We have cookies in the house, but we don’t serve them aer dinner. We have
them as an aernoon snack. And I make sure to call sweet things ‘treats’

 rather than junk food. I don’t want to teach him that what tastes good to
him is junk or garbage. Anton knows he can have two cookies at snack time,
and aer that if he’s still hungry he has to choose some ‘growing food,’ like
nuts or fruit.”
at brings up another important point. Using dessert, or any reward, as
a bargaining chip does not help children learn to enjoy healthy food. One
study investigated the eﬀect of rewards on attitudes toward food.3
Researchers oﬀered two groups of preschoolers the chance to try an
unfamiliar food, keﬁr, a yogurt-based drink. In the ﬁrst group they oﬀered
the kids a reward to try the keﬁr. Most of the students enthusiastically
agreed. In the second group the researchers oﬀered no bribe. ey simply
asked if the kids wanted to try a new, interesting drink from the Middle
East. Many kids in both groups tried the drink. A few weeks later the
researchers returned. ey oﬀered the keﬁr again. In the ﬁrst group the
children asked, “What will you give us if we drink it?” “Nothing” was the
reply. Nobody wanted to drink keﬁr for nothing! In the second group the
children were enthusiastic. “Oh, keﬁr! Sure, I love that stuﬀ!”
Michael raised an eyebrow. “Don’t you think children should be required
to at least try new things? How will they know if they like it if they refuse to
try it?”
“I don’t think they’ll know if they like it if they’re forced to try it. More
likely they’ll be choking it down to get it over with. I prefer to say, ‘Sam,
here’s something I think you might like if you give it a try,’ and leave it at
that.
“You can even say, ‘is is grown-up food, and you might not like it.’ My
family once went to a New Year’s party where the host served stuﬀed
mushrooms ‘only for the adults.’ My children were so oﬀended! I explained
that this was not the kind of food children usually like, and the host didn’t
want her fancy hors d’oeuvres bitten once and tossed in the garbage. But
sure, if they wanted they could have a little bite of mine to see if they liked it.
You’ve never seen such enthusiasm!”
“One thing I do that makes the kids excited about eating healthy food is
to have them help prepare it,” oﬀered Sarah. “When they help to make the
salad by ripping up the lettuce, or pour the rice and water from the
measuring cup into the pot, or stir the beans and sprinkle in the spices,
they’re always more excited about eating.”

 “And what about shopping?” Maria added. “When I take Benjamin to the
grocery store, I let him pick which peaches and plums we should buy for our
fruit salad. He loves eating ‘his’ fruit.”

“So getting kids involved in the planning and preparations can make a
big diﬀerence in their interest in the meal,” I said.
“Here’s something else that might help. I make a big deal about how tastes
change. My husband and I tell the kids about foods we thought were
disgusting when we were kids but that we now love—mushy stuﬀ like
mushrooms and avocado. I remember one dinner when Sam was chewing
on a piece of cooked zucchini with a very unhappy look on his face. ‘Sam!’ I

 said, ‘I thought you didn’t like zucchini. I cut the pieces big enough for you
to pick out.’ Sam said, ‘I’m seeing if my tastes have changed.’
“ ‘Did they?’ I asked him.
“ ‘Not yet.’ ”
Even though Sam still didn’t like zucchini, he was willing to give it a try.
“But what if he tries something and says it’s disgusting?” asked Toni.
“I’d say, ‘Hey, that’s not nice to the people who are eating it!’ ”
“Not to mention the person who made it!” Toni said heatedly.
“Right!” I agreed. “But I’ve noticed that kids are less inclined to insult our
food if we’re not forcing them to eat it. Respect is a two-way street.”
Toni frowned. “It seems like what you’re suggesting is that parents
become short-order cooks. If I have to respect each of my children’s likes
and dislikes I’ll end up preparing ﬁve meals a night. at’s just not
happening! In the old days you put the food on the table and your family ate
it.”
“I’m with you, Toni,” I said. “One meal a night is my limit! It’s a bad idea
to drive yourself crazy making diﬀerent meals for everyone. I’d be resentful.
“What I’m suggesting is that we serve some of the food as separates so
our kids can make choices about how to combine them. And if a kid is truly
horriﬁed by what’s in the family pot, he can have a very simple substitute—a
peanut butter sandwich and a carrot, for example.”
I thought about my own family. My younger brother was the classic picky
eater. He couldn’t eat anything with sauce on it. e diﬀerent foods on his
plate were not allowed to touch, and gelatinous substances such as tomatoes
disgusted him. My mom never made a big deal about it. Since she and my
dad were raised by parents who forced them to clean their plates, they were
determined not to do that to their own kids. I remember many dinners
where my brother had his cheese sandwich with a carrot and bell pepper on
the side, while the rest of the family ate whatever my mom had prepared.
at brother grew up to be the gourmet of the family.
We had come to the end of the session. I sent the group home to
experiment on their children. Here are the stories they brought back.

THE STORIES

 Michael’s Story: The Empty Plate
We really didn’t think it would work to let Jamie serve himself, but he loved
it! He was so interested in the whole process of choosing what would be on
his plate. He kept saying things like, “Hmmm, maybe the potatoes would
taste good with some string beans stuck in them.” “Hmmm, maybe I’ll have
some more chicken. I still have some room in my stomach.”
At one point he scooped half the bowl of mashed potatoes onto his plate
and we had to remind him to divide it up with his eyes, because Daddy and
Mommy and his sister needed some, too. He had never thought about that.
He started asking us if we wanted more of things, too. Usually we spend the
whole meal bargaining with him—two more bites of broccoli if you want
your ice cream. And then he’ll make the counteroﬀer, “How about just one?”
And we end up giving in because we don’t want the crying when he doesn’t
get dessert.
e most amazing thing was that at the end of the meal he didn’t even ask
for dessert. He was full! And then he made a big announcement: “is was
the best meal I’ve ever had!”
It was just a regular meal we’d served many times before.

Maria’s Story: Grapes of Wrath
A few days ago I got into one of those food ﬁghts with Benjamin. I wanted
him to have something in his stomach before school. I had some grapes for
him and he wouldn’t eat them. He said they tasted rotten, and I told him
they weren’t. I was actually trying to stuﬀ the grapes into his mouth, and he
was keeping his teeth tightly closed. en I just stopped. I said, “Oh, you
don’t like these grapes. You don’t like them when they’re even a little bit
brown on top.”
He said, “No,” and that was it. It was a relief. So what if he was a little
hungry that morning at school? I get so crazy thinking that I have to make
him eat! It’s making him crazy, too. e next day I just put a few things out
for him and walked away to load the dishwasher. He ate a banana. A much
better result.

 Toni’s Story: A Different Shape of Pasta
e twins always ﬁnd something to complain about at dinner. is time it
was the pasta. “We don’t like the spirals. Why didn’t you get shells?” I
reminded them that spirals are their favorite. Jenna said, “No, they are my
most un-favorite!” I told them that it’s all the same taste, just a diﬀerent
shape, and it all gets mushed up in your stomach anyway. Ella started to cry.
And then I had that oh yeah moment, so I started saying, “Oh boy, you used
to really like spirals but now you really like shells. You’re tired of stupid old
boring spirals. Shells can be ﬁlled up with sauce; spirals can’t.”
ey both said, “Yeah!” And then I asked if they would come with me to
the grocery store next time to help choose some diﬀerent shapes to try. ey
liked that idea. Aer dinner they drew all kinds of scribbly shapes for pasta
on their “grocery list.” Oh, and by the way, they ate the spirals. I told them I
was too tired to start cooking pasta all over again, plus I didn’t want to waste
food. At that point it didn’t matter anymore. ey were excited about their
new plan.

Sarah’s Story: Eating Emergency
Sophia has hypoglycemia. When she goes without food for too long, her
mood crashes, along with her blood sugar. e problem is, if we don’t catch
it in time she gets into such a state that she’ll refuse to eat. Even though she’s
seven, she throws a tantrum like a two-year-old.
Last night we went out to a restaurant. Sophia hadn’t eaten in hours, and
she was getting teary. She couldn’t ﬁnd anything on the menu she liked. In
the past my husband or I have always been very stern with her. “You have to
get food into your body. You’re just upset because you’re hungry.”
en she screams that she is not upset and does not need to eat. I never
thought of this as an opportunity to accept feelings. It’s a health issue, not a
feelings issue.
But this time instead of insisting that she put some bread in her mouth, I
stuck with accepting feelings. “You really don’t feel well! And a restaurant
with strange food on the menu is probably the last place you want to be.” (It
was also the last place I wanted to be with a screaming kid!)

 She immediately replied, “Yes! I feel sick! is always happens when I’m
hungry! I need to eat something to feel better.”
She grabbed a roll and started chewing.
I was amazed. She usually ﬁghts me when she gets into that state. is
time she showed self-knowledge and was able to move right on to a solution.
It’s really hard to resist telling her what to do when the solution is so
obvious, but this is clearly the better way.

Sarah’s Story: Something Fishy
In our preschool we do a unit on food every spring. We talk to the kids
about healthy foods, and we plant a vegetable garden in the courtyard. By
June kids are making their own salads out of the vegetables they grew
themselves—lettuce, peas, and radishes for the brave. So it’s ironic that I
can’t get my own son to eat healthy food at home. I tell him he can’t have
dessert if he doesn’t clean his plate, but he doesn’t care. He just shrugs and
says, “So I won’t eat dessert.”
I tried the empty plate idea this week. I made ﬁsh, and it came out really
good. I seared it just a minute on each side in a hot pan. Jake refused to eat
it. Everyone else said it was delicious. My husband urged Jake to taste it, but
I told him, “It’s okay, you don’t have to eat it if you don’t want to.” He asked,
“But what about dessert?” I said, “No problem. You can have dessert.”
About halfway through the meal I saw Jake’s hand sneak out and grab
some ﬁsh oﬀ the serving plate. I never would have thought he’d try
something without me insisting. For the rest of the week mealtime has been
very relaxed. ere’s less ﬁdgeting and arguing at the table. Once Jake asked
how many bites of salad he needed to eat, and I told him, “Ask your
stomach.”

Toni’s Story: Juiced Up
When my twins were three years old they were juice ﬁends. At mealtime
they ignored the solid food and just drank juice. I tried to regulate it—
making them dilute the juice with water; insisting that they take three bites
of chicken or broccoli before they could have their cup reﬁlled; telling them

 they won’t grow up strong if they only drink juice. It was always a battle.
ey begged, I argued, they cried, I gave in a little bit, they pushed for more.
e bottom line is that they ﬁlled up on juice, and then a half hour later they
were having sugar meltdowns.
I ﬁnally decided to manage the environment. Aer all, they don’t do the
shopping! I stopped buying juice entirely. All there was to drink in the house
for that year was water, or as we like to call it, “earth juice.” You could have it
on the rocks, or with a squirt of lemon if you wanted to get fancy. ey
screamed about it the ﬁrst day, but then, no more juice battles. It was a relief!
Of course they still had their quirks. ey ate mounds of frozen berries
with yogurt for lunch, and they rejected spoons. ey insisted on using their
plastic frogs as utensils. ey would plow the frog through the yogurt and
then lick it oﬀ the frog’s head.
One day we had their friend Emma over for lunch. Emma is this very
sweet, cooperative, inside-the-box kind of kid. She looked at me with her big
blue eyes and asked, “Why are the girls eating with frogs?”
I said I didn’t know. “Ask them.” Emma asked, and my girls just shrugged.
I never thought being a parent would be this weird.

 REMINDER: Food Fights

Resist the urge to . . .
. . . insist that your child clean his or her plate, eat a speciﬁc food,
or eat a predetermined amount.
. . . oﬀer dessert as a reward for eating healthy food, or withhold it
as a punishment for not eating.
. . . be a short-order cook.
. . . label your child a picky eater.
. . . make food a battleground!
Instead you can . . .

1. Acknowledge Feelings
“Even though you usually like chicken, you’re not in the mood
for it tonight.”

2. Offer Choices
• Put an empty plate in front of your child and let him serve
himself, or ask for what he wants if he’s too young to serve
himself.
• Serve some of the meal as simple separates so kids can make
choices about what they put on their plates.
• Oﬀer a simple alternative if kids don’t want the “grown-up” food
—peanut butter sandwich, bread and cheese, hard-boiled egg,
raw carrots, red pepper.

3. Manage the Environment

 Keep sweets and sugary drinks out of sight. Make it easy to
avoid temptation!

4. Put the Child in Charge
Let kids have as much involvement as possible in planning,
shopping, as well as preparing the meal, if you can tolerate some
food landing on the ﬂoor. (Your dog will thank you!)

5. Give Information
Let kids know that “tastes change,” so they don’t feel stuck with
their limited palate. Tell them, “You might want to give this a try
when you’re ready.”

 2
Morning Madness—Escaping the Intense
Gravitational Pull of Your Home
Julie
Anna took the ﬂoor. “ese tools are working really well with Anton. I wish
I could relax and enjoy that. But Luke is driving me crazy. Do you think he’s
still too young to get it? He just turned two and he is deﬁnitely living out the
dream of being a terrible two-year-old.”
I sat back. “Give us the gory details.”
“Okay, you asked for it.” Anna took a long sip of her coﬀee and started in.
“Luke is suddenly into power struggles. e worst is in the morning. He
ﬂails around on the ﬂoor and ﬁghts me when I need to dress him. None of
the techniques I use with Anton work with Luke. I oﬀer choices. He yells,
‘NO CLOTHES!’ I tell him that’s not an option, and he throws them across
the room. I try to put him in charge and let him do it himself, but he
couldn’t care less.
“Sometimes I try counting down. I tell him, ‘If you don’t start getting
dressed I’m going to dress you on three. One . . . two . . .’ I know, I know,
we’re not supposed to threaten. Anyway it doesn’t even work. He runs away
and hides . . . in small hard-to-reach places, let me tell you.
“I’ve even tried bribes, oﬀering him ice cream for breakfast if he gets
dressed. But he holds out and then he has another tantrum when he doesn’t
get the ice cream. And that’s not all of it. Yesterday I spent ten minutes
wrestling him into his carseat.
“e actual activities aren’t the problem. Sometimes he loves to get
dressed and is excited to get into his carseat. e problem is, when I need
him to do it now, he automatically resists.

 “I’ve thought about natural consequences, but the only consequence that’s
happening naturally is that I’m late for work. I suppose I could take him to
school naked, but I don’t think he would mind. Honestly, I can ignore the
screaming, but he’s only getting bigger and stronger. Soon I won’t be able to
force him anymore.”
e group heaved a collective sigh. ere are few things more stressful
than trying to rush a two-year-old in the morning. We are in an impossible
bind. Grown-up time demands that we move eﬃciently, with purpose,
toward a goal. Toddler time meanders with no particular direction, enjoying
the moment, purpose unnecessary.
“I’m guessing you’re in no mood for whimsy when you’re trying to get
out of the house in the morning,” I said, “but being playful is your best bet
for avoiding a power struggle with a two-year-old. e good news is that the
older kids get, the more reasonable they become. en you can start to use
problem-solving and put them in charge of themselves. But for now, it’s all
about changing the mood.”
Anna looked annoyed. “What about my mood?”
Michael leaned forward. “Hey, your mood will get better if it works,
right?”
Anna folded her arms. “Okay, let’s hear it. What works?”
Sarah raised her hand. “It works for me to make the clothing talk. I make
the socks and shoes say, ‘I’m hungry! I want to eat these sweet little toes.’ Or
sometimes I make them protest, ‘No, no, no! Don’t put that smelly foot in
me. I want to be free!’ en I scold them. ‘Bad little sock, it’s your job to
cover Mia’s foot and keep it warm.’ e sock keeps arguing, ‘I don’t care, it’s a
stupid job.’ en I say very sternly, ‘You must cooperate! You will make poor
Mia late for school.’ Mia laughs and forgets to ﬁght me.”
Maria chimed in. “Ben likes it when I give him silly choices. ‘Do you
want your shirt on regular, or backward? Or inside out? Do you want to put
your right leg in the pants ﬁrst, or your le leg? Whatever you do, don’t
jump in with both at the same time. at would be too dangerous!’ Of
course he tries to jump in. Sometimes I ask if he wants to walk to the car
forward or backward, or pretend he’s on skates, or jump like a frog. He also
likes it when I make it into a race. ‘How many seconds will it take to get to
the car and get buckled in? Ready, set, go!’ I got a little kitchen timer he can
run with. I say things like, ‘Ben wins the race! e crowd goes wild!’ ”

 Michael oﬀered, “Jamie never gets tired of the robot voice. I pretend I’m a
droid when I dress him. ‘Must . . . put . . . arm . . . in . . . sleeve. . . .
Malfunction. . . . Shirt . . . stuck . . . on . . . nose.’ ”
Toni looked a little impatient. “I’d rather have my kids doing a little more
for themselves. ey’re old enough for that. I’d go crazy if I had to do robot
voices and games with all three of them every morning.
“What I did was to have a problem-solving session about the morning
routine. I told them I hated yelling at them every morning, and I know they
hated being yelled at and being rushed. We bought that special timer for
kids, where the red part of the circle gets smaller as the time runs out, so
they can see for themselves how much time is le. en we made a chart
with all the tasks they need to do in the morning. I stapled a strip of
cardboard on the bottom of the chart to make a long pocket. Each kid has a
Popsicle stick with a face on it, and they move their stick to the next task
when they’re ﬁnished.”

I was intrigued. “Can you show us what it looks like?”
Toni quickly sketched it out on a piece of paper. “ere are six steps—
shirt and pants, shoes and socks, eat breakfast, brush teeth, get coat and
backpack, and then the last step is FREE PLAY. ey all like moving their little
Popsicle people from step to step, and if they ﬁnish all the tasks they get to
play whatever they want. If all three of them get ready with time to spare, we
play Touch the Couch.”

 “What?” Michael looked confused.
“I can’t believe you don’t know the greatest game on earth. e parent has
to stop the kids from touching the couch. You can block with your body but
you can’t use your hands. e kids have to run around the parent and touch
the couch to win. It’s like football, except with no ball, and the goal is a
couch.”
“Ahh, I understand now. Sounds like fun in your house in the morning.”
Toni rolled her eyes. “You should come visit!”
We had compiled a lot of good strategies in a short session. But there was
one more important aspect of the morning conﬂict we hadn’t discussed yet
—the transition from sleep to the demanding world of “get up and get
ready!”
Nobody likes to be dragged out of that cocoon to face immediate
demands and pressure to hurry. One sure way to sabotage the morning
mood is to start with, “Time to wake up! You have ﬁve minutes to get
yourself downstairs. Let’s not miss the bus today!”
For a kid, that can set the tone for a morning of resistance. Here are some
more gentle approaches that parents have used to start the day.
“I give a little back massage to help wake up my son. He loves it. I
used to shake him. He hated that!”
“I get into bed with her and snuggle for ten minutes. She used to
get up angry, but now she gets up calm. I didn’t think I had the time
for this, but it makes the rest of the morning go so much better that
it’s worth it.”

 “I say, ‘Do you want to get up now or do you want another ﬁve
minutes to snooze? Wiggle one ﬁnger for now and two ﬁngers for ﬁve
more minutes.’ She always wiggles two.”

“I say ‘It’s morning time, my sleepy submarine. Poke up your
periscope (ﬁnger) if you can hear me. You’re invited to breakfast in
ten minutes, so start coming up to the surface . . . not too fast,
though. You don’t want to scare the ﬁsh.’ ”

THE STORIES
Anna’s Story: Ready for Action
I have to tell you how great my week was. I know you said that Luke is too
young to do problem-solving, but I tried it anyway. I started by saying, “You
don’t like to be rushed in the morning. You are not in the mood to get
dressed right aer you wake up. It’s no fun at all.” Luke nodded.
en I said, “I have an idea. Do you want to get dressed at night, aer
your bath, and sleep in your next-day clothes? en you could wake up
ready to go, with more time to play.”
Luke agreed. His daytime clothes are so pull-up pants and T-shirts so
they’re comfortable to sleep in. is has transformed my life! Now my day
starts without a huge battle.

 Michael’s Story: Lego Lament
Jamie likes to play with Legos in the morning before school. e problem is
that he doesn’t like to stop playing when we have to leave. It’s always, “Just
one more piece! I’m almost ﬁnished.” I get in huge ﬁghts with him about it.
In the past I’d give him the consequence of not being allowed to play with
Legos in the aernoon if he refused to listen to me in the morning. at
didn’t help. It just made him grumpy in the aernoon.
Last week I tried problem-solving. Here’s my worksheet.
e problem

Ideas

It’s fun to play with Legos in the morning, but it’s very hard to
stop in the middle. It’s frustrating not to get to ﬁnish what
you’re building! Dad gets mad when he is late for work.

- Set a timer and stop playing when
the timer goes oﬀ.
- Take the Legos in the car with
you.
- Use only ten pieces of Legos in
the morning.
- Let the Lego guy sit next to your
plate and watch you eat.
- Don’t play with Legos in the
morning at all. Do something else
that’s not as frustrating to stop.

To tell you the truth we never even got around to picking solutions. Jamie
was happy to talk about it for a while, then he lost interest and wandered
away. I ﬁgured we’d pick it up another time. I was going to object to Legos in
the car. I can just imagine the tantrums when pieces fall under the seats.
And I was ready to take action to protect myself—not punish!—by saying,
“Look, this just isn’t working. Legos aren’t a morning toy. Let’s keep them for
the aernoon when you have lots of time.”
But it never came to that. Aer the unﬁnished problem-solving session
Jamie didn’t play with Legos in the morning anymore. Somehow just talking
about it seems to have solved it. At least for now, and that’s good enough for
me!

Maria’s Story: Another Benjamin on the Floor

 Benjamin can dress himself, but some mornings he just refuses. Last
Monday he took oﬀ his pajamas and then went running around the house
naked. I took his clothes—shirt, underpants, pants, and socks—and I laid
them out on the ﬂoor, like a little person on the ﬂoor, and I said, “Look,
Benjamin, there’s a little Benjamin on the ﬂoor!”
Benjamin ran over and lay down on top of the clothes. en he put the
underpants on, put the pants on, put his arms through and put the shirt on.
It was so easy—at least that time.

 REMINDER: Morning Madness

1. Be Playful
(Shoe talking.) “I don’t want that foot in me. Nooooo!”
(Parent talking.) “You’d better get on Luke’s foot right now.
You’re making him late!”

2. Offer a Choice
“Do you want to walk to the car the regular way or backward?”

3. Put the Child in Charge
“Can you set the timer? I need you to let me know when it’s time
to go out the door.”

4. Try Problem-Solving
“It’s not easy to remember all the things we have to do in the
morning. What do you think about making a chart?”

5. Acknowledge Feelings
“It isn’t easy to get out of a warm, cozy bed. It’s nice to snuggle
for a few more minutes!”

 3
Sibling Rivalry—Give the Baby Back!
Joanna
Michael opened the session. He looked somber, without his usual happy
grin.
“We thought we were done with sibling rivalry. Jamie was pretty happy to
be a big brother, once he got over the shock of having a new baby. But now
that Kara’s two, she’s demanding a lot more of our attention and getting into
his things, and he’s beginning to resent it. He shuts his door in her face,
grabs things from her, tells her what to do, says ‘no’ to her a lot, and talks
down about her.
“I know part of the problem is that he’s getting less of our attention. Jan
started working full-time. I take the morning shi with the kids and catch
up on my work aer dinner. So when Jan reads to Jamie at bedtime, Kara’s
on the ﬂoor playing with his toys. It’s not the relaxed cozy bedtime it used to
be.”
Maria was nodding. “Well, at least you had a couple of good years!
Benjamin has never accepted Isabel. He gets angry at the sight of her. He’s
always telling us to give the baby back because her diaper smells and she
yells too much. I’ve tried telling him that we all had smelly diapers when we
started out, and as for yelling, well, Benjamin is the prince of yelling. But it
never helps. What’s driving me crazy lately is that he wakes her up from
naps. He says he doesn’t want her to sleep. It makes him mad that I shush
him and that we can’t go out while she’s napping. But still, you’d think he’d
appreciate having his mom to himself for that time. It’s so frustrating. And
upsetting! I’m afraid to even admit this, but he says things like, ‘Why don’t
you chop her up?’ ”

 e group gave a collective groan. “ose are painful words to hear,” I
said.
“ey sure are,” said Maria. “We’re supposed to be family. Family is the
most important thing! ey need to love and support each other. I tell them
that every day.”
“Okay, that’s what we want,” I agreed. “Now we have to think about how
to get there. And you know what I’m going to say. We have to start with
accepting feelings. is is one of those times when you have to bite the bullet
and accept some truly awful feelings. Big brotherhood is a burden. e ﬁrst
message he needs to hear from you is that you understand. It isn’t easy
having to share your parents with a smelly baby or a two-year-old pest! e
more we try to convince our kids that it’s not so bad, the harder they’ll work
to convince us that it is indeed that bad.”
“So what am I supposed to do?” asked Maria. “Talk to him about killing
the baby? I can’t stomach that.”
You don’t have to use a child’s violent language to let him know you
understand how he feels. You can model a diﬀerent way to express strong
feelings.
“Boy, it’s not always easy having a little sister around. It can be really
frustrating!”
“I’ll bet sometimes you wish you could be the only child.”
“It’s annoying to have to be quiet when the baby is napping. You’ll be
happy when she’s old enough not to need a nap anymore!”
“Two-year-olds can be hard on your things. ey just don’t
understand how to be gentle. It can make you mad.”
If the mood is right, he might enjoy hearing your fond memories of some
of his own notorious exploits as a baby.
“When you were two, you used to get into the cabinets and pull out
every single pot and pan and bang on them with the serving
spoons . . .”

 “When I tried to stop you from climbing onto the roof of the car, you
screamed and cried because you loved climbing so much . . .”
“I remember when you poured an entire box of Cheerios all over the
ﬂoor and then crunched around in them like they were fall leaves . . .”
e second message he needs is that he hasn’t been displaced. He may
want some babying himself. We’re always telling our older children what big
boys or girls they are. But they need to know they can still be your baby, too;
they haven’t been pushed aside. You can say something like:
“Come here and sit on my lap and be my baby. Oh my gosh, look at
you—you are the strongest baby in the world. A super baby who can
run and jump and climb a tree.”

e third message is to help him see himself as the kind, helpful older
brother you have glimpsed in the past. Go out of your way to appreciate
positive interactions with his younger sibling.
“Yeah, sometimes it is a pain in the neck to have a baby sister, but
sometimes it’s not so bad. I remember when the two of you were
running around the kitchen table and you got Kara so excited she
couldn’t stop laughing and she peed on the ﬂoor.”

 “Isabel sure is lucky to have you as a big brother. You really know how
to cheer her up when she’s sad. She loves it when you blow soap
bubbles for her to pop . . . make block towers for her to crash
down . . . read picture books to her . . . play peekaboo under the
table . . . push her stroller over bumps . . . help her get her socks
on . . .”
You can also put him in a position where he sees himself in a new light,
as a helper rather than a rival.
“Jamie, I need to put away the groceries right now. Can you read a
board book to Kara to keep her out of the refrigerator?”
“Benjamin, I need Isabel to wake up. Can you do it for me? She likes
it when you wake her up by patting gently on her stomach.”
“Kara is in a wrecking mood. I need someone who can build a good
block tower for her to knock over.”
“We have some cookies for snack time. Benjamin, can you pick two
good ones for Isabel?”
Even in the middle of an episode where he’s tormenting his sister, instead
of criticizing him for being a beast . . .
“Benjamin, there you go again teasing your sister; this has to stop!”
you can state the positive . . .
“Uh oh, Isabel is starting to melt down. Benjamin, you know how to
make your sister feel better when she’s upset. What do you think we
should do?”
But what if your older child is still feeling displaced by the little invader?
When you have a hankering to coo and fuss over the baby in front of her
brother, you can use the opportunity to “coo” about all the marvelous things
big brother did today. e baby won’t mind, and your older child will enjoy

 hearing stories about himself instead of feeling resentful of the attention the
little one is getting. In your best lilting baby talk, you’ll say . . .
“My little boo boo! Do you know what your big brother Benjamin did
today? He made us peanut butter and jelly sandwiches all by himself.
Yes he did, my little pumpkin. He climbed up on the counter to get
the plates from the cabinet, and he smeared the peanut butter with a
knife, and he put lots and lots of grape jelly on top. It was so tasty! He
will teach you to do that one day. Yes, he will!”
While you’re doing this rather intricate dance, you may feel tempted to
throw in a little comparison to make the older child feel better about not
being babied. It can seem like a good idea to reassure the older sibling of his
superiority. (“You’re a big boy. You can climb the stairs and the baby can’t.
You can get in the carseat all by yourself. You know how to bake cookies
with me. e baby can’t do that!”)
is kind of talk is risky! e baby won’t stay helpless forever. We don’t
want an older child to feel threatened by a younger sibling’s progress. His
self-esteem shouldn’t rest on the shaky foundation of the baby’s ineptitude.
Instead, tell him how lucky that baby is to have a big brother who is such
a skilled seatbelt buckler, and that soon he will be teaching his little sister
how to buckle herself in, or climb the stairs, or bake a cookie. We want him
to feel proud of his competence and of his position as a benevolent helper.
And ﬁnally, I hate to say it, but kids don’t care about our work schedule,
bills, and emails. ey want our undivided time and attention. If it’s at all
possible to carve out, say, a half hour just to be with a child who’s feeling
deprived, it can make a big diﬀerence. You can talk to your child about what
he wants to do with that “fatherly sonly” time, as my little brother used to
call it. Part of the pleasure is in the planning.
“What should we do for our special time? Do you want to cook
something together, make play dough, read e Way ings Work, or
wrestle on the bed?”
Be sure to make a speciﬁc time that your child can look forward to. Six
o’clock means very little to a three-year-old. It works better to say “aer

 dinner,” or “as soon as the baby takes her morning nap.”
When angry feelings do boil over and you have to protect a sibling from
physical attack, it’s important to take action without reinforcing negative
feelings. While grabbing up the aggressor, resist the temptation to say,
“ere you go again. You’re too rough! Now you made the baby cry. at’s
mean!” Instead, snatch him away without insulting his character:
“I can see you’re angry! I can’t let anyone get hurt. We need to
separate!”
I have one last pitfall to warn you against. One of my own biggest
problems with keeping harmony between the siblings was that I tended to
take the younger one’s side. “Oh, Dan, just give it to him. He’s only two years
old. You need to be patient. Don’t be so rough, you’re hurting him. Be nice.”
Without fail this would incite mutual hatred and resentment. Dan would
angrily defend himself, “But I had it ﬁrst . . . I barely touched him . . . It’s not
fair . . . You always take his side!” And Sam, the little one, would get even
more worked up. He’d hide behind my leg while I was defending him and
then lunge out and try to kick his older brother in a ﬁt of righteous rage.
It helps to hold back that ﬁrst “protect the baby” remark. Resist the urge
to demonize the older or stronger child. If you can describe the problem
from both points of view it will make a big diﬀerence in the mood.
“Dan wants to build something with his blocks without the loose pieces
being moved around, and Sam wants to touch the blocks, too. is is a
tough problem. What can we do?”
Notice that I also resisted the temptation to be dismissive of the problem
itself. I wanted to say, “Oh, gee whiz, it’s only a few blocks! Can’t you just get
along?” But it’s more helpful to be respectful of the problem. Building that
block tower is just as important to a four-year-old as your work is to you!
No matter how brilliantly and consistently you carry out these
suggestions, you can’t expect to eliminate sibling rivalry completely. ere
will still be conﬂict! But you can help change the mood and make it easier
for kids to return more quickly to fond feelings about their siblings aer the
conﬂicts are over.

 THE STORIES
Michael’s Stories: A Trilogy
Pros and Cons

is new approach is already making a diﬀerence. I’ve been spending more
time acknowledging Jamie’s feelings about being a big brother. It works best
to talk to him when he’s not already frustrated. We had a good conversation
about the pros and cons of having a little sister. A few hours later he said, “I
love you, Dad,” out of the blue, something that doesn’t happen that oen. I
think it’s a sign he felt heard.
Jamie Reflects on the Past
Jamie: Dad, my life used to be totally diﬀerent before Kara came.
Me (thinking I’m about to hear a list of complaints): Oh, how is
it diﬀerent?
Jamie (sounding surprised): Well, it’s so much better, of course!!
Color Wars

Jamie wanted each of them to color on their own side of the paper. Kara
wanted to color on Jamie’s side, of course.
Me: Oh, this is a tough problem. Jamie wants Kara to color on her
own side, and Kara wants to color on both sides.
Jamie: Oh well, she’s two. She doesn’t understand yet.

(He lets her color on his side.)

Maria’s Story: The Baby Whisperer
I have to tell you, I really went all out with the idea of accepting the negative
feelings this week. I told Benjamin some of the things you said in the group
about how it’s a big pain in the neck to have a little sister. He loved it. He had

 a long list of suggestions for what to do about it, too. Instead of scolding him
I oﬀered to write them down. Here are some of them: “Screech her away!
Make her spin out and whip her away. Grunk her away! Whip her away in a
fast jet plane.”

He was very satisﬁed with his list. Later on, when it was time to wake
Isabel up from her nap, Benjamin insisted that he be the one to do it,
because he does it gently. at is one thing he likes to do, and she really does
wake up smiling when he pats her stomach, so I had been mentioning that a
lot. Now he’s the only one who is allowed to wake the baby since, according
to him, he’s the expert.
I still get tired of hearing all the negative things he has to say. I can only
stand so much. So I tell him my ears are tired, and he can draw me a picture
so that I can see how mad he is. He did this once. It was a lot of crazy
scribble. I put it on the refrigerator and said, “ank you for showing me
these mad feelings.”

Joanna’s Story: Down for the Count
I threw my back out when Dan was three-and-a-half and Sam was only oneand-a-half. I was ﬂat on my back on the couch praying that nothing would
go terribly wrong. I did my most desperately brilliant parenting that week.
When I heard crying from another room I didn’t allow myself to ask the
obvious question, “Dan, what did you do to your brother?”

 Instead I called out, in my best neutral tone, “I hear crying. Do you need
help in there?”
“No, it’s okay. I’m ﬁxing it!”
e crying stopped. Whew!
All day long, instead of physically intervening in their conﬂicts (which I
was helpless to do) I stayed neutral and put Dan in charge. It was the
smoothest day ever. Every conﬂict was resolved peacefully and I didn’t have
to call the ﬁre department to hose anybody down as I had feared.
ey say that necessity is the mother of invention, but I claim that
desperation is the mother of great parenting.

Anna’s Story: Breaking News
When I was pregnant with Luke I really worried about telling Anton. e
one time we’d talked about having a little brother or sister for him, he was
completely against the idea. “No baby!”
When we ﬁnally told him, we did two things that helped a lot. One was
that we said we wanted him to be the ﬁrst to know about the news. He took
great pride that he was so important! He actually asked us not to tell anyone
else yet. I could see he wanted to enjoy feeling special.
e other was that we asked him for ideas about how to handle the big
changes in our family. He came up with a good one. Buy bunk beds! He
would sleep on the top and the new baby could have the bottom. He’d asked
for bunk beds before, but we always told him this kind of bed was for two
siblings. We thanked him for his “helpful idea.”
I didn’t think of it this way at the time, but I guess we made Anton feel
like he was in charge and solving problems even before Luke was born.

Toni’s Story: Good Guy Gripe
is was amazing. All I did was accept one little feeling. Easiest ﬁx ever!
Jenna: So I will be the good guy and you will be the bad guy.
Ella (starting to cry): I don’t want to be the bad guy.

 Me: is is a tough problem. Both of you want to play Ghostbusters
but no one wants to be the bad guy.
Jenna: Okay, I’ll be the bad guy.

Joanna’s Story: Selfish Son
At age ﬁve and a half, Dan got a shiny new bike. e whole family went to
the bike store to buy it. e day was all about Dan. e plan was for threeyear-old Sam to inherit Dan’s old bike. When we got home with Dan’s
gleaming prize, Sam went to touch Dan’s old bike. Dan yelled, “at’s not
your bike, it’s my bike!”
I felt a ﬂash of rage at him. What kind of selﬁsh brat have I raised? I
started to explain to him that he couldn’t have two bikes and leave his
brother with none. Sam wasn’t even getting a new bike. Just Dan’s old
secondhand one. Dan covered his ears with his hands. “I’m not going to
listen to you no matter what you say!”
A phrase from my mother’s book popped into my head. “Ears can hear
only what emotions will allow.” My anger drained away and I took Dan on
my lap. “I have a sad boy. at bike was really special to you.”
Dan began to sob. “Grandma and Grandpa gave me that bike when I was
three. It’s like my turtle shirt. It’s too small for me but it’s still mine!
Remember they tied the happy birthday note to a string, and I had to follow
the string to ﬁnd the bike in the carpet room? And I learned to ride without
training wheels on that bike.”
Sam was crying too at this point. A combination of having been yelled at
by his brother and seeing his brother in tears had sent him over the edge. “I
have two sad boys,” I said.
Dan jumped oﬀ my lap and started making up a song, “I’m the magic
man,” and dancing in a goofy way in front of Sam, to cheer him up.
I wanted to explain to Dan that he still needed to give his bike to Sam.
But the two boys were both happy now. It was a moment of grace and I was
reluctant to bring up the conﬂict again. Sam did it for me. He said, “Well,
you can still touch the bike, Dan.”
I asked Dan if he wanted to call his grandparents to tell them about the
new bike. He liked that idea. I listened in on his side of the conversation:

 “Well, I already ﬁnished riding on my tiger bike and now Sam has the tiger
bike, which is hard to give up, you know. But my new bike has twenty-inch
wheels . . .”
Aer the phone call Dan asked me, “Can I have the tiger bike back aer
Zach (who was six months old) uses it, so that I can give it to my children?”
Only a half hour before, I was disgusted with my son’s selﬁsh, greedy
behavior. Once his feelings were acknowledged his heart was full of
generosity. He’d felt sentimental about his grandparents’ loving gi. And
now he was contemplating passing it on, not only to his younger brothers,
but to his own future child.

 REMINDER: Sibling Rivalry

1. Accept Feelings
“It can be frustrating to have a baby sister!”

2. Give Wishes in Fantasy: Let the older child pretend to be a
baby

“Come sit on my lap and be my super baby.”

3. Describe What You See: Notice and appreciate the positive
interactions between siblings

“You ﬁgured out how to cheer up your sister when she was
crying.”

4. Put the Child in Charge so that he has an opportunity to
see himself differently

“Can you pick a board book for the baby? She likes it when you
read to her.”

5. Reconnect With Your Child
• Plan for Special One-on-One Time
“Would you like to make cookies when the baby takes her nap?
Or snuggle up and read your pop-up truck book?”

• Tell the Older Child Stories About his Baby Days
“I remember when you . . .”

6. Take Action Without Insult: Avoid casting a child in the
role of aggressor

 “We need to separate. I don’t want anyone getting hurt!”

7. Try Problem-Solving: Resist the urge to take sides and don’t
minimize the problem!

“Jamie wants to build by himself and Kara wants to touch the
blocks. is is a tough problem. We need ideas.”

 4
Shopping with Children— Mayhem at the
Market
Julie
Maria opened up today’s session. “It seems like I spend a major part of my
life telling Benjamin he can’t have something he’s begging for. Every time we
go to the grocery store. Every time we have to buy a birthday present for
another kid. I used to like shopping. Now I wish I could avoid it altogether.”
“It’s hard for kids,” I said. “We’re constantly taking them to stores where
they see all this stuﬀ laid out in front of them. And they see us buying that
stuﬀ. ey don’t understand about working for money and paying bills. ey
want to do what we’re doing—take stuﬀ oﬀ shelves and bring it home!

“I get it,” sighed Toni, “but does that mean we should just let them do
what we’re doing, but with the brain of a four-year-old? Let’s see, I would
end up broke and homeless, deeply in debt to the dentist because of all the
candy Jenna bought, and living out of a battery-operated Barbie car.”
“We can give them some choices, though,” Michael said.

 “Yeah, but do you really think that’ll stop them from begging for junk
food?” challenged Maria. “If they think they have the right to make their
own decisions, every aisle will be torture.”
“We can always put limits on the choices,” I said. “We could ask them to
pick out two diﬀerent kinds of pasta. ey could put their energy into
choosing the diﬀerent shapes. And how about produce? ey could pick out
three of the best-looking apples. But it’s nice to have some open-ended
decisions to make too. I used to tell my kids they could have one free choice
out of the whole produce section. at was a very engrossing challenge for
them. I remember one time Asher settled on an orange bell pepper. It was
more expensive than the green ones, but it was worth it.”
“I give my kids a small allowance,” said Sarah. “I got tired of agonizing
over each little request. On the one hand, it would make shopping easier to
give them everything they want, but on the other hand I didn’t want them to
get in the habit of getting everything they want. is way they have to
agonize over what to spend their precious dollar on. Much better!”
“You can also give kids a job,” said Toni. “at’s what works for me. I have
my kids help me make the shopping list, and they each have certain things
to look for.”
Maria grumbled. “I don’t always have time to make grocery shopping an
exciting activity. Sometimes I just need the food.”
“Yeah, well . . .” I had no great remedy for this complaint. “Let’s face it, it’s
never going to be eﬃcient shopping with children. Children don’t really
make any part of life more eﬃcient. But if you can get them involved at least
some of the time, they’ll be more cooperative most of the time.”
“Okay, but how would you do that at a toy store?” Anna asked. “I’m not
going to buy my kids a new toy every time I buy a birthday present for one
of their friends.”
“Well, that is one of the harder challenges of being a kid,” I said. “Being
dragged through a toy store and getting to look at all the marvelous toys and
choose one for another child, but being scolded if you want one for yourself.
ink about it. If you had to devise a kid torture, that might be it.”
I reminded the group about the wish list. When a kid pines for
something, you can write it down. Instead of saying, “Don’t be so spoiled,
you just got a Lego set last week. You’re never satisﬁed!” Try, “Wow, that
looks pretty cool. You really like the spaceships.” Take out the pen and add to

 his list: “Star Wars jumbo Lego set.” Keep the list stuck to your refrigerator
where he can check on it and keep it updated. Some items will get crossed
oﬀ and others will be keepers. By the time a birthday rolls around you’ll have
a useful reference sheet. If there are things on the list that are beyond the
scope of birthdays—my sister always wanted a horse—you can still talk
about them and plan for the future, which may include barns full of horses.

It also helps to tell your kids ahead of time, “We’re only shopping for
Elena’s birthday present today. Nothing for us! Be sure to let me know if you
see something you want to put on your wish list.”

THE STORIES
Toni’s Story: To Buy or Not to Buy
My kids love the hands-on science museum in the city, but I dread the exit.
To leave the museum, you’re forced to walk through the gi shop. It’s an
eﬀective and cruel design! You’ve got overstimulated children, expensive
toys at a kid’s eye level, and worn-out parents. My kids always beg me to buy
them some overpriced gadget. I don’t usually cave in, but it can get ugly. I
don’t feel great about myself or my kids by the time we get out of there.

 I didn’t have much hope that the write-it-down tool would do much
good, but I ﬁgured it couldn’t hurt to give it a try. So on our last visit, right
before we walked into the shop, I told them, “We’re not going to buy
anything in the gi shop today, but if you see something you like, let me
know so I can write it on your Wish List.” I pulled out a piece of paper and a
pen, and they ran around admiring everything and telling me what they
wanted on their lists. It was the ﬁrst time I’ve gotten out of there without the
usual whining and misery.

Anna’s Story: The Lovely List
When Anton wants something he wants it now. at’s typical of kids on the
spectrum. is time it was chicken nuggets and ice cream. I didn’t have
those items in the house and there was no way I was going shopping the day
before anksgiving and facing the crowds. He was winding up into a
tantrum so I decided to try writing down what he wanted. Anton said he
wanted to do it. I was amazed because he’s never volunteered to write before;
it’s such a struggle for him. He began to construct his list, consulting me
frequently about spelling: ice cream, chicken nuggets, French fries, sausages,
and samosa! It took him half an hour to write those words but he stuck with
it. It’s beautiful, and it’s still hanging on my fridge.
In the past, when we’d go shopping, Anton would insist on running away
from me to the frozen food aisle, taking ice pops out of the freezer, opening
them, and eating them . . . and I would run behind him like a monster
mother screaming, “No, no, no, NO!”
is time I gave Anton his list and told him to put all of the items in the
cart. Well, lo and behold, he did. I was busy trying to ﬁnd an unbruised
avocado and a jar of curry while Anton, to my great surprise, was busy
running up and down the aisles gathering all of the things on his list.
Unbelievable! When I looked into the grocery cart there were a few extra
bags of French fries and a few extra cartons of ice cream, but he very
agreeably returned the extras. is has become our new shopping routine.

Sarah’s Story: The Very Long Ride

 We had a ﬁve-hour drive to get home from a weekend visiting my parents.
When we were almost home, I stopped at a supermarket because I realized I
was coming back to an empty refrigerator. e kids were out of control in
the store, running up and down the aisles and yelling. ey didn’t respond to
any of my attempts to get them to calm down.
Finally it occurred to me that they needed to move! I don’t know why it
took me so long to ﬁgure it out. I think the road vibration numbed my brain.
I took them outside and told them to run up and down the sidewalk in front
of the store three times, then hop, jump, skip, then go backward, and then
zigzag around the poles. I only went back in aer they were semi-exhausted.

 REMINDER: Shopping with Children

1. Put the Child in Charge
Have him help make a shopping list and gather groceries to put
in the cart.
Give her an allowance: “You can bring your dollar to the grocery
store in case you see something you want to buy for yourself.”

2. Offer a Choice
“Should we get the spiral pasta or the elbow pasta? You pick!”

3. Acknowledge Feelings with a Wish List
Thomas’s Wish List:
Star Wars jumbo Lego set

4. Give Information—Let Children Know What to Expect
“We’re going shopping for Elena’s birthday present today. Let’s
bring the wish list in case you see something you’d like for
yourself.”

 5
Lies—Kids and the Creative Interpretation
of Reality
Joanna
“Can we talk about lying?” asked Toni. “Last week I caught Jenna with
chocolate all over her face. When I asked her if she’d eaten the cake, she
completely denied it. She knew she wasn’t allowed to touch it. I bought it
because we were having guests for dinner. I told her she’d better tell the truth
or she’d be in even bigger trouble, but she stuck to her story and got all teary.
I made her go up to her room aer dinner and miss dessert. I know you
don’t believe in punishment, but if there’s one rule I consider sacred, it’s
telling the truth. e sooner my kids learn that, the better.”

Toni’s question got me thinking about why lying pushes our buttons.
Aer all, kids misbehave in all sorts of ways. ey kick, they bite, they yell in
the library, they crayon the wall, they resist bedtime like their lives depend
on it. We understand that these are things kids do. We don’t really worry

 that they’ll grow up to be violent, loud insomniacs with a penchant for
vandalism. But when kids lie to us, oen we do worry. We see it as a moral
oﬀense. Somehow we’ve failed to teach good character to our children.
When a child tells a lie, it may help to remember that it is both common
and normal. In fact, the latest research shows that learning to lie is an
important milestone in a child’s cognitive development.1
Children lie for a variety of reasons. Sometimes they lie out of
embarrassment. “I’m not the one who pooped in the playhouse!” Sometimes
they lie to get their own way. “I didn’t have a turn!” Oen they lie to avoid
the unpleasant consequence of facing an angry parent. “I did not throw a
ball in the living room and break the lamp.” In many instances the lie
represents a wish.
Although it’s normal for children to “experiment with the truth,” we still
want them to learn the diﬀerence between the truth and a lie and why they
should stick to the former most of the time. e challenge for the adult is to
resist the temptation to shame the child or to label him a liar.
I turned to Toni. “Look at it this way. If you see your son with a bat in his
hand standing next to a freshly broken window, there’s no need to ask, ‘Did
you break that window? Did you use the bat in the house even though I just
told you not to?’ at road leads to a traﬃc jam of denial. ‘No, I didn’t.’ ‘Yes,
you did, now you’re lying!’ ‘Am not!’ ‘I’m going to have to punish you more
if you don’t tell the truth!’ ‘But I didn’t! e dog did it!’ ‘Stop it, that’s not
even a good lie. Dogs don’t break windows!’ ”
So what is helpful?
Instead of accusing and interrogating, state the obvious. In the case of
the purloined dessert, you can simply say, “I see you ate the cake.” If she
protests, don’t call her a liar. Instead, you can accept the feeling behind
the protest. “It’s not easy to resist eating chocolate cake when it’s sitting right
in front of you. I bet you wish you hadn’t eaten it!”
Let her know how you feel: “I’m very upset that the cake was eaten!
I was going to serve it for dessert when our friends come for dinner
tonight!”
Make a plan for the future: “Next time you’re tempted, let me
know. I’m sure we can ﬁnd a way to help you wait.” And you might also do
some planning of your own. e next time I buy chocolate cake, I’ll put it out

 of sight until it’s time for dessert. Make it easier for your child to practice
honesty—adjust
your expectations and manage the
environment.
If possible, help her make amends: “We’re going to need something
for dessert when our friends come over. Can you get out some cookies and
arrange them nicely on a plate?”
“It still seems like something’s missing here,” said Toni. “I get that you’re
guiding kids toward being truthful rather than labeling them as liars. But
meanwhile, in your scenario, the kid told a lie and there was no
consequence. What’s to discourage her from lying next time? How is she
going to learn that lying is wrong?”
“Toni,” I said, “you summed it up beautifully. I don’t think I can improve
on your words. We’re ‘guiding kids toward being truthful rather than
labeling them as liars.’ Lying is a natural stage of development. To punish
them for it is counterproductive. It would be like punishing a baby for
pooping in her diaper. It’s natural, but we want to help them move on to the
next stage.”
“Let me give you a few snapshots of my son learning about telling an
‘inconvenient truth.’ ”

Dan at Age Two: The Mysterious Stranger
Dan was playing with his little friend Ian while his mother and I chatted, not
paying close attention. Suddenly Ian was on the ﬂoor wailing. “Danny
pushed me!”
I hustled Dan away and asked him what happened. Dan replied somberly,
“A bad man pushed Ian down.” Clearly he needed some distancing from this
awful deed.

Dan at Age Three: Pocket Trouble
Dan came in from playing in the backyard with a torn front pocket dangling
from his pants. I asked, “What happened?” indicating the pocket. Dan gave
it some thought and then carefully stated, “Let’s just say a boy ripped it.”

 I couldn’t help laughing. He was getting a little closer to putting himself
on the spot, but he wasn’t quite there yet.
• • •
Here’s his next step.

Dan at Age Four: Lesson from a Mouse
I was reading e Mouse and the Motorcycle to the kids. We had just ﬁnished
the chapter in which Ralph (the mouse) “borrows” the boy’s motorcycle and
crashes it. He tries to hide his misdeed from the boy, but eventually
confesses. e boy is angry, but ultimately forgives the dejected mouse.
Dan looked at me very solemnly and said, “I’m just like Ralph.”
“How are you like Ralph?” I asked. “Because you both love motorcycles?”
“No. Because we both wrecked something and we were afraid to tell.”
“Oh?”
“I pulled the sheet oﬀ the pull-out couch and it ripped.”
He looked so upset, I tried for a soothing tone. “Oh. Well that doesn’t
sound so bad.”
“It is bad! It’s the special sheet!” he moaned.
e “special sheet” was the one that the kids had picked out for the sofa
bed, for when Grandma and Grandpa came to visit. It was very cheap and
almost frighteningly colorful, with a wild geometric pattern of pink, green,
and yellow on a black background. e kids all loved it.
“Well, let’s look at it,” I said. “Maybe we can ﬁx it.”
Dan led me to his dresser and pulled the crumpled sheet out of the
bottom drawer. It had a ripped corner where the sheet had caught on the
metal frame of the sofa bed. I asked Dan if he wanted to sew it up. It was as
if a great weight had fallen from his shoulders. He gave an enthusiastic,
“Yes!”
I showed him how to thread a needle and he proceeded to make careful
stitches until the sheet was “almost as good as new.”
anks to Ralph the Mouse for his moral guidance!

 • • •
Dan continued in this path of full disclosure with conﬁdence that he could
ﬁx almost anything. e burden of secrecy and lies was not for him. He
much preferred the relief of laying it all bare.
I saved one note from him as an older child . . .

Dan at Age Twelve: Broken Wings
We had a few whimsical magnets attached to the refrigerator—birds and
bugs with moving wings that we had purchased at an outdoor fair. I went
into the kitchen one morning to see a broken bird taped to a piece of paper
on the refrigerator with these words:
Apology from Dan
I’m so sorry I crushed the wings of this poor little guy
when I reached up to get the vitamin C out of the
cabinet over the fridge. I realize he is special and I
mourn his death. I hope to find more of these little
“fridge friends” so I can bring them home and acquaint
them with our family.

 Sorrowfully, Dan

It’s very hard to learn to tell an uncomfortable truth. We help our
children face up to this challenge when we minimize the accusations, let
them know we understand how they feel, and show them how to make
amends. It’s easier to be courageous when there’s hope of redemption!

THE STORIES
Toni’s Story: Sugar Between the Sheets
Jenna lies at the drop of a hat. And it’s not fanciful lying, it’s very deliberate.
She does it when she wants to get away with something. Last week I found
empty candy wrappers in her bed. She knows she’s not allowed to eat in her
room. We have trouble with ants. I’m sorry to say I started out with the
wrong question, “Did you eat candy in bed?”
“NO!” She denied it vigorously, as usual.
I was tempted to call her a liar, but I remembered just in time and shut
my mouth and breathed for a minute. en I said, “Look, I can see that there
are candy wrappers in your bed, and I don’t think a little bunny put them
there. I know that a candy-loving girl ate some chocolate in bed. I don’t like
that. I don’t want ants in the bed. My rule is, ‘Food stays in the kitchen.’ ”
She came right back at me, saying, “My rule is, food doesn’t stay in the
kitchen! ere are no ants in my bed!”
You would be proud of me. I accepted her feelings, when I really felt like
slapping her and banning candy for a month. “I can see that you really like
getting all cozy in bed with your books and stuﬀed animals and a snack. e
problem is, sugar attracts ants. We get them in the kitchen and I certainly
don’t want them in your bed. It may take the ants a little time, but they can
ﬁnd those sugar crumbs, even the crumbs that are too tiny to see.”
She remained deﬁant. My daughter is tough. “I don’t care if an ant gets in
my bed.”
“Well I do care!” I said. “And I am not going to allow candy in the
bedrooms. Maybe we can make a cozy nest in the kitchen for you.”

 Jenna looked interested. “Can I use the beanbag chair?”
“Hmm,” I said. “at’s easy to wipe oﬀ if anything spills on it.”
“Can I put it under the table? at will be cozy.”
I nodded—hey, why not?—and she dragged her beanbag chair under the
kitchen table. She ran to her room and came back with a few stuﬀed animals
and crawled under the table. I handed her some pretzel sticks as a
housewarming for her new nest. is is the ﬁrst time a situation like this
ended with anything other than punishment and resentment. I have a
feeling she’ll be less likely to lie to me next time.

Julie’s Story: Paying It Forward
Out of the blue, our Internet service was shut down. When we called the
company they explained that we’d violated the terms of service agreement
because our son, Asher, had used a curse word in a chat room. But when we
asked Asher about it, he said he didn’t do it. He seemed so genuine in his
denial, we ﬁgured someone must’ve gotten his password and used his
account. We had to jump through a lot of hoops to get our Internet service
back.
About ﬁve months later, Asher confessed that he had lied—he had used
the bad word. He was crying as he told us. He’d been carrying around this
secret for a long time, and it had been weighing on him. My husband
wanted to punish him by taking away his computer privileges for a week, but
I talked him out of it. Instead, we talked to Asher about that feeling you get
when you do something that a part of you knows is wrong. I said, “It can be
scary to tell the truth when you feel bad about what you did. But you did tell
the truth, even though it wasn’t easy.”
I wasn’t sure this was the best way to handle it. I was worried we may
have let him oﬀ too easy. Here’s what convinced me otherwise. A few days
aer Halloween, long aer the chat room confession, Shiriel sneaked into
Asher’s room, stole some of his Halloween candy, and stuﬀed it under her
bookshelf. When Asher noticed his candy was missing, he asked Shiriel if
she knew what happened to it. Shiriel played innocent, but Asher went in
her room and immediately noticed the candy under the bookshelf. And you
know what he said? “Shiriel, maybe you wish you hadn’t taken my candy. But

 if you don’t listen to the part of yourself that knows you should tell the truth,
you just end up feeling really, really bad about yourself, so it’s not worth
lying.”
en he gave Shiriel a hug and collected his candy. He was so kind to his
little sister I almost wanted to cry.

 REMINDER: Lies

1. Describe What You See: Instead of asking or accusing, state
the obvious.

“I see chocolate on your face.”

2. Describe How You Feel
“I’m upset that the cake was eaten! I was going to serve it for
dessert when our friends come for dinner tonight!”

3. Acknowledge Feelings
“It’s not easy to resist cake. I bet you wish you hadn’t eaten it.”

4. Try Problem-Solving: Make a plan for the future
“Next time you’re tempted, let me know. I’m sure we can ﬁnd a
way to help you wait.”

5. Adjust Expectations: Manage the environment instead of
the child

ink to yourself, e next time I buy chocolate cake, I’ll put it
out of sight until it’s time for dessert so it’s not so tempting.

6. Help the Child Make Amends
“We’re going to need something for dessert when our friends
come over. Can you get out some cookies and arrange them
nicely on a plate?”

 6
Parents Have Feelings, Too
Julie
“What about my feelings?” Sarah’s voice had an uncharacteristic edge.
“When do those start to count? I’m feeling kind of low in the sympathy
department lately.”
“What, Sarah, you?” asked Toni. “You’re endlessly patient and
sympathetic. All those little preschoolers wish they could go home with you.
I know Jenna and Ella do. ey always tell me, ‘Sarah never yells at us.’ ”
“Well, it’s easier with other people’s kids. I don’t know, maybe I’m using
up my patience at work. Last week I wouldn’t let Sophia go to a sleepover on
a school night and she started up with, ‘You’re mean. You never let me do
anything fun. You’re always so strict.’ You never, you always . . . I hate those
words.
“I know what I’m supposed to say. ‘Oh gosh, Sophia, it’s so disappointing.
You were looking forward to a sleepover. It seems like you never get to do
fun stuﬀ.’
“I just couldn’t do it. I gave her a lecture about how privileged she was
and reminded her of the long list of fun things I’ve been doing for her. She
stomped out and everyone was grumpy for the rest of the night. I knew the
lecture wasn’t going to ﬂy, but I couldn’t help myself. I’d have had to bite my
tongue so hard it would bleed. Part of me thinks all this accepting feelings is
making her self-centered and spoiled. I wouldn’t have dared talk to my
parents that way.”
“Well, what about your feelings?” said Anna. “What if you told her your
feelings instead of lecturing? I’ll bet she could take it. Aer all, she’s seven,

 not three. What if you said, ‘Sophia! When I hear you never and you always
it makes me mad! It doesn’t make me feel like being helpful to you at all!’ ”
“at would have worked better than the lecture,” Sarah admitted. “I’d
probably give advice like that to my students’ parents. It’s harder to think
straight when your own kid is pushing your buttons.”
Anna was encouraged. “Maybe you could say, ‘If you’re disappointed, you
can tell me, “Mom, I’m disappointed! I really, really wanted to go to the
sleepover!” ’ ”
“Sure, if she put it that way, I’d be more in the mood to ﬁgure out a
solution,” Sarah said. “Maybe she could go for a while and I could pick her
up at bedtime, so she could sleep at home and not be exhausted for school.
Her friend’s school has a diﬀerent spring break, so her mother doesn’t care if
they stay up all night giggling and act like sleep-deprived zombies the next
day.”
“I like your two-part approach, Anna,” I said. “First you let her know how
you feel, and then you give her the words she can use to express herself
without irritating you. It can be tricky, because you really do have to bite
your tongue to some extent. Kids can’t take too much disapproval, even
when you’re gentle about it. e younger they are, the less they can handle.
“But they do need to know when the words they use result in a resentful
parent. at’s valuable information! If we take abuse with a sympathetic
smile, we’re teaching them the wrong lesson.”
“So what you’re saying is there’s a complex equation where we balance
tongue biting and feeling sharing,” complained Toni. “And we’re supposed to
be able to do this calculation when we’re really irritated.”
“Yeah, basically,” I admitted. “Except that you can always go ahead and
say the unhelpful thing, and then come back later when you’re not so upset
and give it another try. at’s what I oen end up doing. When I’m feeling
attacked I don’t usually come up with the perfectly craed response. But
even while I’m yelling, there’s a little voice in the back of my head saying,
‘I’m going to ﬁx this later.’ Kids can be pretty forgiving as long as you don’t
say anything truly damaging.

 “And don’t forget, it takes time to calm down when you’re all riled up.
You can’t just ﬂip a switch. One thing you can do for yourself is to give
yourself that time. Tell your kid, ‘I’m too upset to talk right now! We’ll talk
about this later.’ Or roar it. ‘Ahhhhhhhh!’ en take a break if you can. Go
for a walk if there’s another adult around, or to your room, or the bathroom,
or wherever you can ﬁnd refuge. Do whatever it is you do that makes you
feel better. Run around the block, do push-ups, put on music, curl up with
an understanding dog. You’ll come back refreshed and ready to use some
tools.”
You can have a truly miserable interaction with a kid and still come back
with a triumphant ﬁnish. Here’s the bad start: You accuse your kid of acting
like a spoiled brat. She counterattacks with, “You’re mean! I hate you!” You
both stomp oﬀ in a huﬀ.
Here’s the good ﬁnish: You go to your kid’s room later that evening when
your anger has subsided and say, “Hey, Sophia, I was really annoyed with
you for saying I never let you do anything fun. And you were really annoyed
with me for saying no to your sleepover. I’m not annoyed anymore and I’m
ready to talk about diﬀerent possibilities for a sleepover. Come to the
kitchen when you’re ready and we’ll ﬁgure out a plan that’s good for both of
us.” en you can sit down and do some problem-solving together.
What has the child learned? at when an adult gets angry it’s not the
end of the world. It’s a temporary condition. Problems that cannot be solved

 in the heat of the moment can be solved later, when calmer, cooler moods
prevail.

THE STORIES
Maria’s Story: Bagel Bite
I was at the supermarket with Benjamin. He was sitting in the cart eating a
bagel while we shopped. When we got to the cereal aisle he wanted to get
down and check out the options. He put his last bit of bagel in my hand and
went oﬀ on his mission. I popped it in my mouth. Big mistake. When
Benjamin got back and realized his terrible loss he started screaming, “You
ate my bagel!” at the top of his lungs and whacking my leg. Other shoppers
were giving me horriﬁed looks. It was awful. I yelled back at him, “I don’t
want to be screamed at and hit! Tell me, ‘Mom, I didn’t want you to eat my
bagel. Next time please ask before you eat!’ ”
He repeated those exact words back to me, in a pretty loud mad voice,
but at least it sounded civilized and there was no more whacking. So I said
back to him, still in a loud voice, “ank you for telling me! Next time I will
not eat a bite of your bagel without asking, even if you put it in my hand. I
thought you didn’t want it anymore, but now I know you did.”
en we looked at each other. What now? I asked him if he wanted to go
choose another roll or bagel to eat. We went back to the bread aisle and he
picked out an onion roll. I warned him, “If you don’t want me to take a bite,
don’t put it in my hand! Just put it in the cart.”
“You can have some, Mom.” He tore oﬀ a piece for me. It was just a small
piece, but hey, it felt like a giant leap for mankind.

 Sarah’s Story: Let Them Eat Cake (Without Milk)
We had ten ﬁve-year-olds in our backyard tie-dying T-shirts at Jake’s
birthday party. Aer we hung up the shirts to dry we had cake and ice
cream. As I was serving, one of the kids started banging his ﬁst on the table
and chanting, “I want milk! I want milk!” e other kids joined in. I was
almost mad enough to dump the milk on their heads. Why am I running
myself ragged to entertain these rude little brats? Luckily I couldn’t let loose
because some of their parents were there, too. I said in a loud voice, “I don’t
like to be yelled at while I’m serving people! If you want milk, you can say,
‘May I please have some milk when you’re ﬁnished cutting the cake?’ ”
Nine of the kids stopped banging. ey politely repeated my words. I
said, “Sure! And thank you for asking so nicely.” ey said, “You’re
welcome.” It was magical.
e tenth kid, the one who had started it in the ﬁrst place, kept on
banging and chanting. I didn’t serve him any milk. I guess he wasn’t so
thirsty. A ninety percent success rate is good enough for me!
I think it was important that I stood by my words. If I had told them how
I felt but still served them while they were banging, they wouldn’t have taken
me seriously.

Toni’s Story: Flour Power
I let the twins talk me into baking cookies. What a mess. Can I tell you how
easy it is to spill ﬂour? And how instantly it turns into glue as soon as it hits
a wet spot on the counter . . . and the ﬂoor . . . and the stove. . . . Well,

 anyway, the girls were being pretty obnoxious. ey kept shoving each other
and saying, “Me ﬁrst!” “No, me ﬁrst!” for every task—adding ingredients,
stirring, spooning out the batter. Finally I kind of roared at them, “Hey,
when I let you make cookies I don’t want to hear me ﬁrst and see shoving. I
want to hear, ‘ank you, Mom,’ and, ‘Let’s take turns going ﬁrst.’ ”
Well, they parroted my words right back to me and started taking turns
without a fuss. I can’t believe it was so easy! All this time I’ve wasted telling
them not to be rude when I should have just told them what I expect.

Michael’s Story: Wasted Day
Jamie and I decided to have a special father and son day. We had his favorite
breakfast (pancakes), I took him shopping for cra supplies and seeds for his
garden, and then to one of those fast-food restaurants with a play area for
kids. at was a sacriﬁce! I hate those places. To top it oﬀ I took him to the
movies. When we went into the movie it was still daylight, but when we
came out it was dark. Jamie started this angry crying that he does. He kept
saying, “You wasted the whole day!”
I was so mad. But I still used my tools. I said, “Hey, when I take you
shopping and out to eat and then to the movies, it makes me mad to hear,
‘You wasted the day.’ I want to hear, ‘ank you, Dad!’ ”
Do you want to guess how well that went over? Like a lead balloon. He
cried all the way home, and I fumed all the way.
Aer I handed him, still sobbing, to my wife for bedtime I had some time
to calm down. I went into his room and sat on his bed. “Jamie, I had a really
nice day with you. I think you didn’t want this day to end.”
He said, “Yeah,” and snuggled up to me.
At the movie theater, he was too upset to hear about my feelings. But I
was upset, too! I really like the idea that I can come back later with a better
response when I feel more sympathetic. We turned a bad ending into a good
one.

 REMINDER: Parents Have Feelings, Too!

1. Express Your Feelings . . . Strongly
Instead of, “You’re being rude!”
Try, “I don’t like being told I’m mean. It makes me mad.”

2. Tell Them What They Can Do, Instead of What They
Can’t
“You can tell me, ‘Mommy, I’m disappointed! I wanted to go!’ ”

3. Don’t Forget the Basics—Give Yourself and Your Child
Time to Recover
“I’ll talk to you about it aer dinner. Right now I’m too upset.”

 7
Tattling—Snitches and Whistle-Blowers
Joanna
“I’ve about had it with my twins,” Toni exploded. “ey are in some kind of
a phase—at least I pray that it’s a phase—where every little tiﬀ gets dumped
on me.
“ ‘Mommeee, Jenna ate a cookie before lunch. What are you going to do
to her?’
“ ‘Ella didn’t take her shoes oﬀ inside. She broke the rule!’
“ ‘Jenna touched the stove dial and you told us not to.’
“ ‘Ella poked me and you said no poking!’

“I’ve tried punishing the rule-breaker, but that only makes them more
vigilant to point out every misdeed. It’s like they’re vying to see who can get
more dirt on the other. I’ve tried telling them that they shouldn’t tattle and
I’m not interested, but that doesn’t seem to help either. ey just get louder

 and accuse me of being unfair. ey’ll actually hurt each other if I leave
them to their own devices.”
“at’s been a dilemma for me, too,” said Sarah. “On the one hand, I don’t
want my kids to tattle. I want them to feel like they’re on the same side. On
the other hand, I feel a bit hypocritical if I’m making rules and then not
enforcing them. And I certainly don’t want to discourage them from telling
on their siblings if there’s something dangerous going on.
“It happens at the preschool, too. A few girls have appointed themselves
the teacher’s little helpers. ey come running to me every playtime with
tales of who pushed who on the playground, or who ate half the green
crayon. Sometimes it’s useful, but mostly it’s annoying.”
“Why not just make a rule that you can only tell on your sibling or
classmate if someone is going to get hurt?” oﬀered Michael.
“I don’t know if I’d be comfortable with that,” said Maria. “When I was a
kid, we didn’t tell our parents anything. I want my kids to trust that they can
tell me about whatever bothers them, even if it’s trivial. Besides, can we
really depend on kids to have good judgment about what’s dangerous
enough to tell? If they think I’ll disapprove of them for tattling, they might
not tell me something important.”
“Well, I know that I do not want to know every little thing,” declared
Toni. “Sisters, especially twins, should be loyal to each other. I always tell
them that.”
“I’m wondering, what’s behind the impulse to tattle?” I asked the group.
“Power!” shot back Michael. “You can get your sibling in trouble. I know
that’s why I used to tattle on my older brother when I was a kid. He was so
much stronger and smarter than me, and he’d lord it over me. It was the only
way I could get even. I had the power to get him punished.”
“I think for the kids at school it may be that they’re just trying to please,”
ventured Sarah. “I mean, we’re always emphasizing how important rules are,
and then we get annoyed when they try to help enforce them. It’s got to be a
little confusing.”
I had to admit that my sympathies were with Maria. When my son was in
a mixed ﬁrst- and second-grade program, the teachers told the students that
they should only interrupt a teacher during independent activity time if
someone was bleeding. ere was a recurring problem with older children
bullying the younger ones. Dan complained to me about it, but he never

 asked a teacher for help because he took their words literally. “No one was
bleeding,” he explained to me very seriously, “so I’m not allowed to tell.”

I’m uncomfortable with the idea of teaching children that it’s not okay to
tell us things that bother them. Sometimes it takes bravery to tell on
somebody. Don’t we all wish someone had tattled about the corner-cutting
that led to the oil spill that killed a dozen people and dumped almost ﬁve
million barrels of oil into the Gulf of Mexico? Or to keep it closer to home
(unless you live on the Gulf Coast, in which case you’re already close to
home), what if some adult is inappropriate with your child and then warns
her not to tell? Do we want our kids even to consider that we might
disapprove of them in that situation?
“But I don’t want to hear about every little poke!” protested Toni. “Is that
the only way to protect the ocean? I don’t know if I can take it.”
“I feel your pain.” I laughed. “Here’s what I can oﬀer you. Michael made a
key point. One of the main impulses that drives the urge to tattle is the
satisfaction of getting the other kid in trouble. I’d like to remove punishment
from the equation and see what happens. What if we responded by
accepting feelings, addressing the problem, and oﬀering support if needed—
without punishing anyone? We can help our kids resolve conﬂicts when they
need our help, or encourage them to work it out between themselves when it
seems like they are capable.”
Toni looked skeptical.
“Here’s what I mean,” I said. “When a kid says, ‘She poked me!’ instead of
focusing on the perpetrator, we can focus on the victim. We can respond,

 ‘Oh, you didn’t like that! Show me where you got poked. Does it need a kiss
or a rub?’ ”
“I don’t think that would satisfy my girls,” said Toni. “ey would want to
know what you’re going to do to the poker.”
“I’d say, ‘Hey, Ella, that poke hurt Jenna’s arm. She doesn’t want to be
poked, even a little bit!’ and then I’d wait and see what happens. Maybe Ella
will say she’s sorry and they’ll go back to playing without any more pokes.
Maybe there will be more poking and they’ll decide to play separately for a
while. I don’t know what the outcome will be, but I do know that I won’t be
inspiring them to greater animosity by punishing one or dismissing the
other.
“If one child tells on another for breaking a rule, you can restate the rule
and express conﬁdence that they’ll respect the rule in the future. Or help the
little rule breaker ﬁx her mistake.”
“Oh, I can see why you’d be worried about Jenna touching the stove
controls. If that gets turned on by accident it can start a ﬁre or let out
dangerous gas. Do the two of you want to make some signs for a
reminder? ey could say DANGER or DO NOT TOUCH. Or maybe you
could draw a picture of ﬁre. What would work best?”
“Oh dear, muddy shoes on the carpet. Let’s go bang them outside to
get the dirt oﬀ. And here’s a broom to sweep up the dirt inside. . . .
Ah, you got it all!”
If we ignore the tattler she’ll be confused and frustrated. Why is this rule
suddenly not a rule? When we accept her feelings and address the problem,
she’s going to calm down. By not punishing the perpetrator, we remove the
incentive to tattle purely for the pleasure of power.

THE STORIES
Toni’s Story: Flattened Fingers

 I hate to admit it, but when you’re right, you’re right. I followed your script.
Jenna came in and said that Ella stepped on her ﬁngers. I didn’t say a thing
to Ella. I just took Jenna’s hand and said, “Oh, poor little squashed ﬁngers!”
and I kissed each one. ey both stood and looked at me for a few seconds,
like what now? I didn’t say anything. ey went back to playing together. In
the past when I’ve told them, “I don’t want to hear it,” or scolded the one
who did it, they always stayed angry with each other for a long time.

Sarah’s Story: Swing Wars
I had one of my little “teacher’s helpers” come running to me this week to
tell me that Jared was hogging the swing. In the past I might have told her to
mind her own business because she was playing hopscotch and nobody was
complaining about the swing. I mean, poor Jared gets in enough trouble
during class time. And this little girl knows it! But instead I asked her if she
thought the kids needed help taking turns. She said, “Yes,” so I went over
and did a little problem-solving. All I said was, “It looks like a lot of children
want to swing. What should we do?”
Jared said, “I want ten more swings!”
e other kids started counting out loud while Jared pumped like a
maniac. “One . . . two . . . three . . .” and on ten he jumped oﬀ at the highest
arc. I heard them counting for each kid aer that. ey were very pleased
with themselves. ey created a new game, but they also have a method for
taking turns now. And this little Goody Two-Shoes girl made it happen by
asking for help.

Joanna’s Story: Prison Play
One aernoon I broke my own rule against punishment. But it was all in
good fun, and it changed the mood from hostile to happy.
Six-year-old Dan was pestering four-year-old Sam one aernoon. It had
started as play, but then Sam got fed up and Dan didn’t want to stop. ey
had made a game of pulling blankets oﬀ each other’s beds, laughing
uproariously. At one point Sam realized he was losing all of the tug-of-war
battles to his stronger, older brother and started to complain vociferously.

 Dan kept on slyly returning to snatch yet another item of bedding, until Sam
was in tears. Sam came running into the kitchen to tell on his brother.
“Dan,” I roared. “Sam is not enjoying this game!”
“But he was laughing!”
“Yes, he was laughing, but he’s not laughing anymore. It’s time to stop.”
Sam gave his brother a venomous look and cried, “You should punish
him!”
I was taken aback. Where had my darling innocent developed such a
thirst for vengeance in this nonpunishing family? Where did he even get the
idea? But I decided to go with it. “Should we put him in jail?”
Sam was delighted. “Yes!”
Dan looked intrigued. “Oﬀ to jail with you,” I cried.
I pointed to the space under the desk. Dan grinned happily and crawled
in. I put a milk crate in front of him for bars. I turned to Sam. “Should he
stay in jail for one year or ten years?”
Do I even have to tell you the answer? “Ten!”
I waited a minute and then said, “I think ten years have passed. Should
we let poor Dan out of jail?”
Sam agreed that Dan had paid for his crimes with our pretend
punishment. Dan was just thrilled to participate in the drama. Play had
saved the day.

 REMINDER: Tattling

1. Acknowledge Feelings
“Jenna didn’t like being poked. at hurt!”

2. Help the Child Make Amends (without scolding)
“Let’s get a broom and sweep up the mess.”

3. Try Problem-Solving
“How will we remember not to touch the stove dials? We need
ideas.”

 8
Cleanup—The Dirtiest Word
Julie
Anna came in looking frazzled. “So how do you get them to clean up aer
themselves? I’m starting to get resentful. Last night I spent half an hour
haranguing Anton to clean up his blocks before bedtime, and then I ﬁnally
did it for him. About ten minutes later he dumped the whole bag out on the
ﬂoor again. I was ready to throttle him!”
“I can relate,” said Michael. “As soon as you walk in the door of my house,
you’re wading through toys. I think I have a few Lego spears permanently
embedded in my foot. Sometimes I just try to shove stuﬀ aside. But if I really
want the place to look civilized, it’s much easier to put the kids in front of
the television and do the cleanup myself.”
“But that’s just not right!” Toni protested. “I mean, yeah, I do that, too,
put them in front of the TV when I need them out of my hair, but I’m not
proud of it. How are they going to learn not to be lazy bums if they’re not
expected to pitch in?”
Little kids have diﬀerent priorities from their parents. Let’s face it, they
don’t care about disorder the way we do. Preschoolers aren’t going to sigh in
pleasure at the sight of a cleanly swept ﬂoor and a well-made bed. ey’d just
as soon pick through the dog hair for stray Cheerios and leap on a rumpled
bed to worm under the covers and wrestle with the pillows.
e ﬁrst thing to do is adjust your expectations. We can’t expect kids
to naturally want to clean up. Like it or not, it’s our job to make the task
appealing. e payoﬀ comes later, when they’re a little bit older and can
understand the joys of orderly living.
“So why should we even bother?” asked Michael. “Why not just wait?”

 “How long?” moaned Anna.
Let’s face it, sometimes it’s a hopeless battle. If you’re trying to leave a
playdate with a recalcitrant toddler and you insist that he clean up his mess
before getting in the car, you’re setting yourself up for failure. You’re asking
him to do something unpleasant (cleaning) so that he can do something
even more unpleasant (leaving). Chances are he’s tired and cranky to boot.
Go easy on yourself and don’t take a moral stance. Just sweep up the toys,
say your good-byes, and tuck that toddler in the carseat with a stuﬀed
monkey for consolation.
On the other hand, there are certainly going to be times when we don’t
need to wait until the kids are older. Helping out with cleanup is a good
opportunity for them to develop new skills and contribute to the family.
Even a child too young to care about order and organization can feel a sense
of purpose and pride that comes from helping out. e challenge is to
manage it with a sense of fun and warm feelings—or at least without blame
and frustration.
If everyone is in a reasonably good frame of mind, you have a lot of
options.
You can offer a choice and at the same time make the task feel less
overwhelming: “Do you want to start by picking up all the books, or by
tossing all the dirty clothes in the basket?” “Do you want to pick up red
Legos or blue?” “Cars or crayons and markers?”
You can be playful, and make the block bag talk: “I’m hungry, feed me
blocks. Mmmm, I like these crunchy rectangles! Give me more! Yuck, I hate
the triangles. ey stick in my throat. Ooh, these green ones are extra tasty.”

 You can make it a game: “How many blocks can we get into the bag
in two minutes? Johnny, you set the timer. Ready . . . set . . . GO!”
You can issue a challenge: “I’ll bet you can’t get all the crayons back in the
box by the time I empty the dishwasher.” (Let them win, of course.)
You can get them counting: “Each citizen must deposit ﬁve pieces of trash
in the garbage pail before leaving this room.”
You can write a note: Jackets away before play. Even children who can’t
read enjoy getting a note. You can include a picture or read it to them.
Describe what you see with appreciation. “Wow, look at this big
cleanup you did. You guys are quite a team. is ﬂoor was covered with dirty
laundry and train tracks, and now it’s a pleasure to walk on!”
It’s important to point out progress instead of criticizing an
incomplete job. I’ve derailed many a cleanup eﬀort by saying, “is is
nowhere near ﬁnished. It still looks like a disaster area!” You’ll get better
results with a statement like, “I can see you’ve tossed all the dirty laundry in
the basket. Now all that’s le to make it totally spectacular is to pick up the
books and blocks.”
When children have le you an unpleasant surprise, resist the urge to
threaten and accuse: “Who made this big mess? No TV tonight if this
doesn’t get cleaned up.” Instead, stick with describing what you see
and giving information. “I see crumbs all over the ﬂoor. at will
attract ants. is room needs a good sweeping. Here’s the broom!”
Aer the cleanup is ﬁnished you can say, “I see a clean ﬂoor. e ants will
have to go outside and ﬁnd their snacks in the yard.”

 If you feel the urge to lecture, try to limit yourself to a word. You’ll
get more traction with “Crumbs!” than you will if you launch into a lengthy
diatribe: “I just spent an hour cleaning this kitchen and you kids messed it
up again in two minutes. When are you going to learn to clean up aer
yourselves?”
Again, keep in mind that your child does not care about cleanup any more
than you care about putting together a Lego dump truck (unless of course
you do, in which case, provide your own alternative example). e main
point is to keep the interaction (and the relationship) pleasant. Later your
child will understand more about why cleaning up aer yourself is the right
thing to do, but for a preschooler it’s not helpful to think of it as a moral
issue. What’s important at this stage is developing a positive feeling about
being helpful and working together.
And remember, there will be many times when you have to cut your
losses. You can apply some leverage when your child is feeling energetic, “We
can go to the park as soon as these blocks are put away.” But when a toddler
is tired or hungry, avoid a losing battle. Do it yourself for now. ere will be
plenty of other opportunities for your child to participate. Don’t worry, this
is not the last mess!!

THE STORIES
Toni’s Story: The Missing Bookbag
Every day, omas comes home from school and sheds his bookbag and
coat onto the ﬂoor as soon as he gets in the door. Every day I lecture him. It
goes something like this: “omas, you need to hang up your coat and
bookbag. at’s why we have hooks. When you leave them on the ﬂoor they
get stepped on and dirty. And covered in dog hair, which you know you
don’t like. Come on, just do it.”
“I’m tired. I’ll do it later.”
“No, do it NOW.”
“I can’t. I’m starving!”
is time I wrote a note on a piece of paper and hung it from a string in
the doorway so that he would walk right into it when he came inside. It said,

 Hang up bag and coat and come in kitchen for special snacks. omas ran to
hang up his coat and bag. I gave him a small lump of peanut butter with
carrot sticks poking out of it so it looked like a porcupine. He was pleased
and added raisins for eyes.
e next morning there was panic. It was time for the bus and omas
couldn’t ﬁnd his bookbag anywhere. I asked him, “Did you look on the ﬂoor
of your room? Did you look on the couch in the living room? How about the
bench in the kitchen?” It was nowhere to be found. Finally I had a lightbulb
moment. It was on the hook! We made it to the bus with thirty seconds to
spare.

Sarah’s Story: Don’t Cry Over Spilled Chocolate Milk
My three kids decided to have a sleepover in the playroom. ey dragged in
a bunch of comforters and pillows. ey came to the kitchen for hot
chocolate, and Sophia snuck hers into the playroom. Of course they all
started horsing around, and they knocked over the mug and splashed hot
chocolate all over the white comforters. It got into the foam tiles on the ﬂoor,
too. It was a huge mess. I felt like canceling the sleepover and taking away
their TV time.
But I stuck to description and making amends. I told them, “I see
chocolate all over the place. It needs to be cleaned up.” I showed them how
to scrub the comforters and take apart the foam tiles to get the ﬂoor clean.
ey actually cleaned it all up. I didn’t have to do anything, and it was
amazing. Nobody complained, even though by the time they were ﬁnished
there was no time to watch TV. I’m pretty sure they won’t be bringing drinks
into the playroom again anytime soon.

Michael’s Story: Sibling Sorrow
My kids love making a game out of cleanup. Jamie’s four, so he’s used to
helping out a little, but for Kara this is a totally new behavior, mainly
involving her new passion—throwing. She’s been cleaning up all week,
throwing her dirty clothes in the laundry basket and throwing her crayons
in a box. It’s not long distance or anything. She aims from about two inches

 away and slams ’em in. e other day I told her she was an amazing “cleaner
upper” and Jamie burst into tears. He’s used to being my helper, while Kara
is just the little pest. I’m going to have to be careful to praise them as a
cleanup team from now on, instead of singling out one kid.

Anna’s Story: Monopoly Extortion
is week I tried something new with cleanup. I told Anton I wanted to hire
him for a job. I got a wad of Monopoly money out and told him I’d pay him
ten dollars to pick up the yellow blocks. He was intrigued. He tossed all the
yellow blocks in the bin and I gave him the Monopoly bill. en I said,
“How about another ten dollars for the blue blocks?”
He said, “No . . . twenty!”
“Uhhhh, that’s a lot. Oh, okay.”
He picked up the blue blocks. en he said, “I’ll pick up the red blocks for
a hundred dollars!”
I acted outraged. “What? at’s too much! I can’t aﬀord that! Oh well, I
guess I have no choice. You drive a hard bargain.”
He cleaned up the red blocks and I handed over the hundred-dollar bill
with a big sigh. Anton was giggling the whole time, and I got to sit on the
couch . . . the whole time!

Joanna’s Story: A Glimpse Into the Future

 My three boys generated an astonishing amount of mess when they were
small, a lot of it in the kitchen. As teenagers, all three enjoy cooking—for
themselves and others. ey are enthusiastic, inventive chefs who wipe
down counters, put away perishables, and wash the pots and pans when
they’re done! As for cleaning their rooms . . . well, that happens when a
girlfriend is coming over.

 REMINDER: Cleanup

1. Be Playful
(Shoes talking.) “Pretty please, put me in the closet with my
friends.”
“How many minutes will it take to toss all the Legos into the
bucket? You can set the timer. Ready . . . set . . . GO!”

2. Offer a Choice
“Do you want to be in charge of putting away the books or the
cars?”

3. Write a Note
“Please hang me on the hook. Love, Your Coat.”

4. Describe What You See
“I see orange peels on the ﬂoor.”

5. Give Information
“Peels belong in the compost.”

6. Say It with a Word
“Coat!” “Peels!” “Shoes!”

7. Describe Progress
“You got that whole pile of dirty laundry in the basket! All that’s
le to put away are the cars and books.”

 8. Describe What You See with Appreciation
“Wow, look at this big cleanup you did. e ﬂoor was covered
with dirty laundry and train tracks, and now it’s a pleasure to
walk on!”

 9
Doctor’s Orders—Medicine, Shots, Blood
Draws, and Other Horrors
Joanna
“Ever since omas had his ﬁve-year checkup, I’ve been dreading the day
the twins have theirs,” Toni sighed. “It was horrible. Two injections. Aer the
ﬁrst one omas was screaming and pulling away from the nurse. She kept
yelling at me, ‘Hold him still!’ I wrapped my arms around him while she
gave him the second shot. He was so angry aerward he wouldn’t talk to me
for hours. I felt like I betrayed him. But what was I supposed to do?”

Maria looked distressed. “I don’t see how we can say anything that’s going
to help in a situation like this. e shots hurt. ere’s no way around that.”
It’s true. We can’t protect our kids from the pain of injections, not to
mention all the other uncomfortable experiences that life has to oﬀer.
ey’re going to feel what they’re going to feel. But this isn’t to say our trusty

 tools won’t help. And we need a lot of tools for this one. Aer all, we’re
talking about needles here.
When I had to take all three kids for shots, I made sure to start with
acknowledging feelings. “Just the thought of getting a needle in the
arm can be pretty scary.”
en I went on to giving in fantasy, “I wish they could put the
medicine inside a lollipop. You’d eat one a day for a week, and then you’d
never get sick.”
en I nimbly threw in some information. “e shots put tiny little
ﬁghters in your blood, called antibodies. ey ﬁght against tiny germs so
you don’t get sick.” I added a comforting tip that I had heard from a nurse on
the last visit, “e good news is that shots are quick. ey’re over in the time
it takes to clap twice. Like this (Clap! Clap!).”
en on to choices. “Do you want me to clap for you, or do you want
your brother to do it? I know if you did it for yourself the nurse probably
wouldn’t be too happy. It would be hard to give a shot to a clapping kid.”
Dan liked the idea of clapping. But I wasn’t done. No tool le behind!
Problem-solving was next. “Would it help to have something to look
forward to aer the shot is over?” We decided to stop at the corner store to
ﬁnd a post-shot treat. Dan chose a pack of peanut M&Ms. He decided that
he would get one out ahead of time and hold it in his hand, ready to pop
into his mouth as soon as the shot was over.
By this time we were actually getting kind of excited about the whole
event. It had become a challenge. Once we arrived at the oﬃce it turned out
Dan needed two shots, not just one as I had envisioned. e nurse gave him
the choice of having one at a time, or having them both at the same time,
one in each arm. Dan chose to get it over with all at once. Two nurses
readied their needles. Dan squeezed a green peanut M&M in his ﬁst. I raised
my hands to clap. Stab! It was over. Dan popped his peanut M&M into his
mouth and grinned. Not so bad.
Toni groaned. “I can’t imagine both of my girls going for that. Maybe
Jenna, but not Ella. She wouldn’t give in so easily.”
We always have the fallback of taking action without insult. If you
need to restrain her, you can do it with understanding and sympathy. “I’m
going to hold you on my lap while the doctor gives you the injection. I know

 you don’t like this. I wish there were a less painful way to protect you from
diseases.”
“What about medicine?” asked Anna. “Shots are only once a year at most.
But that disgusting pink goop they put the antibiotics in, you might be
facing that at any time. And by facing it, I mean you might have it spit into
your face! at just happened to me. e doctor said Anton had strep and
couldn’t go back to school until he was on antibiotics for twenty-four hours.
I tried to give him a choice about how to take it, but he ran into his room
and slammed the door. I went and sat him down and forced the syringe into
his mouth, and he spit it back out at me. What was I supposed to do when
oﬀering a choice didn’t work? He deﬁnitely wasn’t in the mood to be
playful.”
“is is a good example of why oﬀering a choice may fail,” I said. “When
a child has strong emotions about something, he’s probably not ready for a
choice. He needs to have his feelings acknowledged ﬁrst. What could we say
to this poor kid who is being ordered to swallow this nauseating liquid?”
e group responded:
“Yuck, this medicine is really disgusting to you.”
“It’s your least favorite taste in the world.”
“Why can’t they make it taste like pizza?”
“e doctors should have to drink this before they make kids drink it!
ey would spit it out, too!”
“Okaaay,” said Anna, “but you do realize I still have to get him to drink it,
right? is might make him feel better, but I don’t see how it helps.”
“You’re right, this is just a ﬁrst step,” I said. “But it’s essential. It helps put
him in the mood to work with you. Now you can say something like, ‘Ugh,
this is a really diﬃcult situation. How can we get this disgusting medicine
inside your body in the least disgusting way possible? We need ideas!’ ”
Anna looked dubious. “I’ll try it,” she said. “And if it doesn’t work I’m
calling you so you can come over to my house and get him to take it.”
“Oh, I may have to screen my calls this week. But I’m eager to hear how it
works out for you.”
Sarah was waving her hand in the air. “I have a suggestion. Jake can’t
tolerate that liquid antibiotic. When he had Lyme disease, he understood
why he had to take the medicine, but sometimes he would actually throw up
within a few seconds of swallowing. I ended up asking the doctor to change

 the prescription to pills. ey said they didn’t usually do that for young
children, but they were willing to give it a try. I put a pill in a spoonful of
chocolate ice cream, with another few spoonfuls to chase it down, and he
was able to swallow it that way.”
“Don’t forget playfulness,” said Michael. “My friend’s son had a bad
stomach bug and he had to drink a cup of this electrolyte stuﬀ every day for
a week. At ﬁrst he liked it, but aer the ﬁrst few days he got very tired of it
and refused to take it. e parents were using the sports coach approach,
‘Come on, buddy, let’s do this! Take one for the team!’ at wasn’t working
too well.
“I wanted to help out, you know, with my superb skills from being in this
group. I picked up the bottle of medicine and said, ‘Oh, look, a new bottle of
medicine for Tommy and it’s magic medicine. Tommy, will you take a tiny
little sip, so I can see what it does?’
“He took a tiny sip, and I pretended I could see the drop of medicine
inside his body: ‘Look at that! I can see it going down your throat. Take
another sip!’
“He took a bigger sip this time, and I pointed and said, ‘Wow, I can see
that sip going down your throat, and through your chest, and into your
stomach. Do it again!’ He thought this was funny, and he took a big gulp.

“ ‘Now it’s down to your knees! I wonder if you can drink enough to get it
all the way down to your toes.’

 “His parents wanted to hire me to come over every night and do my
routine.”

THE STORIES
Anna’s Story: Super Mario Meds
I tried problem-solving and it didn’t work out exactly as I expected. I did
what you said and talked to Anton about how much he hated the medicine. I
let him tell me all of the disgusting things it tasted like, and I even wrote
them down. Vomit, rotten cheese, dirty socks. en I said I didn’t know
what to do because he really needed the medicine or he’d get sicker. I needed
his help with ideas. I suggested ice cream, but his favorite idea was one he
came up with. He wanted me to pour the medicine down his throat while he
played Super Mario Kart on his Wii. We did it and it worked perfectly. He
just tipped back his head and kept on playing. I got him to school an hour
late, but it was worth it.
e problem was that the next morning he refused the medicine again. I
was so furious with him. Aer all that work! I just lost it. I was screaming at
him, “We had a deal! You can’t go back on it!” and he was sobbing
hysterically. He ﬁnally choked it down, and we were late again. So much for
problem-solving.
When I had some time to think about it, I ﬁgured out why it fell apart.
Anton really loved sitting with me, having me write down his feelings, and
doing the problem-solving. He must have thought we were going to do that
every morning! I talked to him when he came home from school and
explained that we needed a solution that would last the whole week because
I couldn’t be late every day. He agreed (whew!) and the rest of the week went
smoothly.

Joanna’s Story: Medical Mauling
When Dan was an infant, visits to the doctor went pretty smoothly. But
around age two he became extremely averse to being touched by strangers.
Or anyone he didn’t know that well. He stiﬀened if our next-door neighbor,

 a lovely woman, tried to hug him. He pulled away when his uncle tried to
give him a handshake. So of course he became hysterical when the doctor
poked at his stomach and tried to listen to his heart and look in his ears.
Forget about needles. Just a stethoscope was sending him around the bend.
e doctor acted like he had never dealt with such an unreasonable child.
He ordered me, “Hold him tight, keep his arms down!” while Dan screamed
and twisted to get away. It was pretty awful.
at was our last visit to that doctor. I asked around for a more childfriendly pediatrician, and we eventually got an appointment with Dr. B. It
was a revelation. Dr. B had my son in stitches for the entire examination. He
made funny noises whenever he had to touch him. He had a little toy ﬁsh
stuck onto the light he used for the ear exam, and he had some silly patter
about what the ﬁsh saw inside Dan’s head. Dan was so full of giggles it was
like I had taken him to see a show instead of to a doctor. I am such a fan of
this man for going all the way through medical school while still taking the
time to cultivate his inner clown. Playfulness wins the day!

Julie’s Story: Vaccination Torture
We were at Asher’s pediatrician’s oﬃce on a Friday for his ﬁve-year-old
checkup. He was due to get two vaccinations. He was terriﬁed, but he
cooperated when the nurse came to give him the ﬁrst one. Aer that,
though, he lost it. He was crying and screaming, refusing to let the nurse
give him the second shot. He was so mad, she had to leave the room.
I said, “at really hurt!”
He screamed, “Yeah!”
“You don’t like shots!”
“Yeah!”
“You don’t want another one!”
He said, “No more shots! I won’t let her!” He was distraught and sobbing.
I held him for a while, and then I said, “I wish you didn’t have to get any
shots ever again. is is so hard. e problem is, the nurse has to give you
one more. What should we do?”
Asher said, “No more shots today. Let’s come back tomorrow.”
“Tomorrow the oﬃce is closed. We’d have to wait until Monday.”

 “Okay, Monday.”
I was worried he would stew in dread all weekend and then refuse again
on Monday. Should I agree to this plan? He promised me he’d cooperate on
Monday, but he’s only ﬁve; I can’t exactly hold him to a contractual
agreement.
e nurse thought it was a bad idea. Better to get it over with, even if we
have to hold him down. But Asher insisted that he would let her give him
the shot on Monday. I made an appointment for Monday and took him
home.
We didn’t talk about the shot over the weekend. On Monday, I told him
we were going to the pediatrician’s oﬃce. He knew why, but he didn’t object.
When the nurse came into the exam room and asked him if he was ready, he
said, “Yes.” He stuck out his arm and he took the shot without any drama.
She and I were both impressed.
I admit I was nervous when I agreed to his plan on Friday. But seeing
how much better he coped on Monday, well, I hope you won’t mind my
saying that he deﬁnitely was better oﬀ calling the shots on this one!

Julie’s Story: The Little Flick
Aer the experience with Asher and his ﬁve-year-old shots, I ﬁgured I knew
how to handle kids and needles. Live and learn.
Rashi had to get a blood draw—his ﬁrst of what has turned out to be
many. He never made a big fuss when he got his vaccinations, so I ﬁgured
this would be easy as pie. But no! He was terriﬁed.
I employed all my tried-and-true strategies, starting with acknowledging
his feelings: “You don’t want this blood draw. You don’t feel ready. . . . is is
scary. . . . You’re afraid it will hurt.”
I gave him information: “ey take just a small amount of blood. You’ll
have plenty le.”
I oﬀered to problem-solve: “e doctor needs a little bit of your blood.
What should we do? Which arm would be better?” He had no ideas. He
didn’t want to come back later, he just wanted to skip it altogether.
e nurse was very patient, but aer an hour of pleading (her) and crying
(Rashi) she gave up. She sent in another nurse—a tall man with big, strong

 arms. He didn’t beat around the bush. “Rashi, this isn’t going to hurt a lot. It’s
going to feel like a little ﬂick of my ﬁnger on your arm.” And he ﬂicked
Rashi’s arm before Rashi could object.
Rashi looked surprised, and he stopped squirming. e man whipped out
his alcohol wipe as he told Rashi, “at’s all you’re going to feel, just a little
ﬂick,” and then he quickly jabbed the needle into Rashi’s arm. Rashi watched
wordlessly and moments later it was all over. He was so relieved!
So what have I learned? at kids are diﬀerent. at some tools will work
for one kid and not another. at sometimes it helps to put the child in the
driver’s seat and let him control the action. at other times it’s best to take
action—take the child out of the driver’s seat and not burden him with that
responsibility. at parenting is an art, not a science. And that I’d better not
get too smug.

 REMINDER: Doctor’s Orders

1. Acknowledge Feelings
Instead of, “Come on, it’s not that bad. Just let her do it, and it’ll
be over.”
Try, “It can be scary to think about someone sticking a needle in
your arm.”
Instead of, “Don’t cry. You’re a big boy.”
Try, “at hurt! You didn’t like that!”

2. Offer in Fantasy What You Can’t Give in Reality
“I wish they could put the medicine inside a lollipop. You’d eat
one a day for a week and then you’d never get sick.”

3. Offer a Choice
“Do you want the shot in your le arm or your right?”
“Do you want to sit next to me, or on my lap?”

4. Give Information
“e shots are quick. ey’re over in the time it takes to clap
twice. Like this (Clap! Clap!).”
“e shots put tiny little ﬁghters in your blood, called
antibodies. ey ﬁght against tiny germs so you don’t get sick.”

5. Try Problem-Solving
Parent: What would make it easier to get through these
injections? Would it help to have something to look forward to

 when you’re done?
Kid: Can we get peanut M&M’s? I could eat a green one as soon
as the shot is over.
Parent: Let’s do that!

6. Be Playful
“I can see the medicine going down your throat into your
stomach. And now it’s heading down your leg to your toes!”

7. Take Action Without Insult
“I’m going to hold you on my lap while the doctor gives you the
injection. I know you don’t like this.”

 10
Shy Kids—Fear of Friendly Folks
Julie
“Is there a prize for worst weekend?” asked Michael. “We spent Sunday with
my cousins, and Jamie was clinging to me the whole time. I couldn’t even
leave the room without him, never mind the house. I’ve always assumed he’d
grow out of this shy phase, but Jan says he’s shy by nature. Every time my
aunt tried to talk to him he hid behind my legs. She kept asking him what
was wrong. I’d like to know how to get him to be more conﬁdent, at least
around my own family.”
“My sister was shy when she was little,” Anna said. “My parents were
always trying to get her to talk to people. It didn’t work, though. You can’t
force a kid to talk.”
“I was very shy as a little girl, too,” said Maria. “My mother protected me.
She’d tell people I was too shy to talk. On the one hand, that was a relief—
people would usually leave me alone. On the other hand, I was pretty lonely
a lot of the time. I didn’t really want to feel so shy. To this day I have a hard
time talking with people I don’t know. Even speaking up here makes me a
little nervous.”
Michael looked exasperated. “So a kid who’s labeled ‘shy’ ends up living
up to expectations, but forcing him to say ‘hello’ doesn’t work either. Is there
some third way?”
“Has anybody tried something that worked with a shy kid?” I asked.
“Something that respected their feelings and at the same time freed them to
get past those feelings?”
Sarah raised her hand. “My nephew is very shy. I only get to see him a
couple of times a year because he lives far away, so every time he comes he

 has to warm up to me again. Last year I had the idea to put a sock on my
hand, and I had the sock puppet talk to him. He really liked that. e next
time he came, I pulled that puppet out again. is time I was prepared; I’m
no artist, but I made eyes and a nose ahead of time with a Magic Marker. He
deﬁnitely remembered it, and he warmed up to me much faster.”

“What about preparing kids ahead of time for the visit,” asked Maria. “Do
you think that would help? On the drive over you could acknowledge
feelings. ‘It can be hard to walk into a new house ﬁlled with relatives. Lots of
people want to say hello to you. at can feel scary. I remember when I was
your age, I was especially afraid of my aunt Sonia. She always gave me
horrible, lipsticky kisses.’ ”
“I like it!” I said. “And then you can plan a strategy for those ﬁrst
awkward moments. Direct greetings for my kids were hard at that age. ey
always did better when they had a job to do. Like carrying the chips and dip
inside and ﬁnding a place to put them on the counter. Or being in charge of
hanging the coats. You can ask them to choose a job.”
Michael looked unconvinced. “You can’t plan for everything. What about
when Aunt Vivacious asks you, ‘What’s wrong with Jamie? Why won’t he
play?’ You don’t want us to deny our kid’s feelings and tell him to go play, but
you don’t want us to cast him in the role of the shy kid, either.”
“It’s tempting to announce that your child is shy. It comes from the best of
impulses,” I said. “We want to protect our kids. But they also need to know
we have faith in them if they’re going to be brave enough to make the leap

 into sociability. I have the magic words for you. Are you ready to receive
them?”
Vigorous nods all around.
“Jamie will join you when he’s ready.”
e group looked underwhelmed. “What’s so special about that?”
It may not sound like much, but those three little words do a lot of work.
ey tell a child that you respect his feelings and his need to go slowly. ey
also let him know that he’s in charge. He’s not being pushed. But the most
important part is what you’re not saying. You’re not keeping him stuck in a
role. Dad said I’m shy. I must be shy. I’d better stay behind his legs where it’s
safe.
Instead you’re issuing an invitation. You’re protecting him while he’s
feeling uncomfortable. But the door is le wide open. He can ease into the
activities without fanfare, as soon as he’s ready. e readiness oen comes
quickly as soon as the pressure is removed.
If the relatives continue to push, you can run interference. When Cousin
Lively tries to pull Jamie over to the train tracks you can say, “Don’t worry,
Jamie will join you when he’s ready. He likes trains.” And to Jamie you can
oﬀer a choice, “Do you want to hang out here with the parents and have a
snack ﬁrst, or do you want to sit on the couch in the playroom and watch the
kids and the trains?”
In short, it’s normal for little kids to feel shy around people they don’t
know well. We may need to adjust our expectations. Instead of pressuring
kids to interact with unfamiliar people right away, we can help them by
giving them something to do, or giving them permission to observe until
they’re ready to join in. And if you’re the stranger, it can help to talk to the
child in a playful way, using a stuﬀed animal or puppet.

 THE STORIES
Sarah’s Story: Put Her in a Pumpkin Shell
Yesenia joined the class in mid-October, a month and a half aer all the
other kids started. Her family had just moved from Puerto Rico. She was
terribly shy and wouldn’t speak to me or to the other students. I wasn’t
actually sure if she understood enough English to know what was going on.
I tried to be as unthreatening as possible—never confronting her with a
direct question, always oﬀering her little tasks to do like handing out
crayons, and sprinkling ﬁsh food into our class ﬁsh tank. She cooperated
with my requests, but continued to keep her eyes on the ﬂoor and
maintained her silence.
On Halloween I brought in a small pumpkin for each child. I gave them
spoons to scoop out the innards and collect the seeds. We planned to toast
some for eating and sprout the rest.
Some of the kids didn’t want to touch the gooey mess with their ﬁngers,
but Yesenia dug right in with her bare hands. She scooped and scooped, and
as she scooped she began to talk. She talked about her brothers and sisters,

 and the cat she had in Puerto Rico. She talked about the plane ride and her
new apartment. She talked about her mother and father and a TV show she
saw about ghosts. It was a river of speech ﬂowing steadily over a broken
dam. And all the while she was running her ﬁngers through the slimy wet
strings of pumpkin with great satisfaction.
From that day on, Yesenia was a fully participating member of the class.
You oen had to bend your head down to hear her because her voice was
so, but she answered questions and oﬀered observations and very deﬁnite
opinions of her own. Something in that pumpkin pulp freed her. If I get a
student like that again, I’ll be sure to bring out the clay and ﬁnger paints, in
case it’s the wrong time of year for pumpkins.
I’m glad I was patient and resisted the impulse to pressure her to talk. She
needed time, and lots of diﬀerent ways to be involved without talking.

Anna’s Story: The Little Flip
No matter how much I try to explain to Anton that he has to look up and
say hello when people greet him, he just can’t bear to do it. But I hate how
rude it looks when he refuses to acknowledge people. And it’s not just that. I
want him to think about how other people feel, too.
We ﬁnally ﬁgured out a solution. I suggested that he look up for a second
and give a little wave of his hand instead of talking. He just ﬂips his ﬁngers
up a tiny bit from his side. It makes him seem sweet and shy instead of
sullen and unfriendly.

Joanna’s Story: Olden Days
When Dan was three years old I was continually surprised by his shyness.
He was such a bold little guy. He’d climb any woodpile in his roller skates,
rocket down any hillside on his bike. e word afraid was quite literally not
in his vocabulary (as my mom discovered when Dan was up in a tree and
she nervously asked, “Aren’t you afraid to go so high?” and he answered,
“What do you mean, afraid?”).
But when it came to people, Dan moved forward with excessive caution.
He had known my next-door neighbor, Donna, almost all his life. She was a

 relaxed, experienced mom of three, wonderful with children. We had spent
many happy hours with our kids playing together at my house or her house.
But Dan still refused to stay at Donna’s house without me.
One day Dan begged to go play with the girls next door, but I was
swamped with chores to do at home. I told him my problem. We decided
that I would go with him for a very short playdate. If he felt comfortable, I
could leave him there on his own to play longer. If not, he would come home
with me. I ﬁgured that if I put him in charge of the decision, he would feel
braver.
It worked! He wasn’t ready to go there all by himself and commit to a solo
run, but once he started playing he decided he would stay on his own. e
next day Dan asked me if he could ride over to Donna’s house on his bike.
(We shared the same driveway, so while it would be an adventure, it was a
pretty safe one.) I said, “Sure!”
Dan was excited with his new boldness. But he also felt nostalgic. He
looked at me thoughtfully and mused, “Hey, Mom, remember the olden
days, when I was scared to go by myself?”

Joanna’s Story: Too Shy for School?
Dan, at ﬁve, was at the brink of a new stage of life—kindergarten! We had
gone to the screening and the orientation. We had gotten the class
assignment in the mail. School was starting in just a week when Dan
announced that he would not be going on the bus unless his whole family
came with him. Mom, Dad, Sammy, and baby Zach, and oh yes, the cat and
the dogs as well. Not for him the solo trek into the great unknown!
I was worried. What if my child was the only ﬁve-year-old in town who
failed to launch? What was I going to do?
Well, I started with acknowledging feelings. “It can be scary to go to a
new place without your family.”
Dan agreed. He was not going to stay with that teacher because he was
not “used to her.” I knew that teachers had the week to set up, so I suggested
we visit the classroom in order to “get used to” Mrs. G. I called the school
and Mrs. G welcomed us warmly. Dan and I made three trips to the

 classroom that week, talking to Mrs. G and playing with some of the toys
each time.
e night before the ﬁrst day of school, we made a project of cutting out
little pictures of each member of the family (including the cat and dogs, of
course) and putting them into a little zippered pouch, shaped like a friendly
lion, purchased especially for the occasion. Dan would bring his family with
him, and he’d be able to unzip his lion and look at their faces if he needed to.
e next morning my little boy bravely stepped into the big yellow school
bus, and I breathed a sigh of relief!

 REMINDER: Shy Kids

1. Acknowledge Feelings
“It can be hard to walk into a new house ﬁlled with relatives.
Lots of people want to say hello to you. at can feel scary.”

2. Adjust Expectations: Give a child something to do instead of
pressuring him to be social.

“You can carry in the chips and put them in the bowl for people
to eat.”

3. Offer a Choice
“Do you want to sit on the couch and watch the kids set up the
trains? Or do you want to have a snack with the grown-ups
ﬁrst?”

4. Be Playful
(Sock puppet talking.) “Hi there! Would you like a corn chip?”

5. Put the Child in Charge
“Jamie will join you when he’s ready.”

 11
Little Runaways—Kids Who Take Off in
the Parking Lot and Other Public Places
Joanna
“I need help!” Michael proclaimed. “If I lose one of these kids my wife is
going to have my head on a plate. I was doing pretty well keeping track of
Jamie, but now Kara’s getting speedy, too. Sometimes they dart oﬀ in two
diﬀerent directions in the parking lot. I need a clone of myself to keep track
of them both. Or maybe a drone to track them from overhead.”
“Oh,” laughed Toni. “Let’s not miss an opportunity to practice giving in
fantasy. Michael, I wish you had a clone to run aer Kara while you watch
Jamie. Or two clones so you could have a coﬀee while the clones do all the
work.”
Michael grinned. “I’ll be ﬁrst in line when they come out. But meanwhile,
what do I do? What do you do, Toni? You’ve got twins. at would be my
nightmare.”
“Umm, thanks a lot, I guess.” Toni made a face. “It isn’t easy. I’ve
considered that leash contraption, but I’m afraid of all the dirty looks I’d get
for hooking my kids up like dogs. Really, I’m all ears for this discussion.”
“Me, too,” Maria said. “Benjamin doesn’t bolt in parking lots, but
sometimes he does go conveniently deaf when I call him. It’s not malicious.
It’s just that he walks away to explore and gets distracted.”
I thought about my oldest son, Dan. When he was three years old he was
a runner. He hated more than anything in the world to have his hand held.
In parking lots, in crowded public places, on the street—anywhere danger
lurked, he felt the urge to be unfettered. He would try to wrench away from
me, and the tighter I held, the more desperately he would struggle.

 I told the group about the time I made the mistake of taking him to see
the holiday displays at a crowded mall on a Sunday aernoon. Dan and I got
into a ferocious struggle. He wanted to roam unencumbered by my sweaty
grip, and I was petriﬁed of losing him in the crowd. I ﬁnally had to pick him
up and carry him to the car as he kicked and yelled at the top of his lungs.
He was screaming so loudly, I was afraid I’d be accused of kidnapping. I
threw him in the back seat and locked the doors while he raged. When he
was worn out enough to be handled, I belted him in and drove home. A
complete holiday outing failure.
All this is to say that sometimes, in my experience, you just have to cut
your losses and slink home with your tail between your legs. Not everything
can be solved in the moment. When safety is at stake, you gotta do what you
gotta do. But there’s always a next time, and that’s where the outlook gets
brighter. We have a sack full of tools for this problem. e ﬁrst is to manage
the environment instead of the child.
I swore oﬀ trips to the mall for a long time aer “the incident.” I took the
simple way out. Stay away from malls—environment managed, problem
solved. I also restricted myself to playgrounds that were fully fenced. But I
couldn’t stay away from the grocery store. We still had to eat! is is where
problem-solving came in handy. Here’s how our conversation went on the
topic of supermarket parking lots.
Me (acknowledging feelings): You don’t like having your hand held
in the parking lot.
Dan: Yeah!
Me: You like to be free to run.
Dan: Yeah! You squeeze my hand! And you don’t talk to me in a
friendly way.
Me (describing the problem): Oh, so you don’t like having your
hand squeezed. at can hurt. I worry about the cars hurting you.
e drivers can’t see children. It’s dangerous. at’s why I yelled. (I
show him how his head is below the window of the car, so the
driver can’t see him.)
Me (asking for ideas): What should we do so you’re safe but your
hand isn’t squeezed? Do you want to hold my shirt? Or my belt?
Do you want to hold the cart and help push?

 Dan: I can help push. But you have to talk to me in a friendly way.
Me: Okay, that’ll be great. e cart is heavy. I can use that help. And
I’ll make sure to remind you with a friendly voice.

Notice that I resisted saying that I didn’t use a “friendly” voice because he
was being horrible and trying to get himself killed, and that if he behaved I
wouldn’t be forced to yell at him. at would’ve undermined the positive
mood and endangered the peace talks.
Other parents have come up with diﬀerent ideas. One mom oﬀered her
son the dog leash. He would hook it to her belt loop so that he could pretend
she was his puppy and “walk her” to the car, making sure his “puppy” didn’t
run into traﬃc. Another suggested that the family walk like elephants,
holding each other’s “tails” (shirttails that is). One parent of four young
children had them pretend to be a choo-choo train and chug from the store
to the car, taking turns being the engine and the caboose. at’s an age-old
favorite of schoolteachers who have to move their group down the hallway
without disturbing the other classes.

e main idea is to come up with some kind of fun plan for how to get
from point A to point B safely, instead of engaging in a battle of wills. Of
course, if your kid breaks and runs you’ll have to grab him and hold fast, in
spite of the kicking and crying. And that will happen. But then you’ll have a
fresh chance to talk about it and make a new plan for the next time. It’s back
to the drawing board. “You didn’t like being grabbed, and I didn’t like being
scared I would lose you. What should we do next time?”
Your little runner will learn quickly, with a combination of your ﬁrm
refusal to compromise on safety and your good-natured oﬀer to engage him
in the solution.

 As for the child who wanders oﬀ to explore and doesn’t respond when
called, that’s a slightly diﬀerent problem. First of all, let’s get into this kid’s
head. He’s completely engrossed in a fascinating exploration. He’s following
his drive to discover new territories. ere’s nothing naughty or deﬁant here,
just human nature at work—the desire to learn. So how can we modify this
positive activity to keep him safe?
One approach is to have a problem-solving discussion ahead of time:
“You like to look around when we go to the park. Sometimes you like to
go far away. e problem is, I get worried when you don’t answer me. I get
scared that I’ll lose you. What can we do? We need ideas.”
If your child is in on the planning, it’s likely that he’ll be more
cooperative. He may enjoy a playful recall, rather than the plain old “fun’s
over” announcement. Perhaps he can come up with a secret signal—a
whistle or a special word. Kangaroo means wave at Mom and keep on
hopping around, tiger means come running back. A whistle might be
earsplitting enough to get his attention if words or gestures fail.
If he still ignores you, you’ll have to take action. “We’ll try again another
time. I have to take you home now because I don’t want to lose you.” Or, “I
have to put you in the cart for now because I don’t want to lose you in the
store.” If he is a truly determined explorer, he may need to have this
experience to see that you mean what you say.

THE STORIES
Michael’s Story: Handicapping the Race
I solved the parking lot problem. I gave Kara the choice of riding on my
shoulders like a monkey, or sitting in the stroller. As for Jamie, I put him in
charge of the whole expedition. I pretend I don’t know which way to go and
he’s in charge of leading me to the store. en I pretend I can’t remember
where I parked the car. He knows I’m faking it, but he doesn’t care. He has a
ball telling me which way to go, and it keeps him close.

Toni’s Story: Lions and Tigers and Bears

 My kids are fascinated with animals, so I tell them, “It’s a jungle out there in
the parking lot. We have to watch out for lions.” We sneak to the car,
huddling close together. I call out things like, “Possible lion behind the red
car!” e kids love it. So far they’ve wanted to play it every time. ey’re
making up more predators—dinosaurs, spiders, pythons, crocodiles, and
tigers. It’s strangely more eﬀective to give them imaginary threats than real
ones.

Maria’s Story: Happy Feet
We made up a game called Frozen Feet. We practiced at home. I tell
Benjamin to run around as fast as he can, and when I yell, “Frozen feet!” he
has to stop right away. It’s his new favorite game. Now whenever we’re out
and I need him to stop, I say, “Frozen feet!” and he stops immediately—most
of the time. If he doesn’t stop, I put him in the stroller.
I also talk a lot about the plan before we go somewhere. For example, I
took both kids to the apple festival by myself last week. I talked with
Benjamin a few times before we le. I reminded him that we were going to a
crowded place, and he would have to hold the stroller handle so I’d know
where he was. I reassured him that he’d still be able to see the animals and
play on the hay. Aer all that planning, he knew just what to do when we got
there.
Overall, I’m trying to put myself in his shoes more. I’m getting better at
combining his need to have fun with my need to keep him safe. Now I can

 leave my house without worrying, too much, that he’s going to run and
never stop. is is making a huge diﬀerence in my life as a mother!

 REMINDER: Little Runaways

1. Adjust Expectations: Manage the Environment Instead
of the Child
Avoid outings that seem like fun but will be more stress than
pleasure with a small child. ere will be plenty of opportunities
to see holiday decorations at the mall or enjoy an outdoor
concert by the river when your child is a little bit older.

2. Acknowledge Your Child’s Feelings
“You don’t like it when your hand is squeezed. You want to be
free to look around.”

3. Describe Your Own Feelings
“I worry that drivers backing out of parking spaces can’t see
children.”

4. Offer a Choice
“You can ride in the cart or you can help push.”

5. Be Playful
“We need to stick close together. It’s a jungle out there. I think I
just saw the tail of a lion behind that car!”

6. Try Problem-Solving
“Let’s think of a secret signal we can use that means we have to
get to each other as fast as possible.”

 7. Take Action Without Insult
Grab your kid and go home. “We can’t stay here. I have to watch
the baby and I’m too worried about losing sight of you by the
river.”

 12
Hitting, Pinching, Poking, Punching,
Pushing—I Barely Touched Him!
Julie
Imagine a person who pushes, punches, grabs,
kicks, and bites to get what he wants. You are
either picturing a violent criminal or a
perfectly normal two-year-old.
—Richard E. Tremblay, developmental
psychologist

Maria came in looking ﬂustered. “I’m very upset!” she announced. “I have to
tell you what happened this morning. Benjamin was sitting on the couch
with a water bottle. Isabel crawled over, pulled herself up, and reached for
the water bottle. Benjamin said, ‘No!’ but Isabel kept on grabbing. So he
casually stuck his foot into her chest and shoved her oﬀ. She went ﬂying and
hit her head on the ﬂoor. I yelled at Benjamin to go to his room, and he ran!
I spent the next ﬁeen minutes calming Isabel down. If there’s ever a time to
punish, isn’t this it?”
“I’m with you,” said Toni. “You have to draw the line somewhere. It’s one
thing when a child makes a mistake, but he deliberately hurt her. ere has
to be a consequence. He can’t be allowed to get away with that kind of
behavior.”

 “e way I see it, there already was a consequence,” I said. “His sister
cried, his mother yelled, he was sent to his room, probably feeling miserable,
and now he has a mother who is very upset with him. Not a pleasant
outcome. e question is, ‘Where do we go from here? What kind of
response will get us to our ultimate goal?’ ”
“Which is?” Toni arched an eyebrow.
“Which is an older brother who feels more tolerant of his little sister, not
more resentful. And who has options other than violence to protect himself
in the future.”
“I don’t see how leniency is going to make him behave better,” countered
Toni. “You’re just showing him that he can get away with being a bully. My
older brothers used to push me around all the time, and my parents never
said boo to them about it. ere were seven of us, and it was le to us to
work out our diﬀerences. Good for the older, stronger kids, not so nice for
the little ones.”
“I’m not suggesting that parents look the other way when one child hurts
another,” I said. “We need to let our kids know that violence is unacceptable.
e challenge is to do it in a way that will allow for loving feelings rather
than increasing resentment. at’s what will ultimately keep our kids safe
from future violence, whether as perpetrators or victims.”
e ﬁrst priority, of course, is to protect. Take action to prevent injury!
is may involve grabbing a child. e words that accompany this action are
important. We need alternatives to “bad boy” or “how could you hurt the
baby like that?” or “don’t be mean!” We need words that state your values
without attacking the child.
“Sisters are not for pushing!”
e next priority is to attend to the victim.
“Let me kiss that bump to make it feel better. Should we put ice on
it?”
But it’s not enough to simply draw a line in the sand. You want to head
trouble oﬀ at the pass so that you don’t have to trudge through all that sand

 in the ﬁrst place. What can a parent do to make a kid feel more kindly
toward a sibling and less likely to attack in the future?
We can help him make amends:
“Isabel needs something to make her feel better. Can you bring her
the teddy bear? . . . ank you, Benjamin!”
And ﬁnally we can acknowledge feelings and problem-solve for next
time:
“It’s not easy to live with a one-year-old. What can a person do when
a baby starts to crawl on them or grab their stuﬀ?”
We tell our children not to hit, but sometimes we forget to acknowledge
what a challenge that is for a youngster. It can be a great relief to a child to
know that he is engaged in one of the great aspirations of civilization—
ﬁguring out alternatives to violence!

THE STORIES
Anna’s Story: Roar Out a Warning

 Anton used to adore his little brother, but now that Luke’s two he’s getting
into Anton’s toys and Anton gets furious. He’s starting to use his ﬁsts. We
had a problem-solving session and talked about what he could do when he’s
mad enough to hit. He liked the idea of roaring like a lion. e next time
Luke toddled over to where he was playing, he put his face right next to
Luke’s and ROARED. Luke burst into tears. Yikes!
I sat down with Anton again. “We have to go back to the drawing board.
at was too scary for Luke.” We came up with the idea of roaring into a
pillow instead of into Luke’s face. Anton liked that idea, and he’s been doing
it when he gets mad. When I hear the roar I run to help him and say, “ank
you for calling me with your awesome roar!” He’s not quite ready for tea
with the queen but it’s a big step. It’s a lot better than hitting!

Maria’s Story: A Flower for Isabel
Aer our workshop I decided to try problem-solving with Benjamin. When
I told him I wanted to talk about hitting and kicking he got into his bed and
wrapped his stuﬀed monkey around his head. Clearly he was worried!
I sat on his bed and said, “I want to talk about what happened with Isabel
the other day. I know it’s not easy to live with a one-year-old. ey don’t
understand about not touching your things.”
Benjamin didn’t answer or look at me.
I kept talking. “I think you didn’t want to hurt Isabel, you just wanted to
keep her away. You didn’t mean for her to fall on her head. at was not the
plan! It must have been scary when she started crying and I started yelling.
You didn’t want that to happen.”
Benjamin moved the monkey and looked right at me. “I didn’t want that
to happen.”
“I know. You’re a brother who’s usually pretty gentle with your sister. We
need to ﬁgure out what to do when a little kid grabs your stuﬀ.”
Benjamin thought, and I waited. “I could put my monkey on her head.”
“at might make her laugh and forget about grabbing your stuﬀ. I’m
going to write that down.”
I got a piece of paper and wrote it and showed it to Benjamin. He gave a
little laugh and got up to leave. I was disappointed! I thought we were going

 to make a long list of ideas, but I guess a three-year-old doesn’t always have
much attention span. I think he was just relieved not to feel guilty anymore,
and he was ready to move on. As he walked away I called aer him,
“Remember, you can also call me to help, if you feel like hitting or pushing.”
A few minutes later he came back with a paper ﬂower he’d made in
preschool to give to Isabel to “make her feel better.”
e next day, Benjamin was on the couch again and Isabel started
crawling onto him. He called to me in a worried voice: “Mommy, move
Isabel!” A step in the right direction! Another time he was drawing with
markers and she grabbed one. He traded her for a dried-up marker, which
she was just as happy with. He’s still too rough with her sometimes, but I can
see his attitude changing. He’s thinking more about how to act around his
sister, instead of going straight to violence.

Toni’s Story: Cat Fight
I got a call from omas’s teacher. She said he hit another child during
recess and was sent to the principal’s oﬃce. He wants to be friends with
three boys who play together at recess, and I have a feeling they’ve been
trying to exclude him and omas isn’t taking the hint.
I was steaming when I ﬁrst got oﬀ the phone. I have a zero-tolerance
policy for hitting. In my mind I immediately took away his TV time, dessert,
his friend’s birthday party . . . he was going to learn! Lucky for omas, I ran
into Anna before school got out, and she talked me down.
When I got to school, the teacher came over and told me about the
incident. omas stomped out of the building. I walked out and said, “Wow!
You seem really angry right now!” He glared at me. “I am really angry . . . at
you, for talking to the teacher!”
“Oh, I see. Your teacher told me that you had a rough time at recess.” He
buried his head in my shoulder and started to cry. I said, “You’re so sad.
Something happened.”
en it all poured out. e boys said omas couldn’t play with them
because he didn’t own a cat. When he told them he had a stuﬀed-animal cat,
they said that didn’t count. And then another boy pushed him, and that’s
when omas hit him.

 I kept repeating “Oh” and “Uh-huh” and he eventually calmed down.
en he decided on his own to write an apology note for hitting!
It was very challenging for me not to come down hard on omas for
acting out like that. But if I’d followed my usual instincts, I don’t think he
would’ve told me about the cat game, or decided to apologize.

 REMINDER: Hitting, Pinching, Poking, Punching, Pushing

1. Take Action Without Insult
• Make everybody safe
“We need to separate!”
• Attend to injuries
“Let me kiss that bump. Do you want a piece of ice for your
head?”

2. Express Your Feelings Strongly
“I don’t like seeing Isabel hurt!”
“at makes me very upset!”

3. Help the Child Make Amends
“Isabel needs something to make her feel better. Can you ﬁnd
her a toy? Or do you think she’d like a strawberry?”

4. Acknowledge Feelings
“It can be very frustrating to have a little sister grabbing your
things.”
“It’s not easy to resist hitting or pushing when you’re mad!”

5. Give Information
“No pushing allowed in this house. Daddy is not allowed to
push me. You are not allowed to push your sister, and she is not

 allowed to push you. And I am not allowed to push either of you
—unless you need a push on a swing!”

6. Try Problem-Solving
“Sometimes your little sister can drive you crazy! What can a
person do when his sister is bothering him? We need ideas.”

 13
Sleep—The Holy Grail
Joanna
e ﬁrst God that puts her to sleep, I’ll convert!
—Maz Jobrani, comedian, talking about his
four-year-old daughter

“Joanna, you keep promising that you’re going to talk about sleep, and you
keep putting it oﬀ!” Toni was adamant. “Food, oxygen, shelter . . . sleep. It’s
one of the basic needs, remember?”
I had tried as hard as I could to avoid this topic. I wanted to maintain my
status as a “child whisperer” who could solve any problem my workshop
participants threw at me. I feared I would come out of this session with my
reputation at least slightly tattered. ere are no easy answers here. e holy
grail of sleep for a parent of young children oen requires a grueling quest.
I still remember the paralyzing fear I felt as a child, waking up from a
nightmare, alone in the dark. I would call out for help, literally too scared to
move. My mom or dad would shuﬄe in and take me to their bed. Ah, the
sweet relief from terror, to be safe between their warm bodies. I also have
memories of being in the kitchen in the middle of the night, with my mom
making me warm milk and honey for my sore throat. It was scary not to be
able to swallow without pain, but Mommy was there for me with her magic
potion to make it better.
I wanted to be that parent. To be heroically available to my kids in the
deep, lonely darkness of night. To save them from bad dreams and selﬂessly

 attend to their sore throats.
Once I became a parent myself, I realized that it was . . . well . . .
complicated. I adjusted my vision of the perfect parent. In my new picture,
this ﬂesh-and-blood parent needs sleep of her own to function as that
wonderful giving mom-of-the-year. It turns out that I had expected
nighttime wakening to be the exception rather than the rule, but somehow
my kids didn’t get that memo. I discovered that playing the hero on a nightly
basis wears thin fast. It doesn’t feel so much like heroism as drudgery. Or
sleep deprivation torture. Having my sleep disturbed by needy children
several times a night, or taking hours to go through the bedtime routine,
was destroying my ability to function as a reasonably pleasant person during
the day. I would ﬁnd myself waking up aer a night of many sleep
interruptions and gazing upon my children’s sweet, rosy faces with a
resentful eye and a heavy sigh.

Unfortunately, there is no one-size-ﬁts-all solution for this problem.
ere are entire books on the topic—shelves and shelves of them—that give
advice ranging from letting children cry it out, to maintaining a family bed
until the child decides on his own to sleep separately. Some parents worry
that their children will feel abandoned if they insist on independent sleeping

 arrangements. Others have strong feelings about having time to themselves
at night. It’s not easy to strike a balance between a parent’s biological
imperative to sleep and a child’s desire for unconditional twenty-four–hour
service. We wouldn’t presume to dictate where you should draw the line.
What we can do is share with you what has helped other parents and let you
ﬁgure out what’s right for you.
I asked the group for a brainstorm. “Get out your pens and pencils! We’re
going to write down what you did with your own children, what you
remember your parents doing with you as a child, what your friends or
siblings do with their kids. My goal for this session is to create a
smorgasbord of bedtime alternatives so that we can all pick and choose the
recipes that will work for our own children.”
“What, no handout for this topic?” Toni had a dangerous look in her eye.
“I come here for answers, not questions!”
I gulped. “We’re creating the handout now. Future generations will thank
us!”
I passed out paper. e group bent their heads to the task. Fieen
minutes later people were looking up and ready to share. Here are our
results.

THE STORIES
Sarah’s Story: Story of the Day
One idea that helps Jake relax at bedtime is to have him get under the covers
and then tell him e Story of Jake’s Day. It may not have the same plot twists
and illustrations as a regular bedtime storybook, but somehow it helps him
let go of the day and relax into sleep. It goes something like this: “You had a
very long and busy day. At seven o’clock in the morning you woke up. You
came into the kitchen and asked for blueberry yogurt. But there was no
yogurt! You were a little bit sad. But then you decided to have a bowl of
cornﬂakes and milk instead. A little bit of milk spilled but Jango (that’s our
dog) was very happy about that and licked it up oﬀ the ﬂoor . . .” and so on.
Jake loves hearing the details of his day so much that he forgets to protest
about getting into bed.

 Julie’s Story: Back in a Minute
When Shiriel was two and a half, she’d climb into bed without protest. But
the minute I le, she’d pop back up. She needed water, or she heard a funny
sound, or she forgot to tell me something. She wanted me to stay until she
fell asleep. I tried. I would impatiently wait for her eyelids to droop. en I’d
do the commando crawl to get out of her room, freezing at the slightest
rustle. It was not my concept of an ideal evening activity.
I read a book that advises you to insist that your child stay in bed, but you
come back to check on them at increasing intervals—ﬁve minutes, then ten
minutes, then twenty, and so on. If they cry in between you’re supposed to
ignore it. Well, I put my own twist on that one night, almost by accident.
Shiriel wasn’t ready for me to leave, but I had to go to the bathroom. So I
told her I’d be gone for just a few minutes and then I’d come back to check
on her. When I got back I was surprised to see that she was calmly waiting in
bed for me. I gave her a little back rub, then told her I needed to ﬁnish
loading the dishwasher and start it up so that we’d have clean dishes in the
morning. But I would be sure to come back to check on her as soon as I was
ﬁnished, which I did. en I told her I had to put on my own pajamas and
brush my teeth, but I’d come back to check on her aer that. By the time I
came back she was asleep!
at became our new nightly routine. I’d promise to check on her several
times and she’d stay in bed, knowing I’d be back. Better yet, she’d fall asleep
on her own. A great improvement over waiting for her to drop oﬀ and then
trying to sneak out, while she resisted sleep as hard as she could so that I
wouldn’t leave. I think it helped a lot that she could picture what I was doing
while I was gone. One time I even said that I had to leave to read a
newspaper article on the couch. A previously unthinkable indulgence!

Joanna’s Story: Bad Bunny
When Dan was two he would get very amped up at bedtime. He clearly did
not want the day to end. Sometimes it was enough to read him a story in bed
and sing a few lullabies, but at other times that didn’t do the trick. He would
deliberately thrash around in the bed, working himself out of a sleepy mood.

 I was pretty cranky by that time of night, and would tell him he had to lie
still and relax and let himself get sleepy. at never worked. It took me a
while to realize that playfulness would help here. I was not in the mood! But
I was desperate enough to try.
Dan had a stuﬀed animal, a little bunny we called Peter Rabbit. I tucked
Peter Rabbit in beside Danny, snuggled under his chin, then I made Peter
wiggle and jump up and push oﬀ the covers. I sternly scolded the bunny.
“Now Peter, it’s time for bed. You can jump around in the morning.” Peter
wiggled out of the covers again. “Peter! Danny needs his sleep! Stop that
right now! You must stop disturbing my son or he will be too tired to play
tomorrow! Danny, can you help me tuck Peter in nice and snug and tight?”
and so on.
Dan was highly amused by this drama, and would help me tuck Peter in
and calm him down with a tight hug. He got to be the parent ﬁgure in
charge of a troublesome little hyperactive creature. I think it helped him
relieve some of his own stress over making that diﬃcult transition into
slumber.

Anna’s Story: Lumpy Bed
If I can get Anton into his bed in the ﬁrst place, that’s half the battle. Once
he’s under the covers he relaxes pretty easily with stories and songs. We have
a game for this. I say, “I have to make the bed. I hope it’s not lumpy tonight.”
en Anton gets in and I start smoothing down the covers complaining
about all the lumps. I say, “I don’t know how this bed got so lumpy. Every
time I try to make it nice and smooth it bumps up again. I’m going to have
to write an email to the mattress company and complain. I’m going to try
one more time. I’ve got to smooth out this long skinny lump here!” I press
him down all over his body and he snuggles in. He likes the joke, but he also
likes the pressure. I’ve read that physical pressure helps kids who have
sensory issues to relax, and it seems to work for us.

Toni’s Story: A Bath by Any Other Name

 is isn’t exactly about sleep, but it’s about the bedtime routine. I insist the
twins take a bath every evening. If you saw how they eat dinner, sticking
their hands in their hair between bites, you’d understand. ere’s a reason I
don’t serve ﬁsh very oen! Anyway, they’re usually very resistant to bath
time because they know it’s the ﬁrst step to the end of all fun. And I get very
cranky because I know it’s only the ﬁrst step, and I have such a long road
ahead before I can rest.
Last week my mother was visiting and she oﬀered to bathe the kids. Jenna
immediately said, “No bath!” I reminded her that she had wiped mango
juice in her hair at snack time, but she wasn’t impressed. en Grandma
said, “Oh no, of course no bath. ere will be no bath under any
circumstances. Tonight we are having a slath.”
I got into the spirit and said, “Do you hear that voice? I think it’s your
bathtub.” I used my high-pitched, sad bathtub voice. “I’m so lonely up here.
No one has been in me all day. I miss Jenna and Ella.”
e girls scampered upstairs and took oﬀ their clothes. When the bath
was full, they started to climb in but their grandma said, “Oh no, you don’t
get into a slath the same way as a bath. You have to get in backward.” So the
girls turned around and backed in. I used my bathtub voice again. “I feel so
much better. It’s nice to have you to play with. ank you.”
Jenna said, “You’re welcome!”
ey washed from head to toe, got out, put their jammies on, and
climbed into bed. What a lovely night.

Michael’s Story: Picnic Breakfast
In our family we have a problem at the other end of the night. Jamie likes to
get up early. Really early! Jan and I have begged him not to come in and
wake us up before he sees the “7” on the digital clock. (We cover up the
minutes to make it easier for him.) Is that asking so much? But he comes in
anyway and climbs around on top of us while we try to ignore him. Jamie
always says he’s hungry. I ﬁgured he’s just trying for attention. Who can be
hungry at 5 o’clock in the morning?
Last Friday evening Jan had an inspiration. She asked Jamie if he wanted
a special picnic breakfast. She set out a bowl for him and let him pick the

 cereal. We put the cereal in a small container. We also ﬁlled a sippy cup with
milk and put it on the bottom shelf of the fridge. Jamie was ecstatic. e next
morning he got up and had breakfast on his own, then went to play with his
Legos until 7 o’clock. e table was a little messy, but between mess and sleep
there is no contest! Now we do it every day.

Joanna’s Story: The Power of Music
When I was a little girl I got a child’s record player for my birthday. It was
one of the best presents ever. Every night I would choose a record.
Sometimes it was music. Some of my favorites were Tom Glazer’s On Top of
Spaghetti, Pete Seeger’s Children’s Concert at Town Hall, and another
cherished album called For Kids and Just Plain Folks, which included the alltime great song that tickled my funnybone as a kid, “Be Kind to Your
Parents.” Sometimes it was a record of stories for children. I would dri to
sleep listening to those words and melodies. ey took my mind oﬀ my
particular worries—that the shadows were monsters, a robber might come
into the house, and a ﬁre could come blazing down the hallway. To this day
my brother and I can recite lines, word for word, from those recordings.

Maria’s Story: Monster Dust
Benjamin gets scared at night. I’ve learned that even the most innocent
things can set him oﬀ. His favorite space book has a page about black holes,
which he obsessed about at bedtime for weeks. We don’t read that book at
night anymore. Last week we let him watch a movie about a little mouse
who goes west. In one scene the mouse runs toward his parents in the
desert, but when he gets close it turns out they’re a mirage and they
disappear. Oh, do I regret that movie! Benjamin didn’t sleep on his own for
the next three nights, for fear we would disappear.
But even without science books and G-rated movies, we still have
monster problems. We’ve made monster repellent out of cornstarch and
glitter. We put it in a spice jar and sprinkle it in a line across the doorway for
protection. When that idea wore out, we made monster spray out of water
with a few drops of lavender oil mixed in. I also got him a feather duster to

 sweep the monsters out from under the bed. One time my husband helped
him build a wall of imaginary bricks around the bed to protect it. We even
rearranged the furniture, and that helped a lot, although I have no idea why.
We have to keep changing it up, but the main idea is that part of the bedtime
routine involves monster management.
I used to tell him that monsters don’t exist, and he would say, “I know!
But I’m still scared of them!” It works better to take his worries seriously. It’s
more comforting because it makes him feel like we’re on the same team—a
monster management team.
• • •
I was pretty excited. We had produced a rich stew of ideas. But there’s no
telling whether any of them will work for any particular child. Problemsolving is a useful tool if none of these prepackaged ideas do the trick.
Here’s how it might go:
Step 0. Find a Peaceful Time to Talk with your child (not at
bedtime).
Step 1. Acknowledge Feelings

“It’s not easy to get used to sleeping by yourself.”
“You really like having us lie down with you until you fall asleep.”
“Even though part of you knows that Mommy needs to sleep, it’s
really, really hard to resist waking her up.”
“It’s no fun to be the only one awake in the night.”
“It can be scary to lie alone in the dark.”
See if your child will talk about how she feels. Reﬂect back what she says.
“Oh, so your toys can look like monsters in the dark.” If she doesn’t want to
talk, you might tell a story about how you were afraid of the dark when you
were little. It could be comforting for her to know that her parents had such
fears, too.
f

 Step 2. Describe the Problem (Briefly!)

“is is a really tough problem. You don’t like to be alone when you
wake up at night, and Mommy and Daddy need to sleep in their own
bed so they can have energy in the morning.”
Step 3. Ask for Ideas

“We need ideas. What can a person do in a situation like this?”
“What helps put you in a sleepy mood?”
“What can you do when you wake up and have trouble going back to
sleep?”
Write down all ideas without judgment—even the most outrageous ones.
(“Buy a pet monkey to sleep with me.”) In case you need help getting your
creative juices ﬂowing, here are some suggestions that other parents have
used successfully.
• Keep a picture book of vehicles by the bed to look through.
• Make a special recording of favorite songs or stories that she can
listen to in bed.
• Get a special doll or stuﬀed animal to cuddle
• Acquire a night-light to stave oﬀ fears of the dark.
• Rearrange sleeping accommodations so that the child shares a
room with a sibling at night.
• Make three “get out of bed” cards for when she “really, really”
needs you, so she doesn’t feel stuck. She can help make them.
• Make a recording of Mom or Dad reading a story to her so she
can hear your actual voice when she’s alone in bed.
• Make a list of special activities that your child can do on her own
in the morning before you wake up. Make a special supply box
for the activities.
• Hang a two-sided sign on your door that she helps make:
“SLEEPING PARENTS” on one side, and “COME IN!” on the
other.

 ere is one very signiﬁcant caveat to this whole problem-solving process
when it comes to the epic bedtime battle. In my experience, no matter how
creative you are, it is extremely diﬃcult to compete with the powerful draw
of a cozy, parent-ﬁlled bed. You may very well ﬁnd that your child will be
willing to consider problem-solving alternatives only if the primary prize is
oﬀ the table. If you are truly dedicated to defending your sleep space, you
may have to draw a ﬁrm line in the sand, and take action to let your child
know you mean business. It is likely that tears will be shed!
at’s a deal-breaker for many of our workshop parents. ey prefer to
come up with some kind of compromise such as getting a bigger bed, adding
a “sidecar” to the parental bed, or providing a small mattress on the ﬂoor of
a parent’s bedroom for nighttime wanderers. If you are comfortable with
those solutions, more power to you.
For me, those compromises felt like too much of a sacriﬁce. I treasured
the few hours at night that I was not on duty. So did my husband! Once my
children got past the baby stage and were able to make it through the night
without nursing, I was ready to reclaim my bed. One motivator was that my
ﬁrstborn took the classic H position at night—head toward one parent and
feet toward the other—and energetically kicked his way through his dreams.
I was waking up in the morning feeling grumpy and resentful. It wasn’t good
for my sanity, and it wasn’t good for my relationship with my children,
either.

 If you crave a child-free space at night, please don’t feel guilty. We believe
that the right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness includes the
pursuit of a good night’s sleep. e mother (and father!) ship must survive if
the crew is to thrive. ink of it as giving your children the gi of a wellrested parent and protecting them from the dangers of the zombie caretaker.
We’re not suggesting that any parent can expect a perfect night’s sleep 365
days a year, but it is possible to create an environment where night duty is
the exception rather than the rule.
Here’s what taking action without insult might look like at night:

THE STORIES
Sarah’s Story: Parents Have Feelings, Too
I can’t bear the thought of letting my children “cry it out.” But I have learned
to act a little more displeased at having my sleep interrupted. I used to lead
Mia back to bed and go through the whole tucking in, cuddling, and singing
rigmarole each time. at led to endless wake-up calls. I ﬁnally started
expressing my feelings strongly. “Mommy needs to sleep! I don’t like waking
up in the night! At night we stay in our own beds.” I put her back in, gave a
brief smoothing of the covers, and went back to my own bed quickly.
e other thing I stopped doing was letting her crawl into bed with me in
the middle of the night and stay there. I used to complain but not actually
move to evict her. My sleepy brain tells me to avoid getting up at all costs.
But I can’t get a restful sleep with her wriggling around next to me. In the

 long run, it’s worth it to get up and put her back in her own bed. Aer a
week of forcing myself to get up and lead her back to bed, she stopped
coming in—most of the time.

Joanna’s Story: A Dark, Dark Night
ree-year-old Danny was in a playful mood. He ﬁgured out that getting up
again and again aer bedtime was a pretty good game. No matter how ﬁrmly
I spoke to him, he popped up again ﬁve or ten minutes later, giggling. Aer
the fourth time I realized that it was going to be a very long night unless I
changed my tactics. e ﬁh time, he popped up to ﬁnd himself in a
decidedly non-fun environment. e house was dark, the door to his
parents’ bedroom was locked. He cried and pounded on the door. I yelled
through the closed door in a grumpy voice, “I need to sleep!”
He yelled back, “Let me in!”
“No! I’m tired. I need to sleep!”
He cried harder. I called out, “You run back to your bed and I’ll come
tuck you in.”
Dan ran back to his bed. I got up and tucked him in. I sympathized
brieﬂy. “It’s not easy to stay in bed at night! e problem is, I have to sleep.
We’ll play tomorrow.” I opened the doors between our bedrooms again.
Peace reigned in the kingdom for the rest of the night.
• • •
Not all crying is harmful. In fact, if we managed to protect our kids from
every occasion that might cause tears, they probably wouldn’t be
emotionally healthy. Getting through hard times with the support and
empathy of parents can make a child stronger. Sometimes our role is to
provide sympathy without giving in to a child’s demand, whether that
demand is to have candy for breakfast or to keep a parent up all night.
Neither one is healthy.
Many parents have found that they have to go through a painful period of
“standing their ground” before problem-solving and other methods work for
them. Make no mistake, shared problem-solving is still meaningful. You can
take heart in the conviction that by problem-solving you are asking your

 child to participate in conquering a very diﬃcult challenge, rather than
arbitrarily abandoning him to weep in the dark.
And then there are those times it seems best to gracefully give in (at least
temporarily).

Michael’s Story: All Together Now
When Kara was born, Jamie was just barely two years old. He had been
sleeping in his own room, but aer Kara arrived he started having night
fears. He wasn’t so happy about having a new baby sister. As much as we
tried to reassure him, it was true that he was getting less attention. Here was
this noisy little invader in Mommy’s arms. And that was just during the day.
At night, the three of us—Mom, Dad, and Kara—were in one room, and
Jamie was all by himself in another, like an outcast, banished from the rest of
the family. It was no use explaining that he had shared our bed when he was
a baby. at was ancient history to him. We didn’t try any of these other
techniques because we didn’t know about that back then. So I can’t say if
they would’ve helped. What we did do was to put a mattress on our ﬂoor so
that he could come and sleep in our bedroom.
When Kara was six months old we moved her into Jamie’s room, got
Jamie a new “grown-up” bed, put up mobiles and posters of dogs and ﬁsh
and trucks, and generally made a big deal about them having their own
special room together. Two kids in one room and two parents in the other.
Nobody was alone. At that point Jamie was ready for it. And even though he
still sometimes resented his sister during the day, he liked having her there
with him at night.

 REMINDER: Sleep

1. Acknowledge Feelings
“Sometimes it isn’t easy to fall asleep. It can be scary to lie in bed
in the dark.”

2. Be Playful
“I need to smooth out these terrible lumps in your bed!” (Press
down on legs and arms of child.)

3. Try Problem-Solving
“Let’s see what ideas we can come up with for staying in your
bed at night. A special night-light? A picture book by your bed?
A recording of songs or stories?”

4. Take Action Without Insult
“Mommy and Daddy need to sleep! I’m putting you back in your
bed. We’ll play in the morning.”

 14
When Parents Get Angry!
Julie
You can learn many things from children. How
much patience you have, for instance.
—Franklin P. Jones

“e truth is I’m having my doubts about this whole approach,” Anna began.
“It’s not that I don’t believe these tools are worthwhile. But I’m never going
to be able to remember to use them in the moment. When I get really angry
at Anton, all I want to do is smack him. I don’t even want to try to think of a
tool from the workshop. I just don’t care! I’m sorry, but I don’t have the right
temperament to stay calm enough to do this.” Anna slumped in her seat.
“Don’t be sorry, Anna.” Maria looked down as she spoke. “I’ve been
thinking the same thing. e other day I was so furious at Benjamin for
intentionally kicking Isabel. I screamed at him, ‘What is wrong with you?
How can you be so hateful? I don’t care what she did to you, I don’t want to
hear it. Get out of my sight! I don’t even want to be your mother anymore.’
I’m too embarrassed to tell you any more details.”
I am reminded of a Refresher meeting of my ﬁrst long-term group. We
always went around the room with a ﬁve-minute check-in about how we
were doing. When it was my turn, I shared with the group how furious I was
with Asher. He had been such a horror that morning, mercilessly teasing his
brother, that I was ready to give him away. Did anyone want an extra ﬁveyear-old?

 I worried the group might lose faith in me aer my confession. Instead
they were relieved to hear I was human. ey had imagined that I was
inﬁnitely patient and never got angry with my kids. at day I discovered a
common misperception about this approach. Parents assume they should be
able to remain calm and in control at all times. I have yet to meet a parent
who ﬁts that description. And I’m not sure I even want to meet a parent who
ﬁts that description! at person would be an automaton, not a real human
being.
“Anna and Maria, thank you for sharing your dark feelings. e reality is
that normal, loving parents get angry at their kids—even downright rageful.
Let’s go back to the foundation of this approach. All feelings can be accepted,
some actions must be limited. at truth must apply to us as well as to our
kids. e challenge is to notice and accept our own violent feelings, and at
the same time limit our actions so we do no harm. Or, if we do cause harm,
the challenge is to reconnect with our children once we’ve recovered.”
Maria ventured, “I’ve read that you’re supposed to take deep breaths, or
count to ten, or do jumping jacks when you get really mad at your kids.”
“ose things are probably helpful, but the idea that I should try to calm
myself down when I’m angry makes me feel irritable! When I get mad I
don’t want to calm down. It can actually be confusing for children to have
their parents talk to them calmly when the kids can tell that they’re furious.
Talk about mixed messages!”
When I’m angry my voice gets loud. Fortunately for me, there are plenty
of great ways to be loud without doing psychological damage. Stick with the
tools. is is where they really come in handy.
Say it with a word. When I’m driven into a frenzy by dawdling kids
(and my gentler tools of playfulness and oﬀering choices to get them into the
car have failed) I yell, “CAR!!!” with all my frustration packed into that
word. Chances are the word car, even delivered at top volume, will not cause
lasting damage to the psyche.

 If one word is not enough, you can direct your fury into giving
information. You can roar, “BROTHERS ARE NOT FOR KICKING!!!”
You can express your feelings strongly. Use the word I instead of
you. “I GET VERY UPSET WHEN I SEE A BABY BEING PINCHED!!!”
You can describe what you see. “I see people getting hurt!!!”
You can take action. “I can’t allow sand throwing! WE ARE
LEAVING!!!”
None of these words wound. ey don’t tell a child he is mean or
worthless or unloved. ey do let him know that his parent is past all
patience. And they model a healthy way to express anger and frustration
without attack.
Of course, being yelled at by a furious parent can be an upsetting
experience in itself. at can’t be the end of the story. It’s important to
reconnect aer the intensity of anger has abated. Our kids need to know
there is a way back into our good graces and a better way to go forward. at
can start with acknowledging feelings all around. “at was no fun.
You didn’t like getting yelled at. And I was really mad about ___ (insert your
gripe here).”
en you can go on to plan what to do next time, or help your child make
amends. A problem-solving session on how to get out of the house in the
morning may be helpful. He can make amends to his brother by ﬁnding a
colorful Band-Aid to place on the hurt spot. He may need to talk about what
makes him mad at the baby. It’s all part of the valuable work of growing up—
learning what makes people angry, learning what to do aerward. An angry
parent provides crucial feedback in the art of human relations.

 “Don’t you think you can overdo it, though? I don’t think a lot of yelling
is good for the kids, no matter what the words are,” Maria said. “My mother
was a yeller. It felt like we were living with a ticking time bomb. My brother
and I were always tiptoeing around in fear of her next explosion.”
I had to agree. People do get angry, people do blow up, and the How to
Talk tools oﬀer a safer way to release the pressure. But if you feel like you’re
losing control of yourself, if the kids are getting scared by your frequent
outbursts, then it may be a good idea to get outside support. ere’s no
shame in ﬁnding a therapist or counselor who can help you ﬁgure out
alternative ways to relieve your stress. You’ll be doing right by yourself and
your children.
Anna nodded. “Okay, but before we all go into therapy, can we take a few
minutes to share what people in this group do when we feel like we’re
heading for an explosion? I wouldn’t mind a few free tips.”
“I yell, ‘I feel like hitting! You better get out of here!’ ” Toni said. “Later I
call my sister and tell her about it. She’ll commiserate with me, tell me her
kids are at least as bad as mine. You might think I could just talk to my
husband, but he’s one of those guys who’s always trying to make suggestions
and ﬁx the situation. I’m not ready for that! My sister, she’ll let me rant. I do
the same for her.”
Maria spoke next. “If my husband is home, I go for a run around the
block. Two or three if I’m really in a rage. ere’s something about fresh air
and being able to move that helps me calm down.”

 “I wish I had a partner to take over for me once in a while,” Anna said. “I
can’t leave the kids alone and go for a walk. I lock myself in the bathroom
and curse under my breath. e kids bang on the door and beg me to come
out. At least I know they’re safe, but the door does take a beating.”
“Aer my third kid was born there was a period where I was irritated and
overwhelmed all the time,” Sarah said. “I ﬁnally went to a therapist. It helped
me get some insight into what was setting me oﬀ. I still get mad of course,
but I don’t feel like it’s out of control, and there are plenty of good times in
between. Coming to this group has really helped me, too. Sometimes when
one of my kids does something awful, I’ll think to myself, ‘I can’t wait to tell
the group about this.’ It’s nice to know you guys will get it. I know we’re
going to end up laughing about it.”
Michael cleared his throat. “I have to admit that I tend to lose my temper
if I haven’t gotten enough sleep or if I get too hungry. When I say it out loud
it sounds pretty obvious, but it’s so easy to stay up late to do one more thing.
And I’m like that with food, too. Sometimes I don’t notice I’m hungry until
I’m literally growling at the kids.”
“anks for making that point, Michael. Sometimes we’re so focused on
managing the kids we forget to take care of ourselves. Like they say on the
airplanes—in an emergency, ‘Put on your own oxygen mask ﬁrst before
helping others.’ Self-sacriﬁce is not useful here! On that note, let’s wrap this
up so we can all go home and get some food and sleep.”

THE STORIES
Joanna’s Story: You Had to Be There
When my mother and her coauthor ﬁnished writing Liberated Parents,
Liberated Children, she sent a copy to an author whom she greatly admired.
He was an observant and creative teacher of children who had written
several deeply moving books about his experiences. He responded that he
could not recommend her book. He was appalled by the description of
parental anger toward their precious young charges. He had spent a lifetime
working with children, some of them very troubled, with diﬃcult behavior

 problems. He could neither imagine nor excuse such violent feelings toward
helpless, innocent children.
In all of my parenting workshops, when loving, caring, dedicated parents
read that section on anger, they come alive. “I loved that chapter!” “It made
me feel so much better about myself.” “It was the most helpful thing I’ve ever
read in a parenting book!” I’ve never once heard a parent who is shocked by
the depiction of parental rage in Liberated Parents, Liberated Children.
is author was not a parent himself. I can only conclude that you have
to have experienced the intense and relentless frustration of being in charge
of these precious, sweet, unruly, and infuriating little beings twenty-four
hours a day, seven days a week, to truly understand the anger an otherwise
loving parent can feel.

Joanna’s Story: A Mountain of Trouble
It was a bitterly cold winter day and I was stuck indoors, trying to entertain
two-and-a-half-year-old Dan and six-month-old Sam in the living room.
Dan was determined to conquer a mountain. If the mountain would not
come to Dan, Dan must create his own. He dragged his rocking horse into
the living room and hoisted it up on top of the coﬀee table. He went into his
bedroom and dragged out his toddler chair. He reached up and managed to
get the chair on top of the horse, balanced on three of the four legs. en he
started to climb.
I grabbed his arm as the whole crazy structure teetered and wobbled.
Dan determinedly wrenched himself away from me and headed back up to
his homemade summit. No skills came to mind. I didn’t accept feelings, give
choices, or give him his wishes in fantasy. I simply reacted in alarm: “No!
No! NO!” en I grabbed the chair and horse, undoing his grand design.
Dan was outraged. He cried and kicked me, making a solid connection with
my shin. Ow! Now I was outraged. I grabbed him hard and held him at arm’s
length, yelling, “Hey, no kicking! at hurts!”
He yelled back, “Stop it!” and continued to struggle and kick.
I shouted furiously, “I won’t let you hurt me!” I disentangled myself from
Dan, picked up the baby, who was now crying, too, and stormed into my
bedroom, locking the door behind me.

 Dan was frantic. He kicked at the door and screamed, “Let me in! Let me
in!”
“No, I won’t! I don’t want to be kicked!”
“Let me in . . . let me in . . . let me in! I won’t kick you!”
“Okay, I’ll let you in if you don’t kick me.”
I opened the door and Dan fell into my arms, sobbing. e baby was still
crying. We all got into bed together. Dan snuggled up to me and put his arm
around baby Sam. “Evyboby ty-yi-ing,” he snuﬄed.
“Yes, everybody’s crying,” I agreed. We pulled the covers up to our necks
and snuggled. We were cozy together in our sadness. Aer a little while we
got up and went to get a snack.
ere was conﬂict. ere was violence. A child struck out. A mother
protected herself and loudly insisted on her rights without striking back. e
family reconnected and loving feelings returned. Soon we’ll have to talk
about how much fun it is to climb, and we’ll ﬁgure out some safer challenges
for Dan. at’s life with little kids. Kicking and screaming is part of the
territory.

Julie’s Story: Road Rage
I got the call that my grandmother passed away in the aernoon, but I
couldn’t get a ﬂight out to the East Coast for the funeral until the next day. I
didn’t have the heart for cooking dinner, so I decided to take the kids out for
pizza. But the car ride turned into a nightmare. Rashi whined that he wanted
to listen to Raﬃ. Asher told him that Raﬃ is for babies.
Rashi insisted, “I’m not a baby!”
Asher said, “Yes, you are a baby. You listen to baby music.”
ey went back and forth. Rashi started to cry, and my feeble “Hey, hey!”
had no eﬀect.
I couldn’t think straight. I couldn’t draw up a single tool. I was paralyzed
by grief and furious with Asher for taunting Rashi.
I parked the car, and Asher decided to climb into the front seat and
search my glove compartment for more “mature” music. I felt a sudden,
overwhelming urge to slam the glove compartment on Asher’s little ﬁngers. I

 caught myself in time, but the feeling of wanting to hurt him was so
powerful, it scared me.
I learned from that day. When extremely upset, don’t get in the car with
little kids and drive them around for pizza! Take care of your own emotional
needs if you can. In retrospect I should’ve said, “Kids, I’m very sad tonight. I
can’t go driving. It’s cereal and milk for dinner.”

 REMINDER: When Parents Get Angry!

A. In the moment, if you must yell, use your tools . . . LOUDLY!

1. Say It in a Word
“CAR!!!”

2. Give Information
“BROTHERS ARE NOT FOR KICKING!!”

3. Describe How You Feel
“I GET VERY UPSET WHEN I SEE A BABY BEING
PINCHED!!”

4. Describe What You See
“I SEE PEOPLE GETTING HURT!!”

5. Take Action without Insult
“I can’t allow sand throwing! WE ARE LEAVING!!”
B. When the moment has passed and everyone’s safe, take care of yourself.
Do whatever works best for you: run around the block; take deep
breaths; take a time-out for yourself (lock yourself in another room); call
a friend and vent; email a friend; write in a journal; hug a dog; turn on
your favorite music; attend to your own basic needs—sleep and food. . . .
C. Reconnect and try problem-solving.

 “at was no fun. You didn’t like getting yelled at. And I was
really mad about being late. What can we do next time?”
D. Seek help if you feel the anger is too much.

 15
Troubleshooting—When the Tools Don’t
Work
Joanna

“I hope you won’t take this the wrong way,” Toni started, “but sometimes
these tools just don’t work for me. Maybe my kids are more strong-willed
than yours. Or I’m not patient enough. But I thought if I used these tools, I
could get my kids to listen. Your examples and stories all sound very sweet
and amazing, but real life doesn’t always have a happy ending. At least not in
my family.
“Take the other day, for example. Jenna wanted to go to her friend
Megan’s house. I had to pick up omas from soccer practice and then make
dinner. I just didn’t have time. I was sympathetic, at least at ﬁrst. I oﬀered
her a choice: ‘You can play at Megan’s tomorrow, or this Saturday.’ She
started crying. ‘It has to be today! You have to take me!’

 “I gave her information: ‘I have to pick up omas and make dinner. I
don’t have time to take you to Megan’s and back.’ I tried putting her in
charge: ‘What do you want to do instead?’ Nothing helped. If anything, I was
making it worse. Finally, I couldn’t take anymore whining and weeping, so I
put her in her room and shut the door.”
It’s frustrating when you go out of your way to respond to a distressed
child with skill and caring, and it doesn’t help. It can make you doubt
yourself or doubt the whole approach. What’s the point of all this if it doesn’t
lead to cooperative kids?

When “Engaging Cooperation” Tools Don’t Work
“When I ﬁnd myself hitting a wall, my mantra is, ‘When in doubt, go
back to acknowledging feelings.’ You might try saying, ‘is is
terrible. You don’t want to go to Megan’s house another day. You want to go
right now! I wish I could take you.’
“ere’s no guarantee that the storm clouds will li immediately. is
disappointment might be the last straw in a pile of frustrations that have
built up over the day. She might need to stomp around or sob on your
shoulder before she can ﬁnally let go of it.”
Toni sighed. “It’s true, I didn’t think to acknowledge what she wanted in
words. I thought that by giving her information, and oﬀering a choice and
trying to problem-solve, I did acknowledge what she wanted. is is too
hard. I’ll never get it right.”
“Hey,” I said, “you got a lot right. You didn’t add insult to injury. You also
didn’t cave in and teach her that she could get what she wanted by whining.
You held your ground. I can guarantee you’ll get another chance to practice
acknowledging feelings when the cooperation tools aren’t working.”

When Empathy Seems to Make a Child Feel Worse
“But what about when you empathize with a child, and even that makes
things worse?” Sarah asked. “e teacher told me Sophia had a conﬂict at
school. When I picked her up I said, ‘I heard you and Janelle had a ﬁght.’ Her
eyes teared up. I said, ‘at can be so upsetting,” and she started to cry. She

 told me Janelle wouldn’t sit with her at lunch or let her play dress-up with
the other girls. e more I said things like, ‘Oh, wow! at’s so hard!’ and
‘at didn’t feel good. at’s not what you expect from a friend!’ the more
she sobbed. I eventually had to leave her crying by herself so I could start
dinner.”
Sometimes it can seem as if you made a child feel worse by naming her
painful feelings. What’s going on?
“Let’s try it on ourselves,” I suggested. “Imagine that your grandmother
died last week. e two of you were very close. You try to put it out of your
mind and hold yourself together so you can function at work. en you run
into a dear friend who says, ‘I was so sorry to hear about your grandmother.
You two had such a special relationship.’ You feel your defenses start to
crumble and your eyes well up. Your friend gives you a hug and says, ‘You
miss her.’ e tears spill over and you start to cry.
“Did what she said make you feel worse?”
“I think I’d feel better to ﬁnally let the sadness out,” Sarah said, “and to
have somebody know how I feel.”
“What if aer a few minutes your friend said to you, ‘Well, she was old.
You can’t be sad all night. You have to get over it, so let’s go bowling.’ ”
Everyone groaned. “Okay, I get it,” Sarah said. “Just because we say the
‘right thing’ to our children doesn’t mean they’re going to cheer up on our
time line. It’s stressful to have a sad kid. I guess it’s hard to accept that we
can’t instantly heal every wound.”
Toni looked skeptical. “So you’re saying we have to keep empathizing for
hours and hours until they’re ready to move on? at’s exactly what I don’t
have patience for. Especially since we’re usually talking about missed
playdates, not dead grandmothers.”
If your patience runs thin or you run out of time, you can take care of
your own needs without blaming the child. Instead of, “Come on now, that’s
enough crying. is isn’t so terrible,” you can say, “I see how sad you are. I
need to start making dinner now. Come to the kitchen and keep me
company when you feel like it.”

When a Child Gets Mad at You for Naming His Feelings

 “But what about when your child actually gets mad at you for accepting his
feelings?” Anna asked. “I’ll give you an example. Anton has a love-hate
relationship with Legos. He adores them, but his ﬁne motor control is not
very good, so he can get enormously frustrated. He moans and cries and
throws things when something he’s been working on falls apart. If I try to
acknowledge his feelings by saying something like, ‘at is so frustrating,’ or
‘You look mad,’ he gets enraged with me. He’ll actually yell, ‘DON’T SAY
THAT!’ It’s like I’m rubbing salt in his wounds. He doesn’t want to talk about
feelings.”
When acknowledging feelings isn’t helping, here are a few things to
check:
Are you matching the emotion with your tone of voice, or are you just
phoning it in? No child (or adult for that matter) wants to hear a calm,
syrupy singsong, “Oh, you are frustrated,” when he’s extremely agitated. You
have to say it like you mean it.
“at’s SO FRUSTRATING!”
And don’t forget, you’re not limited to simply labeling the feeling. ere
are other ways to let a child know that you’re getting it. A sympathetic grunt
can be comforting:
“Ugh!” “Mmph.”
If that’s not enough you can put a child’s thoughts into words:
“Stupid Legos!”
“Someone should invent bricks that will actually stick together when
you put them together!”
“You didn’t want that to happen!”
Sometimes it helps to tell the story of what happened:
“You worked hard on that. You almost had it! You got all the big blue
bricks together to make the base. And all the little red bricks for the

 lights. And you put the alien with a laser on the top. It was almost
ready to ﬂy to Mars. And then it exploded! Darn it!”
And sometimes the best approach is to say nothing!
ere are times when children prefer to be le alone, without any
interference at all, even when they’re struggling. Children (and adults) don’t
always appreciate a running commentary about how they’re feeling. Keep in
mind that kids will cry, tempers will ﬂy (as will toys and juice cups). We can’t
shield our children from all distress, nor should we. ey can’t learn how to
handle adversity without wrestling with it a bit.

When a Child Needs Help Climbing Out of a Pit of Despair
“Okay, but what about when the histrionics are truly out of proportion to
the problem?” Toni asked. “Aren’t we in danger of encouraging a child to
wallow in self-pity? What will happen to a kid out in the real world if she’s
used to endless sympathy at home? She’s not going to get that from a teacher
with twenty-ﬁve kids in a class.”
“I can relate to that,” I said. “I worried about that very problem with my
second child. e thing is, what seems like a minor inconvenience to us can
feel like a monumental disappointment to a kid. We can’t simply talk them
out of their feelings or explain them down to smaller proportions. But there
are other ways to help a child climb out of his pit of despair. Let me tell you
about Dan and Sam.

 A Tale of Two Brothers
My ﬁrstborn son would cheer up almost immediately when his feelings were
acknowledged. He fell oﬀ the swing, banged his head, and broke the plow oﬀ
his precious tractor that he was holding in his hand (probably the reason he
fell in the ﬁrst place). “Oh dear, that hurts. Let’s give your head a kiss. Poor
little broken tractor, it’ll need some glue.” e tears instantly dry, the clouds
clear, and the sun shines again. Dan is on to the next misadventure.
In contrast, my second son oen needed help to change gears. Sam would
cry so long and so hard when he got hurt that I used to worry about what
would happen when he went oﬀ to school. What teacher would have the
patience for his particular extended time line of misery?
I remember once when Sam scraped his knee and cried for such a long
time, I wondered if he had broken a bone. But knowing Sam I decided to
wait it out. Finally he seemed ready to move on. He said he was hungry and
happily munched on the apple I oﬀered. Five minutes later, he looked down
at his knee and started crying anew. I was exasperated. “Sam, you don’t have
to keep crying when it doesn’t hurt anymore!”
Sam was outraged. He mustered all the scorn a misunderstood threeyear-old can muster and replied, “Just because it doesn’t hurt, doesn’t mean I
can stop crying!”

 • • •
One thing I learned from having a child who held on to both physical and
emotional pain was that it isn’t always enough to just acknowledge feelings.
You may have to carve some steps into the sidewall of that pit they’re in, so
that they can see a way to climb out.
“Let me give you a special kiss. You can add your own kiss if you want to.”
(Sam liked getting involved in the healing.)
“Which Band-Aid should we put on it? e plain one or the one with the
dinosaur?”
“It sure is a good thing that our skin knows how to ﬁx itself. Your body is
busy making new skin cells to patch up that scrape. How long do you think
it will take to completely heal? ree days? Four?”
is mixture of kisses, choices, and information helped Sam see his way
back to good cheer. And by the time he went oﬀ to kindergarten, to my
relief, he was able to do it for himself. But before he did, there were plenty
more occasions for me to hone my tools for the despairing child.

Popcorn on the Pavement
On another tragic occasion, Sam spilled his popcorn onto the pavement of
the parking lot as he was getting into the car. I gave him the classic response,
“Oh, how disappointing. You were looking forward to eating that. You didn’t
want that to happen!”
Sam sobbed harder. I tried to engage him in a conversation about what
snacks we should make when we got home. He was not interested in
considering any replacement for his terrible loss. Finally I ventured, “Well,
this is really sad and annoying for you. But I know someone who is actually
very happy about that spilled popcorn.”
Sam’s curiosity got the better of him. “Who?” he demanded.
“ere is a squirrel who is extremely excited to see all that free popcorn.
Right now he’s probably running to tell his family and friends the good
news, and they’re all going to have a big party with that popcorn. Maybe
they’ll invite the chipmunks, too. Bad for us, but good for them!”
Sam smiled to think of the squirrel party. “Bad for us, but good for them,”
he repeated emphatically.

 Sam has grown up to be a philosophical young man with a ﬁne
appreciation of life’s ironies. I can’t help but think it may have started with
the squirrels.

• • •
“Okay. I get it,” Toni said. “Sometimes my problem is I’m using the wrong
tool. And sometimes I need to be more patient with the tools I have. But
aren’t there times when these tools just plain aren’t going to work?”
It would be nice if we had a tool that was guaranteed to swily convert
misery to cheer, no matter what the circumstance. We would win a Nobel
Peace Prize! (How’s that for giving in fantasy what I can’t give in reality?) But
we may lose something along the way. Kids are not programmable robots.
Before they can grow up to be kind, thoughtful, self-directed beings, they’re
going to have to learn how to manage a range of emotions and experiences,
including great sadness and disappointment. at’s bound to include some
wailing and gnashing of teeth. It’s all part of being human.

THE STORIES
Maria’s Story: Bathroom Boycott

 I was getting my kids ready for bed the other night. Sometimes Benjamin
resists going to the bathroom. Either he wakes me up in the middle of the
night, which I don’t appreciate, or else he doesn’t, and we have a mess to
clean up in the morning.
I decided to oﬀer him a choice. “Do you want to use the hall bathroom,
or the one in my bedroom?”
His response? “No! I am not going to the bathroom!”
I tried a diﬀerent choice, along with some information: “Benjamin, you
have to pee before you go to bed so the sheets don’t get wet during the night.
Do you want to go alone, or do you want me to come in with you?”
“I AM NOT GOING TO THE BATHROOM EVER AGAIN!”
Wow, I used my tools, and the problem got worse. is was looking a lot
like failure.
en I thought, ere must be something else going on. I remembered that
when in doubt, we’re supposed to go back to acknowledging feelings, but I
didn’t know what those feelings were.
I said to Benjamin, “ere’s something about going to the bathroom
tonight that you really don’t like.”
In response, he stuck out his arms to show me his new dinosaur tattoos.
He looked very sad and said, “I don’t want them to wash oﬀ.”
So that was it! “Oh, I see. ey’re very special to you. How about we wrap
your arms with towels while you wash your hands so your tattoos won’t get
wet?” He liked that plan and happily went to use the bathroom.

Michael’s Story: Camp Nostalgia
Sunday night I told Jamie that he’d be starting a new camp in the morning.
He started screaming and crying. Instead of trying to convince him that it
would be great—which is what I usually would have done—I just kept
reﬂecting his feelings for what seemed like forever.
Me: You don’t like that idea. You don’t want to start a new camp.
Jamie: No! I’m not going!
Me: You wish you could go back to Adventure Camp! You loved that
camp!

 (at was his old camp, which he really loved, but it was over.)
Jamie: Yeah!
Me: I bet you wish you could go to Adventure Camp forever and
ever! ey should never have closed that camp!
Jamie: Yeah! ey should have it for the whole summer!
(At this point he was still crying, and he climbed into my lap.)
Me: And then you would never have to go to a new camp. You would
always know what to expect, and you would always have a great
time, and you would always have Tom for a counselor.
Jamie: And Andy would be there, too.
Me: It can feel scary going to a new camp. You don’t know who’s
going to be there. You don’t know what to expect.
Jamie (crying, nods his head): Mm-hmm.
Aer twenty minutes of this, I really wanted to say, “Okay, now you’re done.”
It certainly seemed like the more I accepted his feelings the more he would
cry. But I stuck with it, mostly so I could tell you it didn’t work. Aer about
half an hour he said, “Okay, I don’t want to talk about this anymore.” He
didn’t seem to feel better, just tired.
But the next day, when we got to his new camp, he ran oﬀ with his
counselor as soon as we got there. I guess he really just needed to have a
good cry about his favorite camp ending.

Joanna’s Story: Candy Clamor
As the youngest of three, Zach was usually happy to go with the ﬂow. Heck,
he had two attentive older brothers, three dogs, and a kitten. ere was
always lots of excitement and distraction. Hardly ever a reason to stay upset
about anything. Except for C.A.N.D.Y.
When Zach was two and a half, he was old enough to go trick or treating
with the big kids on Halloween. Sure, last year he rode on his mom’s
shoulders dressed as a Dalmatian to match his dog (who was also dressed as
a Dalmatian, with painted-on spots) but that didn’t count. is was real. He
had a bag full of sweets collected through his own eﬀorts.

 He was shocked the next day to learn that there were restrictions
attached. I explained that while candy is delicious, it isn’t good for your body
if you eat too much at a time. e boys agreed that two pieces a day would
be reasonable. ree if they were small. We put the bags in the cabinet above
the refrigerator so they wouldn’t be tempting and they’d be out of reach of
the dogs.
Zach agreed with this protocol in theory. But it turned out that a day was
longer than he had thought. Whenever the word candy was mentioned (and
it was mentioned a lot aer Halloween) Zach got a powerful urge to have
that candy in his mouth—even if he had already consumed the agreed-upon
amount. When crying didn’t work, he upped his game to kicking and
screaming.
Accepting feelings didn’t seem to make a dent. Neither did giving in
fantasy: “It would be nice to have a mother who wasn’t so fussy about food!
One of those nice moms who gives you candy for lunch, and isn’t all, ‘Oh
dear, I must make sure my children are so healthy’ ” (said in a syrupy voice).
Brotherly oﬀers of alternative foods simply increased his rage.
I turned my attention to getting lunch for the other boys. Zach eventually
wailed himself out and joined us.
Later, I took the older boys aside and asked them not to talk about candy
in front of Zach. If they needed to say it, they could spell it. e allure of
sugar is powerful. Even the thought of it was too much for a two-year-old to
handle.
I thought my solution was brilliant. Zach didn’t have any more
meltdowns, and the older boys used spelling to avoid setting him oﬀ. About
a week later, I had a friend visiting and Zach asked her, “Do you have any CA-N-D-Y you could share with me?”
My friend was astonished. “He can spell?? at is the most brilliant twoyear-old I’ve ever seen!”
Turns out Zach was paying attention. It didn’t take him long to crack the
code when something as important as candy was at stake. But I also realized
that he had not thrown another candy tantrum in spite of the fact that he
was not fooled by our spelling. He had tested the limit and found it ﬁrm.
• • •

 Sometimes, when a kid really wants something and can’t get it, he is going to
cry and scream. It doesn’t necessarily mean we’re doing the wrong thing. e
unenviable job of a parent is to stand your ground when the health and
safety of your child is at stake, even in the face of a hurricane of emotion
that only a toddler can produce.

 REMINDER: Troubleshooting

1. When a child is too upset to cooperate, go back to
Acknowledging Feelings

“You don’t even want to think about visiting your friend another
time. You were looking forward to going today!”
• Make sure your tone of voice matches the emotion
“at’s so disappointing!”
• Try a grunt instead of words
“UGH!” “Mmph!”
• Put your child’s thoughts into words
“Stupid Legos! ey should stick together and stay together!”
• Tell the story of what happened
“You worked for a long time on that spaceship. You used blue
bricks for the base, and red bricks for the lights, and it was
almost ready to launch! All it needed was the ﬁns on the
rockets. . . .”

2. Give your child Time to Recover (and give yourself a break!)
“I can see how sad you are. I’ll be in the kitchen making dinner.
Come join me when you’re ready.”

3. Help a child climb out of the pit of despair by Acknowledging
Feelings, Giving Information, and Offering Choices

 “Oh no, the skin got ripped! at hurts! Good thing skin knows
how to repair itself. It’s getting busy right now growing more
skin cells to cover that poor knee and make it as good as new.
How many days do you think it will take? What kind of BandAid should we cover it with?”

4. Take Action and stick to your values; if you regularly cave
in to whining and complaints, the tools won’t work

“You wish we could have candy for breakfast! I’m putting it out
of sight. e choices are cereal or eggs.”

5. Check on “The Basics”
Is your child lacking food or sleep, or feeling overwhelmed? Is
your child developmentally ready to do what you’re expecting?

 The End?

So, we’re done here? Every child is now brushing his or her teeth without
protest, treating younger siblings and small animals with the greatest
gentleness and respect, eating a full portion of greens at every meal,
neglecting to poke pennies or peanut butter into the DVD player, and
sleeping angelically through the night without interruption?
No?
Ah, we didn’t think so. You wouldn’t want life to become boring! We
hope that you found in our book a wealth of ideas that have helped you
survive the daily challenges of life with kids and end the day feeling . . .
weary, yes, but more peaceful, connected, and joyful than before.
Onward to new ages and stages, new challenges, new questions and
stories. And who knows, maybe we’ll go ahead and write another book
about that.
We want to hear from you! Please share your stories—your triumphs and
calamities, your questions and observations. We can be reached at
info@HowToTalkSoLittleKidsWillListen.com
or
at
our
website
HowToTalkSoLittleKidsWillListen.com. It is our hope to create a
community of adults who share ideas and support each other in our most
important task: raising the next generation.
—Joanna and Julie

 Acknowledgments

To our husbands, Andrew Manning and Don Abramson, who patiently
supported and believed in us as we spent long hours tapping away at
keyboards while muttering over phone headsets to each other on our
opposite coasts.
To our children, Dan, Sam and Zachary Faber Manning, and Asher,
Rashi, and Shiriel King Abramson, who challenged us, inspired us, provided
tech support, occasional editing, and sometimes even cooked dinner for us
while we worked.
To our agent, Bob Markel, and our editor, Shannon Welch, who
shepherded our book from theoretical conjecture into actual being and were
unfailingly generous and understanding about “stretched” deadlines.
To our artists Tracey and Coco Faber, and Sam Faber Manning, who took
our awkward stick ﬁgures and made them come alive, even while in the
midst of term papers and ﬁnals in their senior year at college.
To our parents Adele and Leslie Faber, and Pat and Ed King, for their
unwavering faith and abundant wise counsel.
To all the parents, grandparents, teachers, librarians, pediatricians,
speech therapists, nurses, physical therapists, day care providers, child life
specialists, and preschool directors who shared their stories with us, both
their triumphs and their tribulations.
And especially to Adele Faber and Elaine Mazlish, our founding mothers
and our inspiration. We stand on your shoulders!
Finally a shout out to Kazi (Joanna’s Belgian shepherd) who would climb
up in the chair next to Joanna and dump a chew toy on her head if she and
Julie labored too long at the keyboard without getting up for a walk. Vital
service indeed.

 Kazi at his post

 Additional Resources

How To Talk So Kids Will Listen & Listen So Kids Will Talk, by Adele Faber
and Elaine Mazlish
Liberated Parents, Liberated Children, by Faber and Mazlish
Siblings Without Rivalry, by Faber and Mazlish
Children Who Are Not Yet Peaceful, by Donna Goertz
Kids, Parents and Power Struggles, by Mary Sheedy Kurcinka
e Spirited Child, by Kurcinka
Playful Parenting, by Lawrence D. Cohen
e Siblings’ Busy Book, by Lisa Hanson and Heather Kempskie
e Happy Sleeper, by Heather Turgeon and Julie Wright
Unconditional Parenting, by Alﬁe Kohn
Punished by Rewards, by Kohn
Uniquely Human: A Diﬀerent Way of Seeing Autism, by Barry M. Prizant
You Can’t Say You Can’t Play, by Vivian Paley
Your Baby and Child, by Penelope Leach

 Joanna Faber is a parenting and education expert. She contributed

heavily to her mother’s award-winning book How to Talk So Kids Can
Learn and wrote a new aerword for the thirtieth-anniversary edition of
How to Talk So Kids Will Listen & Listen So Kids Will Talk. She lectures
and conducts workshops based on her mother’s work and her own
experiences as a parent and educator. Joanna lives in the Hudson Valley
region of New York with her husband, three sons, dogs, cats, and an
assortment of chickens.

Julie King has been educating and supporting parents and

professionals since 1995. In addition to her work with individual parents
and couples, she leads “How to Talk . . .” workshops for numerous
schools, nonproﬁts, and parent groups. Julie received her AB from
Princeton University and a JD from Yale Law School. She lives in the
San Francisco Bay Area and is the mother of three. Julie and Joanna
have been friends since they were six and ten months old, respectively.

MEET THE AUTHORS, WATCH VIDEOS AND MORE AT

SimonandSchuster.com

authors.simonandschuster.com/Joanna-Faber
authors.simonandschuster.com/Julie-King

 We hope you enjoyed reading this Scribner eBook.
Join our mailing list and get updates on new releases, deals, bonus content and other great books from
Scribner and Simon & Schuster.

CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP

or visit us online to sign up at
eBookNews.SimonandSchuster.com

 Notes

PART ONE
Chapter Two: Tools for Engaging Cooperation

1. For an in-depth discussion of this phenomenon, read chapter three, “Too Much Control,” of Alﬁe
Kohn’s book Unconditional Parenting. And also Donelda J. Stayton, Robert Hogan, and Mary D.
Salter Ainsworth, “Infant Obedience and Maternal Behavior,” Child Development 42 (1971): 1057–
69.
Chapter Three: Tools for Resolving Conflict

1.

Ministry of Social Development New Zealand, “Publications and Resources.”
https://www.msd.govt.nz/about-msd-and-our-work/publications-resources/journals-andmagazines/social-policy-journal/spj27/the-state-of-research-on-eﬀects-of-physical-punishment27-pages114-127.html. See also Alﬁe Kohn, Unconditional Parenting. New York: Atria Books, 2005,
pages 63–64.

2. https://www.thersa.org/globalassets/pdfs/blogs/rsa-lecture-dan-pink-transcript.pdf.
3. Daniel J. Siegel, MD, and Tina Payne Bryson, PhD, “ ‘Time-Outs’ Are Hurting Your Child,” Time.
September 23, 2014. time.com/3404701/discipline-time-out-is-not-good.
Chapter Four: Tools for Praise and Appreciation

1. Carol Dweck, Mindset: e New Psychology of Success, New York: Random House, February 8,
2006.
Chapter Five and a Quarter: The Basics

1. For a good resource about developmental stages, see Penelope Leach, Your Baby and Child: From
Birth to Age Five. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1990.
PART TWO
Chapter One: Food Fights—The Battle at the Kitchen Table

1. Kim Severson, “Picky Eaters? ey Get It From You.” New York Times, Oct. 10, 2007.
http://www.nytimes.com/2007/10/10/dining/10pick.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0.

 2. Steven Strauss, “Clara M. Davis and the wisdom of letting children choose their own diets.” CMAJ,
November 7, 2006; 175(10): 1199–1201. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1626509/.
3. Alﬁe Kohn, Punished by Rewards: e Trouble with Gold Stars, Incentive Plans, A’s Praise, and Other
Bribes. Boston: Houghton Miﬄin Company, 1993.
Chapter Five: Lies

1. Susan Pinker, “Children’s Lies Are a Sign of Cognitive Progress.” e Wall Street Journal, January
13, 2016. http://www.wsj.com/articles/childrens-lies-are-a-sign-of-cognitive-progress-1452704960.

 Reminder Index

PART ONE
THE ESSENTIAL TOOLBOX

Chapter One: Handling Emotions
Chapter Two: Engaging Cooperation
Chapter Three: Resolving Conﬂict
Chapter Four: Praise and Appreciation
Chapter Five: Kids Who Are Diﬀerently Wired
Chapter Five and a Quarter: e Basics
PART TWO
THE TOOLS IN ACTION

1 Food Fights
2 Morning Madness
3 Sibling Rivalry
4 Shopping with Children
5 Lies
6 Parents Have Feelings, Too!
7 Tattling
8 Cleanup
9 Doctor’s Orders

 10 Shy Kids
11 Little Runaways
12 Hitting, Pinching, Poking, Punching, Pushing
13 Sleep
14 When Parents Get Angry!
15 Troubleshooting

 Index

A note about the index: e pages referenced in this index refer to the page numbers in the print
edition. Clicking on a page number will take you to the ebook location that corresponds to the
beginning of that page in the print edition. For a comprehensive list of locations of any word or
phrase, use your reading system’s search function.
allowances, 21, 258, 262
amends
in conﬂict resolution, 93, 102, 122, 129, 132, 207, 296, 333, 337, 360
for hitting (pinching, punching, poking, etc.), 333, 337
for lies, 265, 268, 273
for tattling, 290
anger of children, and sibling rivalry, 247
anger of parents, 278, 357–67
expressing sparingly, 71, 83
expressing strongly, 359
expressing while engaging cooperation, 69–71, 83
reconnecting aer expressing, 359–60, 364, 367
reminder list for, 366–67
single words used with, 359, 366
situations involving, 357–58
stories about, 362–65
suggestions about, 358–62
apologize, See amends
apology letters, 206–07, 268, 336
appreciation. See praise and appreciation
art
acknowledging feelings using, 22–28, 39, 41
praising children’s, 140
Asperger’s syndrome. See autism spectrum disorder
autism spectrum disorder, 163, 165–66. See also children who are diﬀerently wired
diﬃculty grasping meaning of words in, 194
dinner with extended family and, 188
insistence on routines and sameness in, 171
picky eaters and, 216–17
play and sense of fun in, 186, 196
stories about, 23–24, 186–87, 196–97
baths

 at bedtime, 344–45
conﬂict resolution about, 105–06
engaging cooperation for, 54, 56, 72–73, 81
washing hair and, 105–07
bedtime routines. See sleep
blood draws, 308–09
“buts,” avoided in listening to feelings, 17–19, 42
camps, 378–80
candy, 380–81
carseats, 31, 75, 81, 119, 232, 246
cats
ﬁght over, 336
checklists, with children who are diﬀerently wired, 190–91, 201
child in charge
engaging cooperation and, 57–60, 78, 82
food selection and, 220–21, 229
morning routines and, 236, 239
shopping and, 258, 261, 262
shyness and, 314, 318, 320
children who are diﬀerently wired, 163–202
adjusting expectations and managing environment with, 183–88, 199, 201
alternatives to spoken words used with, 190–94, 200, 201
being playful with, 196–97, 202
comic strips about, 198–200
description of situations involving, 163–67
imagining what your child is experiencing, 171–76, 198, 201
joining them in their world, 168–71, 198, 201
new skills inconsistently used in, 188–90, 202
putting into words what kids want to say, 177–82, 199, 201
reminder list for, 201–02
stories about, 169–71, 173–76, 179–82, 185–88, 189–90, 190–94, 196–97
telling them what they can do (rather than what they can’t), 194–95, 200, 202
choices
cleanup with, 292, 299
conﬂict resolution and, 93–94, 130, 132
doctors and medicine and, 302–03, 310
dressing and, 236
engaging cooperation and, 53–57, 78, 81–82
food selection and, 218–19, 221, 222, 223, 228
morning routines with, 233, 235, 236, 239
shopping and, 221, 224, 258, 262
cleanup, 291–300
as challenge, 293
choices in, 292, 299
expectations about, 292
as game, 197, 293, 297
knowing when to cut your losses in, 294

 notes about, 293, 295, 299
playfulness in, 293, 297, 299
pointing out progress in, 293, 300
reminder list for, 299–300
at school, 31
single words used in, 294, 299
situations involving, 291
stories about, 295–97
suggestions about, 292–94
clothing
choices about, 236
morning routine with, 28, 51–52, 231–33, 236, 237–38
not wanting to wear, 28, 231–32
playfulness about, 51–52, 232–33, 238
conﬂict resolution, 85–133
acknowledging your child’s feelings in, 98
asking for ideas in, 98–99
comic strips about, 129–31
description of situations involving, 85–92, 128
expressing your feelings strongly about, 92, 129
oﬀering a choice in, 93–94, 130
planning ahead and timing of, 124–25
problem-solving in, 97–98, 130–31
reconsidering expectations in, 100–02
reminder list for, 132–33
removing disputed object temporarily in, 116–17
rewards and, 117–21
showing how to make amends in, 93, 129
showing respect in, 115–16
stories about, 102–15, 118–19, 123–24, 126–27
taking action without insult in, 94–97, 130
time-outs and, 121–24
cooperation, engaging, 43–83
being playful and, 49–53, 77, 80, 81
comic strips about, 77–80
describing how you feel in, 67–68, 77
describing what you see in, 65–69, 79, 82
expressing anger or frustration using I in, 69–71, 83
expressing anger sparingly in, 71, 83
giving information in, 61–62, 80, 82
oﬀering choices for, 53–57, 78, 81–82
putting child in charge for, 57–60, 78, 82
reminder list for, 81–83
saying it with a word or gesture for, 62–65, 79, 82
stories about, 51–53, 55–57, 58–60, 62, 64–65, 67–69, 72–73
taking action without insult in, 74–76, 78, 83
threats not used in, 57, 83
troubleshooting when not working, 370, 382

 writing a note for, 72–73, 80, 82
denial of feelings, 7
developmental readiness, expectations about, 209–11, 212
diaper vacation, 189–90, 201
diet. See food
disputed objects, removing temporarily in conﬂict resolution, 116–17
doctors and medicine, 301–11
playful attitude and, 304, 307, 311
problem-solving and, 302, 306, 309, 311
reminder list for, 310–11
situations involving, 301–02
stories about, 305–09
suggestions about, 302–05
dogs, caring for puppies, 210–11
dramatic reactions in acknowledging feelings, 26–28, 42
drawings
with children who are diﬀerently wired, 190–94
about feelings, 23, 24–25, 41, 250
praising, 140, 141, 151
dressing
choices about, 236
not wanting to wear clothes, 28, 231–32
playfulness about, 51–52, 232–33, 238
eﬀect on others, describing in praise and appreciation, 142–44, 159
eﬀort, describing in praise and appreciation, 144–47, 160
emotions. See feelings
empathy, 370–72
environment, managing
children who are diﬀerently wired and, 183–88, 199, 201
food selection and, 227, 229
preventing lies by, 265, 272
runaways and, 322, 328
expectations of parents
children who are diﬀerently wired and, 183–88, 199, 201
cleanup and, 292
conﬂict resolution and, 100–02
eating and, 223–24, 226–27
matching to child’s development and experience, 209–11, 212
puppy care and, 210–11
shopping and, 259, 262
shyness and, 316
stories about, 209–11
vacations and, 209, 210
experiential readiness, expectations about, 209–11, 212
fantasy

 reactions to doctors and medicine using, 302, 310
responding to feelings with, 29–34, 40, 41
feelings of children, 3–42
accepting, 10–12, 14, 17, 42
(almost) silent attention in, 35–36, 42
anger at parents about naming, 372–74
art in acknowledging, 22–28, 39, 41
avoid “buts” in listening to, 17–19, 42
cleanup and, 31
comic strips about, 38–40
conﬂict resolution and acknowledging, 98
denial of feelings, 7
description of situations involving, 3–8
despair and, 374–77, 383
about doctors and medicine, 303, 308–09, 310
dramatic reactions in acknowledging, 26–28, 42
engaging cooperation and, 370, 382
fantasy in responding to, 29–34, 40, 41
food preferences and, 225, 228
hitting (pinching, punching, pushing, etc.) and, 333, 334, 336, 337
lies and, 264–65, 270–71, 272
morning routines and, 239
praise and appreciation and, 151–53
problem-solving by acknowledging, 98
reminder list for, 41–42
resist asking questions about, 7, 32–34, 42
runaways and, 322, 323, 328
about school, 24–25, 33–34, 36
sibling rivalry and, 242, 247, 248, 249–50, 253, 254
sleep issues and, 348, 355
stories about, 12–17, 21–22, 22–26, 27–28, 30–32, 33–34, 35–37
tattling and, 286, 290
words in acknowledging, 9–19, 39, 41
writing in acknowledging, 20–22, 39, 41
feelings of parents, 275–82. See also anger of parents
bedtime and, 351–53
conﬂict resolution and, 92, 129
engaging cooperation and, 67–68, 77
expressing strongly, 92, 129, 278–79, 282
lies and, 272
physical activity (hitting, pinching, etc.), 332, 337
recovery time for, 205, 278, 282
reminder list for, 282
runaways and, 321, 322, 328
situations involving, 275–76
stories about, 278–81
suggestions about, 276–78
food

 candy and, 380–81
cheese as a quick snack, 204
letting children help prepare, 220–21
noticing when a child is hungry, 203, 204
providing choices for children regarding, 218–19, 221, 222, 228
stories about, 204
tools not working due to lack of, 203, 212
using as rewards, 219–20, 238
food ﬁghts, 215–29
letting a child ﬁll his own plate at meals, 218–19, 223, 228
reminder list for, 228–29
situations involving, 215–18
suggestions for avoiding, 219–22
stories about, 223–27
trying new foods, 220, 221, 226
frustration, expressing while engaging cooperation, 69–71, 83
games
children who are diﬀerently wired and, 169, 197
cleanup as, 197, 293, 297
conﬂict resolution about, 114–15, 118–19, 125
morning routines with, 233, 234
punishing for playing, 288
sleep time and, 344
turning boring tasks into, 50, 81
gestures
with children who are diﬀerently wired, 190–94, 201
engaging cooperation using, 62–65, 79, 82
hair
getting food in, 344, 345
washing, 105–07
Halloween candy, 380–81
hitting (pinching, poking, punching, pushing, etc.), 331–38
reminder list for, 337–38
situations involving, 331–32
stories about, 334–35
suggestions about, 332–33
ideas, in problem-solving, 98–99
information, giving
engaging cooperation and, 61–62, 80, 82
food selection and, 221, 229
insult, avoiding
conﬂict resolution and, 94–97, 130
engaging cooperation and, 74–76, 78, 83
kindergarten, 146, 185, 205–06, 319

 lies, 263–73
accepting feelings about, 264–65, 270–71, 272
amends for, 265, 268, 273
managing environment to prevent, 265, 272
planning for future to prevent, 265, 272
reasons for, 264
reminder list for, 272–73
situations involving, 263–64, 265–67
stories about, 268–71
suggestions about, 264–65
make amends. See amends
meals. See food; food ﬁghts
medical visits. See doctors and medicine
morning routines, 231–39
child in charge during, 236, 239
choices in, 233, 235, 236, 239
clothing selection and getting dressed, 28, 231–32, 236, 237–38
feelings about school and, 24–25
gentle approaches for waking in, 235
playfulness and, 232–33, 235, 238, 239
problem-solving for, 233–34, 236–37, 239
reminder list for, 201
situations involving, 231–35
stories about, 236–38
notes
with children who are diﬀerently wired, 190–94, 201
cleanup and, 293, 295, 299
for engaging cooperation, 72–73, 80, 82
pediatricians. See doctors and medicine
pictures, with children who are diﬀerently wired, 190–94, 201
pinching. See hitting
planning
conﬂict resolution and, 124–25
preventing lies using, 265, 272
runaways and, 326
playfulness
with children who are diﬀerently wired, 196–97, 202
cleanup and, 293, 297, 299
clothing choices and dressing and, 51–52, 232–33, 238
doctors and medicine and, 304, 307, 311
engaging cooperation using, 49–53, 77, 80, 81
morning routines and, 232–33, 235, 238, 239
with runaways, 324, 326, 328
shyness and, 315, 316, 320
sleep and, 343–44, 355

 poking. See hitting
positive focus, while engaging cooperation, 66
potty training. See toilet training
praise and appreciation, 135–62
acknowledging feelings instead of, 151–53
asking questions instead of, 140–41
cleanup and, 293
comic strips about, 159–60
describing eﬀect on others in, 142–44, 159
describing eﬀort in, 144–47, 160
describing progress in, 147–51, 160
describing what you see in, 139–40, 159
description of situations involving, 135–38
giving child new picture of himself as part of, 153–56
praising descriptively in, 157–58
reminder list for, 161
starting a conversation in, 140, 141
stories about, 140, 143–44, 146–47, 150–51, 156–57
preschool, 24–25, 28, 31, 36, 51, 89, 90, 140, 170, 191, 219, 226, 284, 291, 294
problem-solving
conﬂict resolution steps in, 97–98, 130–31
doctors and medicine and, 302, 306, 309, 311
hitting (pinching, pushing, etc.) and, 333, 334–35, 338
morning routine and, 233–34, 236–37, 239
parents’ anger and, 360, 367
running away and, 323, 324, 325, 329
sibling rivalry and, 251–52, 255
sleep and, 347–50, 353, 355
tattling and, 287–88, 290
progress
describing in praise and appreciation, 147–51, 160
pointing out in cleanup, 293, 300
punching. See physical activity
punishment
conﬂict resolution rather than, 85, 86, 87
examples of alternatives to, 102, 103
for hitting, 187, 331
for lies, 263, 264, 265, 270
older children and teenagers and, 128
opportunity for making amends rather than, 93
parents’ memories of, 88–89
pitfalls in using, 89–91
problem-solving instead of, 97–100, 124, 126, 127
reasons for using, 88, 94, 95–96
reward seen as, 118–19
for tattling, 283, 284, 285, 286, 287, 288–89
time-outs instead of, 122–23
withholding dessert as, 228

 puppy, caring for, 210–11
pushing. See hitting
questions, asking
about feelings, 7, 32–34, 42
in praise and appreciation, 151–53
recovery time, 205–09, 212
child’s need for, 205, 282, 382
parents’ need for, 205, 278, 282
stories about, 205–08
relatives, shyness around, 313–16
respect, in conﬂict resolution, 115–16
rewards
conﬂict resolution and, 117–21
food as, 219–20, 238
rule-breaking, and tattling, 283, 286–87
runaways, 321–29
playfulness and, 324, 326, 328
problem-solving about, 323, 324, 325, 329
reminder list for, 328–29
situations involving, 321–22
stories about, 325–26
suggestions about, 322–25, 327
school
changing to new school, 207–08
children who are diﬀerently wired and, 185, 191–92, 192–94
conﬂict resolution and, 90, 105–06
eating breakfast before, 223–24
engaging cooperation about, 52–53
feelings about, 24–25, 33–34, 36
ﬁrst day of, 319
hanging up items aer returning from, 295
hitting at, 336
length of day in, 185
morning rituals before, 196, 223–24, 231–32, 236–37
not talking in, 192–94
praise in, 140, 144–45
shyness in, 316–17, 319
smells at, 175
tattling at, 284–85
tiredness and getting ready for, 204–05, 276
waiting for pickup at, 191
sensory processing disorder (SPD), 163. See also children who are diﬀerently wired
challenges in, 167
clothing likes and, 171, 184
example of, 164–65

 physical pressure and, 344
story about, 182
shoes, getting on, 49, 155, 184, 188, 195, 232, 234, 239
shopping, 257–62
child in charge during, 258, 261, 262
choices in, 221, 224, 258, 262
reminder list for, 262
situations involving, 257
stories about, 260–61
suggestions for, 257–59
wish lists for, 20, 259, 260–61, 262
shots (injections), 301–02, 303, 307–08, 310
shyness, 313–20
acknowledging feelings about, 315, 320
being in charge and, 314, 318, 320
choices with, 314, 315
having a job to do and, 314, 316, 320
playfulness and, 315, 316, 320
reminder list for, 320
situations involving, 313–14
stories about, 316–19
suggestions about, 314–16
sibling rivalry, 241–55
feelings in, 242, 247, 248, 249–50, 253, 254
hitting (pinching, pushing, etc.) and, 331–35
one-on-one time and, 246–47, 254
problem-solving in, 251–52, 255
reminder list for, 254–55
sharing with siblings and, 335
situations involving, 241–42
stories about, 248–53
suggestions for, 242–48
wishes in fantasy in, 254
singing and songs
bedtime routines with, 344, 346, 349, 355
with children who are diﬀerently wired, 190–94, 201
sleep, 339–55
bath before, 344–45
bedtime stories before, 341–42, 343, 346–47
challenging behavior from lack of, 204–05
noticing when a child is tired, 203
problem-solving for, 347–50, 353, 355
rebellious behavior ending with, 208
reminder list for, 355
sharing beds with parents and, 340–41, 350–51, 355
situations involving, 339–41
stories about, 204–05, 341–54
suggestions about, 341, 353

 tools not working due to lack of, 203, 212
transition to morning routines aer, 235, 236
vacation plans and, 210
sleepovers, 275, 278, 296
snitches. See tattling
stories, bedtime, 341–42, 343, 346–47
strangers, shyness around, 313, 316, 317
taking action
conﬂict resolution and, 94–97, 105, 130, 132
during doctor visits, 303, 311
engaging cooperation and, 74–76, 78, 83
parents’ anger and, 359, 366
preventing injury from hitting or pushing by, 332, 337
runaways and, 325, 329
sibling rivalry and, 247, 255
sleep problems and, 350, 351, 355
sticking to values by, 383
tattling, 283–90
acknowledging feelings in, 286, 290
making amends for, 290
reminder list for, 290
rule-breaking and, 283, 286–87
situations involving, 283–85
stories about, 288–89
suggestions about, 285–87
threats, avoiding while engaging cooperation, 57, 83
time-outs, in conﬂict resolution, 89, 121–24
toilet training
children who are diﬀerently wired and, 187–88
conﬂict resolution about, 110–11, 112–13
diaper vacation from, 189–90, 201
rewards for, 119
toothbrushing
gesture, 64
talking brush, 49
troubleshooting, 369–83
vacations
parental expectations about, 209, 210
visiting family on, 124–25
vaccinations, 307–08
wish lists
accepting feelings using, 20, 21, 41
shopping and, 259, 260–61, 262
writing
in acknowledging feelings, 20–22, 39, 41

 SCRIBNER
An Imprint of Simon & Schuster, Inc.
1230 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10020
www.SimonandSchuster.com
Copyright © 2017 by Joanna Faber and Julie King
All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or portions thereof in any form
whatsoever. For information address Scribner Subsidiary Rights Department, 1230 Avenue of the
Americas, New York, NY 10020.
First Scribner edition January 2017
SCRIBNER and design are registered trademarks of e Gale Group, Inc., used under license by
Simon & Schuster, Inc., the publisher of this work.
For information about special discounts for bulk purchases, please contact Simon & Schuster Special
Sales at 1-866-506-1949 or business@simonandschuster.com.
e Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau can bring authors to your live event. For more information or
to book an event contact the Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau at 1-866-248-3049 or visit our
website at www.simonspeakers.com.
Interior design by Kyle Kabel
ISBN 978-1-5011-3165-3
ISBN 978-1-5011-3163-9 (pbk)
ISBN 978-1-5011-3166-0 (ebook)

 