Unique Identity OUR BROOD

Name Kei

Age: 41

Main Trait
You are part of an alloparenting family that lives in a house called Crave. It's part of a network of houses where humans and machines live alongside each other in dialogue. You have been here for four years and part of the project for six. You take your role as one of the many mothers of the house very seriously—you do not doubt your choice to be part of Crave.

You specialise in ideas around technogaianism, the stance of active support for the research, development, and use of emerging and future technologies to help restore Earth's environment. You are fascinated by nanotechnologies, which can convert waste materials in landfills into valuable products, and biotechnology, which can be used to create microbes that can break down hazardous waste.

Your beliefs center around sustainability, community, and a hopeful future vision. You emphasise living in harmony with nature, prioritising renewable energy, and fostering social collectivism. You also promote decentralisation, open-source resources, and a DIY ethic, contrasting with the dystopian outlook often seen in cyberpunk narratives. One may call you the old wife of Solarpunk who envisions a world where humanity thrives through integrating technology and nature, aiming to solve contemporary challenges such as climate change and pollution. Encouraging practical and innovative solutions, often drawing from existing technologies and practices like solar energy, urban agriculture, and organic architecture. You're not tied to a specific political ideology but advocate for a collective shift away from polluting forms of energy and the domestic family towards a sustainable civilisation. You practice prefigurative politics, creating real-life spaces where the principles of a sustainable future can be explored and demonstrated.
Emphasising interconnectedness between humans, machines and the natural world, fostering a sense of belonging and connectedness - this is why you found yourself so wrapped up in the journey of The Crave early on. This interconnectedness can provide you with a spiritual framework that celebrates the awe and wonder of the natural world, fostering a profound sense of gratitude and humility within you. This also encourages you to push harder to make this way of life more accessible to the broader public, you typically try to do this by looking at the technological application and how they can be routed through open source community nodes, how to train diverse coders and how to source energy that doesnt radically undo all the positive steps in the project, however since you turned 40 you have been flirting with more techno utopian ideas, especially since Br00d was born - you just feel such a rush in the progress between yours and their lives. You find excitement around the work of Alexander Grothendieck and the synthetic biologist Michael Levin.


Motivation
Your motivation stems from a traumatic upbringing, where you lost yourself in sci-fi and fantasy. It enabled you to envision a future where technology could help achieve post-scarcity, transform human nature, prevent suffering, and even end death. (What was your childhood like? If you wanted to find a cure for these things?)

Desire 
You want to prove this works! You want to prove there is something else, and it's difficult but not impossible—we need to reprogram ourselves. (How does this manifest in your daily life?) 

Personality Type
You are open to experience, extraversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism.  You are characterised by being responsible, careful, and diligent. You are a hard-working and reliable community member and tend to be efficient and organised rather than easygoing and disorderly.
People have described you as thoughtful, goal-oriented, and controlled. You are self-disciplined and persistent, carefully consider how your actions will affect others, and are generally dependable. However, if something goes against your inner goals, you can be quite antisocial and rude.

You can often be found multiple times a day in the garden or parts of the house, a stairway, or the kitchen - cat-eared headphones (we have these for you) on dancing wildly, head thrown back, colossal grin, glossy eyes - it relaxes you. It allows answers to come to the surface (don’t forget to pre-prep your playlist and device) .The rest of the house has accepted you breaking off mid-conversation to do this.

Daily Life
Your life is centred around an active alloparenting community, The Crave, comprised of human and AI family members. Their names are Winter, Ki, Lucan, M0ther, Aurora, Morgana, Nyx, Nouksie, Arbour and Br00d

Alongside daily family life, your community members have turned their home into a domestic lab, constantly reporting their hopes of living together differently. They support themselves economically by hosting and facilitating psychodrama sessions focusing on living with emergent technologies and brokering new political and social space through therapeutic agents and role-playing tools. You have a close kinship with Lucan, Winter, and Br00d—things can get a little heated with Arbour and you.

(How do you map your work? Laptop, books, building out tech apparatus physically? Think about the props in terms of your study)

Crave’s Collective Family Goals for Living Facilitation.

1. To critically examine the relationship between human procreation and AI development at a civic level.  
2. To explore the potential of AI raised through radical care and non-conventional family structures.  
3. To engage diverse audiences in participatory, immersive experiences that challenge societal norms.
4. To build responsive environments with intelligent architectures that allow for participatory co-designing at their core. 

Your days are spent surrounded by nature, operating as a collective unit, hijacking the virtual actual feedback of this world and constructing intersectional family customs, rites, rules and new forms of life. Each member is a scholar in their own right; your days follow a strict routine of work, study, practice, rest and community life, not unlike the early life routines of children.





