Copyright 2023. Verso.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

Part III. Everyday Life:
The Commune-Form

EBSCO Publishing : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 3/5/2025 6:23 AM via UNIVERSITEIT VAN AMSTERDAM
AN: 3571482 ; Kristin Ross.; The Politics and Poetics of Everyday Life
Account: uamster.main.ehost

107

 14
The Survival of the Commune

This interview was originally published in ROAR magazine issue 1: “Revive la Commune!”
ROAR: The Paris Commune has been studied and debated for almost a century and a half. How does your
book [Communal Luxury] add to our understanding of this world-historical event, and why did you
decide to write it now?
Kristin Ross: Like many people after 2011, I was struck by the return—from Oakland to Istanbul,
Montreal to Madrid—of a political strategy based on seizing space, taking up space, rendering public
places that the state considered private. Militants across the world were experiencing the space-time
of occupation, with all the fundamental changes in daily life this implies. They experienced their own
neighborhoods transformed into theaters for strategic operations and lived a profound modification of
their own affective relation to urban space.
My books are always interventions into specific situations. Contemporary events drew me to a
new reflection on the Paris Commune, which for many remains a kind of paradigm for the insurgent
city. I decided to restage what took place in Paris in the spring of 1871 when artisans and
communists, workers and anarchists took over the city and organized their lives according to
principles of association and federation.
While much has been written about the military maneuvers and legislative disputes of the
Communards, I wanted to revisit the inventions of the insurgents in such a way that some of today’s
most pressing problems and goals might emerge most vividly. The need, for example, to refashion an
internationalist conjuncture, or the status of art and artists, the future of labor and education, the
commune-form and its relation to ecological theory and practice: these were my preoccupations.
The Paris Commune has always been an important point of reference for the Left but what is new
about today is in part the entire post-1989 political context and the collapse of state socialism, which
took to the grave a whole political imaginary. In my book, the Paris Commune reemerges freed from
that historiography, and offering a clear alternative to the centralism of the socialist state. At the same
time, the Commune has never, in my opinion, fit easily into the role that French national history tries
to make it play as a kind of radical sequence in the establishment of the republic. By liberating it
from the two histories that have instrumentalized it, I was certain we would be able to perceive the
Commune anew as a laboratory of political invention.
Communal Luxury is neither a history of the Paris Commune nor a work of political theory in the
ordinary sense of the term. Historians and political theorists have been responsible for most of the
massive literature generated by the Commune, and in the case of the latter—whether communists,
anarchists, or even philosophers like Alain Badiou—this means approaching the event from the
perspective of an already-formulated theory. Communard actions become the empirical data
marshaled in support of verifying the given theory, as if the material world were a sort of local
manifestation of the abstract rather than the other way around.
To my mind, this amounts to summoning up the poor Communards from their graves only in
order to lend gravitas to philosophizing. What I did, instead, was to immerse myself for several years
in the narratives produced by the Communards themselves and a few of their fellow travelers of the
period. I looked closely not only at what they did but at what they thought and said about what they
were doing, the words they used, fought over, imported from the past or from distant regions, the
words they discarded.
These narratives about their struggle—and we are fortunate that so many of the literate
Communards chose to write something about their experience—are already highly theoretical
EBSCOhost - printed on 3/5/2025 6:23 AM via UNIVERSITEIT VAN AMSTERDAM. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

108

 documents. But they tend not to be treated as such by political theorists. This is why I had very little
use for the existing political theory about the Commune and why, in the end, I find political theorists
to be the bane of our existence to the extent that they approach instances of political insurrection
from the perspective of an overarching view that tries to unify them under a single concept, theory, or
narrative of historical progression. I don’t think it is wise to consider historical events from an
omniscient perspective, nor from the vantage point provided by our present, fat and complacent with
all the wisdom of the “backseat driver,” correcting the errors of the past.
I ignored all the innumerable commentaries and analyses of the Commune, many of which—even
those written by people sympathetic to the memory of the Commune—consist of nothing but this
kind of second-guessing or listing of errors. I had to perform a massive clearing of the terrain in order
to construct the distinct phenomenology of the event and visualize it outside of the multiple
projections placed on it by historians. It is the event and its excesses which teach you how to consider
it, how to think and talk about it.
And, once you have paid this kind of attention to workers as thinkers—an attention I learned
when I encountered and translated some of the early work of Jacques Rancière—you can’t tell the
story the same old way, the way, for example, it has been told by the two traditions that controlled its
narration for so long: official state-Communist historiography on the one hand and the French
national fiction on the other. You have to reframe and reconfigure those past experiences in order to
render them significant on their own terms and to make them visible to us now, in the present.
By focusing on the words and agency of concrete individuals acting in common to dismantle,
little by little and step-by-step, the social hierarchies that make up a state’s bureaucracy, I’ve tried to
think the Commune historically—as belonging to the past, as dead and gone—and, at the same time,
as the figuration of a possible future. I tried to stage it as very much a part of its historical era, yet in
a way that exceeds its own history and suggests to us, perhaps, the deepest and most durable
demands for worldwide democracy and revolution.
The book is my way of reopening, in other words, from the midst of our current struggles, the
possibility of a different historiography, one that allows us to think and do politics differently. The
Commune offers a distinct alternative to the course taken by capitalist modernization on the one
hand, and the one taken by utilitarian state socialism on the other. This is a project that I think more
and more of us share and it’s why I wrote the book.
ROAR: By choosing to focus on the afterlife of the Commune more than on the seventy-two days of “its
own working existence,” you manage to unearth the myriad ways in which the Commune’s political
imaginary actually survived the massacre and lived on in the struggles and thought of
ex-Communards and their contemporaries. What do you consider to be the most important legacy of
the Commune in this respect?
K.R.: I did not so much focus on the “afterlife” of the Commune as I did on its survival. In one of my
earlier books, May ’68 and Its Afterlives, my subject was indeed, as the title suggests, something
more like a memory study: how the ’68 insurrections were represented and discussed ten, twenty,
thirty years later. And today very interesting work is being written about what some choose to see as
the “afterlives” or “reactivations” of the Paris Commune: studies of the Shanghai Commune, for
example, or other aspects of the Chinese Cultural Revolution, or studies that look to the Zapatistas as
a kind of reactivation of some of the gestures of 1871.
Communal Luxury, however, is limited to the life span of the Communards and is centrifugal or
geographic in its reach. I examine the shockwaves of the event as they reach Kropotkin in Finland or
William Morris in Iceland, or as they propel the hard-pressed Communard exiles and refugees
themselves into far-reaching new political networks and ways of living in Switzerland, London, and
elsewhere in the aftermath of the massacre that brought the Commune to an end. The extremity and
gore of that end, the Bloody Week of state violence that brought thousands of people to their deaths,
has all too often proved to be an uncontrollable lure, making invisible the networks and pathways of
survival, reinvention, and political transmission that came in the years immediately after, and that
concern me in the latter part of the book.
There’s almost a wish on the part of historians to lock the whole event up into a neat
seventy-two-day episode that ends in tragedy. In that sense I wanted to examine the prolongation of
EBSCOhost - printed on 3/5/2025 6:23 AM via UNIVERSITEIT VAN AMSTERDAM. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

109

 Communard thought beyond the bloody carnage in the streets of Paris, its elaboration when the exiles
met up with their supporters in England and the mountains of Switzerland. In so doing, of course, I
am very much in agreement with Henri Lefebvre who tells us that the thought and theory of a
movement is generated only with and after the movement itself. Struggles create new political forms
and ways of doing as well as new theoretical understandings of these practices and forms.
On one level you could argue that it is the forms taken by that survival—a “life beyond life” as in
the French word “survie”—that constitute the Commune’s most important legacy: the very fact that
its own “working existence” continued, the refusal on the part of the survivors and their supporters to
allow the catastrophe of the massacre to bring everything to an end.
At a more symbolic level, though, the legacy left by the thought generated by the Commune
emerges in my book in the cluster of meanings that attach to the phrase I chose for the book’s title:
“communal luxury.” I discovered the phrase tucked away in the final sentence of the Manifesto
Eugène Pottier, Gustave Courbet, and other artists wrote when they were organizing during the
Commune. For them the phrase expressed a demand for something like public beauty—the idea that
everyone has the right to live and work in pleasing circumstances, the demand that art and beauty
should not be reserved for the enjoyment of the elite, but that they be fully integrated into daily
public life.
What may seem a merely “decorative” demand on the part of decorative artists and artisans, is a
call for the reinvention of wealth beyond exchange-value. And in the work of Commune refugees
like Elisée Reclus and Paul Lafargue and fellow travelers like Peter Kropotkin and William Morris,
what I am calling “communal luxury” was expanded into the vision of an ecologically viable human
society. It’s striking that the work of Reclus, Lafargue, and their friends is now at the center of the
attention of ecological theorists who find there a level of environmental thought that died with that
generation in the late nineteenth century and was not resuscitated again until the 1970s with figures
like Murray Bookchin.
This is all exciting work, but it often fails to take into account how the experience of the
Commune was part and parcel of the ecological perspective they developed. The experience of the
Commune and its ruthless suppression made their analysis even more uncompromising. In their view,
capitalism was a system of reckless waste that was causing the ecological degradation of the planet.
The roots of ecological crisis were to be found in the centralized nation-state and the capitalist
economic system. And they believed a systemic problem demands a systemic solution.
ROAR: Following up on the previous question, you particularly emphasize the profound impact of the
Commune on Marx’s thinking at the time. Could you briefly discuss how the events of 1871
informed, changed, or deepened Marx’s understanding of capitalist development and the transition to
a post-capitalist society?
K.R.: Marx knew about as much as it was possible for someone to know about what was transpiring in
Paris streets that spring given his distance and the veritable wall of censorship—“a Chinese wall of
lies” in his terms—mounted by the Versaillais to prevent accurate information from reaching French
people in the countryside and foreigners alike. He looked at the Commune and was astonished to see
for the first time in his life a living example of unscripted non-capitalist life in the flesh—the inverse
of dailiness lived under state domination. For the very first time, he saw people actually behaving as
if they were the owners of their lives and not wage slaves.
In Communal Luxury, I chart the profound changes the Commune’s existence brought to Marx’s
thinking, and, more importantly, to his path: the new attention he paid in the decade following the
Commune to peasant questions, to the world outside Europe, to pre-capitalist societies, and to the
possibility of multiple routes to socialism. Seeing, for the first time, what non-alienated labor actually
looked like had the paradoxical effect of strengthening Marx’s theory and causing a break with the
very concept of theory.
But it must be said that I am less concerned with relating the Commune to the intellectual
trajectories of Marx or some of the other well-known fellow travelers I discuss in the book, than I am
in weaving together the thought, practices, and trajectories of contemporaries like Kropotkin, Marx,
Reclus, and Morris, shoemaker Napoléon Gaillard, and other lesser-known figures into the relational
web the event produced—a kind of “globalization from below.”
EBSCOhost - printed on 3/5/2025 6:23 AM via UNIVERSITEIT VAN AMSTERDAM. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

110

 The socialist imaginary in the immediate wake of the Commune was fueled not only by the recent
insurrection, but by elements that include medieval Iceland, the communist potential of ancient rural
peasant communes in Russia and elsewhere, the beginnings of something called anarchist
communism, and a profound rethinking of solidarity from what we would call today an ecological
perspective.
ROAR: You note how the Commune was really a shared project that “melted divergences between left
factions.” Likewise, you yourself have little patience for sectarian squabbles that overemphasize the
split between Marx and Bakunin, or between communism and anarchism, in the wake of the
insurrection. What was it about the Commune that allowed these various tendencies to find common
cause, and what—if anything—should the Left take from this experience today?
K.R.: Life is too short for sectarianism. It is not that sectarianism didn’t exist under the Commune and in
its wake. In fact, the Left in the years immediately after the Commune is usually seen to be fiercely
riven by the quarrel between Marx and Bakunin—a quarrel between Marxists and anarchists that is
said to be responsible for the end of the First International, and a quarrel that is often tiresomely
rehearsed today between those who believe economic exploitation is the root of all evil and those
who believe that it’s political oppression.
What I chose to do in my book was to push Marx and Bakunin, those two old graybeards whose
quarrel has been for so long all any of us could see or hear from that era, off the stage or at least to
the sidelines for the moment in order to see what else there was to be seen. And what I discovered
was a whole host of very interesting people who were neither slavishly loyal to Marxism nor to
anarchism, but who made adroit use of both sets of ideas.
This seems to me to resemble very closely the way militants today go about their political lives,
perhaps because some of the most sectarian types from both sides have left the scene. Even so, my
book has had its share of sectarian attack—for insufficient towing of the Marxist line and of the
anarchist line, in about equal numbers!
ROAR: Many contemporary movements seem to harken back to the spirit of the Commune in their own
struggles. Do you believe we are experiencing a revival of the communal imaginary in our times?
How would you account for the return of occupation-based political strategies and this renewed
interest in the politics of urban space?
K.R.: I think there is clearly a revival of the communal imaginary today, but I don’t agree with you that it
is centered in the politics of urban space. The city today all too often presents young people with
three choices: no work, badly paid work, or meaningless work. Many have chosen to move to the
countryside to lead lives that interweave struggle and social cooperation. When I think about the
various struggles today, particularly in France which is the context I know best, they are often in
rural areas, and are concerned with defending a way of life deemed “archaic” under capitalist
modernization. Occupiers seek to create a form of regional self-sufficiency that does not entail
retreating into a self-enclosed world, or eddying in isolated pools of self-referentiality.
This is a desire that emerged very strongly, by the way, in the period following the Commune,
and I discuss at some length the many interesting debates on this subject that took place in the Jura
mountains in Switzerland between refugees and their supporters all too aware of the dangers of
isolation. From what I know of the current communal occupations of territories and terrains,
occupiers and Zadistes claim a certain lineage not only with the Paris Commune but with more recent
struggles like the Larzac in the 1970s and important figures from that era like Bernard Lambert. It
was Lambert, after all, who stood upon the Larzac plateau in 1973 and proclaimed to the thousands
of people who had traveled there from all over France and beyond to support local farmers in their
fight against being expelled from their land by the French army, that “never again will peasants be on
the side of Versailles.”
When Lambert in his classic text, Les Paysans dans la lutte des classes, situated urban workers
and peasants in the same place vis-à-vis capitalist modernity, he was mobilizing exactly the same
rhetorical strategy that one of the main figures in my book, Communard Elisée Reclus, does in his
1899 pamphlet, “A mon frère, le paysan.” And it’s the identical strategy underlying an even earlier

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/5/2025 6:23 AM via UNIVERSITEIT VAN AMSTERDAM. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

111

 pamphlet addressed to (but never received by) French in the countryside by besieged Communards in
April 1871, “Au Travailleur des campagnes.” To quote Lambert: “Paysans, travailleurs, même
combat.”
Today, the existence of zads—zones à defendre, or “zones to be defended”—and communes like
Notre-Dame-des-Landes in France or No TAV outside of Turin, settlements that occupy spaces given
over by the state to large infrastructural projects judged to be useless and imposed, mark the
emergence of something like a distinctly alternative and combative rural life. This is a rural life
opposed to agribusiness, to the destruction of farmland, to the privatization of water and other
resources, and to the construction by the state of infrastructural projects on a Pharaonic scale. We see
here a real defiance with regard to the state. And at the same time the rural world is being defended
as a space whose physical as well as cultural realities oppose the homogenizing logic of capital. By
refusing to move they are placing themselves at the center of combat.
The current remobilization of the commune-form, as I understand it, seeks in part to block the
ongoing creation of a territorial network of privileged financial metropolitan centers whose
development comes at a price: the destruction of the links that tie those centers to their immediate
outskirts and surroundings. It is those outskirts, rural or semi-rural in nature, that are then destined to
decline in a kind of prolonged desert-ification, as finance capital sucks more and more personnel and
resources into the work of transporting at higher and higher speed, and on a larger and larger scale,
communication, goods, and services between the designated loci of wealth.
Militants today often see themselves as fighting a distinctly new and neoliberal reality, but I don’t
think it matters much whether we view neoliberalism as a distinctly novel phase of capitalism or
not—the capitalist world they oppose was already substantially analyzed by Henri Lefebvre in his
Production of Space, a book that came out, I believe, in the early 1970s. There he showed how the
increasing “planification” of space under capitalism was a movement in three parts: homogeneity,
fragmentation, and hierarchy.
The production of homogeneity is guaranteed by the unification of a global system with centers
or points of metropolitan strength that dominate peripheral weaker points. Simultaneously, though,
space becomes fragmented the better to be instrumentalized and appropriated: it comes to be divided
up like graph paper into autonomous, Taylorized parcels with distinct localized functions. And an
increasingly conscious and treacherous strategy divides all the rural and suburban zones, the satellites
made up of small and medium cities, the banlieues and the bleak spaces left behind by the
decomposition of agrarian life—all these semi-colonies to the metropolis—into more-or less-favored
zones with most, of course, being destined for controlled, closely supervised, often precipitous
decline.
Such contemporary struggles and occupations are, like the Paris Commune—of
necessity—locally based. They are bound to a particular space and as such demand a specific
political choice. They share all the concerns and aspirations that are place-specific in kind. But they
are not localist or localizing in their aims. Communards, we should recall, were fiercely anti-state and
largely indifferent to the nation. Under the Commune Paris wanted to be an autonomous unit in an
international federation of communes.
In this regard the Commune anticipated in act all kinds of possibilities such that even the projects
it could not undertake and that remain at the level of a wish or an intention, like the federating
project, retain a profound meaning. Site-specific struggles like Notre-Dame-des-Landes and No TAV
are much better placed today to achieve the kind of international federation that Paris under the
Commune had no time to achieve.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/5/2025 6:23 AM via UNIVERSITEIT VAN AMSTERDAM. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

112

 15
The Wind from the West

What continues to give what we call “the sixties” their power is the way that any attempt to narrate those
years, to commemorate them, curate them, or even allude to them in passing, functions, almost invariably,
as a glaring indicator of what is being defended now. Last October, because of a book I wrote almost
twenty years ago concerning the construction of the official memory of the French ’60s, I was invited by
the Macron government to come to the Elysée Palace to discuss President Macron’s intention to
“celebrate,” throughout the entire upcoming year, the fiftieth anniversary of May ’68. What, precisely, I
wrote back, did the president intend to celebrate? If the answer I received—“the end of illusions, the
modernization of France, the closing down of utopias”—was not a surprise, the angry breach of protocol
on the part of Macron’s counsellor when I declined the invitation, was. Apparently, a summons to the
palace was to be thought of as a command performance.
Later, I learned that a couple of other historians in France had received a similar invitation and that
they, like me, had chosen to decline. Left with only his fervent supporter, Daniel Cohn-Bendit, in tow to
function as the master of ceremonies of any celebration, President Macron chose wisely to abandon the
idea and devote his commemorative energies to the centennial anniversary of the end of World War I and
other more neutral topics.
Commemorations are killers. But they are a preeminently French exercise. President Sarkozy, who
presided over the fortieth anniversary of May, had announced his intention to liquidate all existing
memories of the upheavals as part of his presidential campaign. This, in the end, was an attitude on the
part of the state to be preferred to Macron’s wish to absorb and celebrate, since it gave a bit of vim to the
deadly ritual of the commemoration ten years ago. In Paris this year,* May ’68 was everywhere: the date
and accompanying images screaming out from kiosks, on posters announcing museum exhibits and
competing colloquia, film series, memoirs, and special issues of everything from mainstream magazines to
scholarly journals. Yet the commemoration framing and fueling the proliferation of references seemed to
drain those references of any compelling interest.
There was one exception. Only once did some aspect of the ’68 years break through the
commemorative fog to enter directly, and with a high measure of political necessity, into the figurability
of the present moment. This occurred early in the year when people found their attentions drawn to the
sudden reinvocation in the media of the ten-year struggle that began in 1971 in southern France—the
battle by farmers in central France known as the Larzac. Suddenly, people old enough were dusting off
their memories of summer evenings of solidarity spent on the Larzac plateau, and young journalists were
scurrying to bone up on the intricacies of sheep farming. The Larzac was a ten-year battle that began when
103 sheep-farming families attempted to block the state expropriation of their land to serve as an army
training ground. Over the course of the decade, hundreds of thousands of French people and others made
their way to the Larzac plateau to show their support for the farmers’ ultimately victorious battle. This was
the first time that such a large number of French people had displaced themselves and traveled such a long
distance for political reasons.
The sudden reawakening of interest in the Larzac struggle had everything to do with the victory in
January of this year of what was the longest-lasting ongoing battle in postwar France: the occupation of a
small corner of the countryside in western France outside of Nantes whose purpose was to block the
construction of an international airport. What had begun around 1968 when the site was chosen for a new
airport with a few farmers in the village of Notre-Dame-des-Landes refusing to sell their land, had become
in the last ten years a full-fledged occupation known as the zad: a motley coalition of farmers, elected
officials, townspeople, naturalists, and occupiers who had succeeded up until then in blocking progress on
any construction. Like the sheep farmers in the Larzac forty years ago, the zad attracted tens of thousands
EBSCOhost - printed on 3/5/2025 6:23 AM via UNIVERSITEIT VAN AMSTERDAM. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

113

 of supporters over the years to the site to help build their communal buildings and habitations, to share in
collective farming and banquets, and to defend the wildlife and wetlands as well as the alternative and
semi-autonomous, secessionary way of life that had developed there. And, in January 2018, the zad won.
President Macron announced a definitive end to the airport project. The state had, in effect, collapsed in
the face of tenacious opposition. That fact alone caused the all-too-familiar feelings of fatality and
powerlessness that so strongly permeate the recent political climate to be gloriously lifted. In the euphoric
months following the Macron administration’s announcement, the Larzac reemerged to be parsed and
examined as a possible precedent, a model of sorts, a way that the occupiers and farmers of the zad might
continue to farm collectively in the manner they had become accustomed to, with the land remaining
under their collective control. Suddenly, the Larzac was understood as not just an afterthought or a waning
moment of the long 1960s, but as a site whose deepest aspirations could only be fulfilled in the present, in
the form of the communist experiments at the zad. (The zad brought the Larzac back to people’s minds,
and not, for example, another significant struggle from the 1970s at the Lip factory in Besançon, in a way
that made it clear that Lip now represented the closing down of a particular political strategy: factory
occupation. While the Larzac—ironically, given the widespread perception of farmers as
backward-looking, clinging desperately to the old—was from the future.) Since there was to be no airport
at Notre-Dame-des-Landes, and the farmland and the wetlands had been preserved, why couldn’t the
Larzac serve as a precedent?
That hope was to prove very short-lived for reasons I will go into at the end of this essay. But what the
new visibility of the Larzac early this year in turn made possible was a new perception of the decade of
highly exemplary, even Homeric battles that began in 1966 when peasants and farmers outside of Tokyo,
nimbly supported by the far-left members of the National Student Union, the Zengakuren, fought the state
expropriation of their farmland to be used for the building of the Narita airport. It became possible to see
that battle, known as Sanrizuka, together with the Larzac, for what they truly were: the most defining
combats of the worldwide 1960s.
The zad and other recent land-based territorial struggles, in other words, help us to see the Larzac and
Sanrizuka (Narita) struggles as the battles of the second half of the twentieth century that reconfigure the
lines of conflict of an era. Another way of saying this is that the 1960s, whatever else they were, are
another name for the moment when people throughout the world began to realize that the tension between
the logic of development and that of the ecological bases of life had become the primary contradiction of
their lives. Henceforth, it seems, any effort to change social inequality would have to be conjugated with
another imperative—that of conserving the living. What these movements of the long 1960s initiated and
what the zad confirms is that defending the conditions for life on the planet had become the new and
incontrovertible horizon of meaning of all political struggle. And with it came a new way of organizing,
founded on the notion of territory as a praxis produced by space-based relations. Sixty-eight was a
movement that began in most places in the cities but whose intelligence and future tended toward the
earth/Earth.
This is perhaps a major shift in the way we consider the 1960s, but I have experienced once before
how a shift in the political sensibility of today can give rise to a new vision of the past. This was at the
moment when the 1995 labor strikes in France, followed by anti-globalization protests in Seattle and
Genoa, awakened new manifestations of political expression in France and elsewhere and new forms of a
vigorous anti-capitalism after the long dormancy of the 1980s. It was this revitalized political momentum
(and NOT any obligatory commemoration) that led me to write my history of May’s afterlives.* The
workers’ movements had dislodged a sentiment of oblivion, if not triviality, that had settled over the ’68
years, and I felt the need to try to show the way the events, what had happened concretely to a
staggeringly varied array of ordinary people throughout France, had not only receded from view, but had
in fact been actively “disappeared” behind walls of grand abstractions, fusty clichés, and unanchored
invocations. The reemergence of the labor movement in the 1990s jarred the 1960s loose from all the
images and phrases put into place in France and elsewhere by a confluence of forces—the media, the
institution of the commemoration, and the ex-gauchistes converted to the imperatives of the market.
Today, when Bernard-Henri Lévy, André Glucksmann, Bernard Kouchner, and Alain Finkielkraut no
longer dominate the airways in France with the ubiquity they still commanded even a mere ten years ago,
it is difficult to remember the monopoly such self-appointed and media-anointed spokesmen held as lone
EBSCOhost - printed on 3/5/2025 6:23 AM via UNIVERSITEIT VAN AMSTERDAM. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

114

 interpreters of the movement. These men, and a few others (we have their equivalents in the United
States), all of whom could be relied upon to reenact at the drop of a hat the renunciation of the errors of
their youth, were those I called in my book the official memory functionaries or custodians. It was they
who took on the pleasurable task of affirming, symbolizing, and incarnating an essentially generational
movement the better to criticize its goals and foundations. Using the movement as a target of opportunity,
they in effect made themselves the guardians of the temple they were in the midst of destroying. By the
twentieth anniversary of the May events—the peak of their power—they had successfully presided over a
three-part effacement of the memory of the movement: the effacement of history by sociology, politics by
ethics, and ideology by culture. The voice of the counterrevolution was taken in France to a remarkably
homogenous degree to be the voice of the revolution.
But the labor strikes of the winter of 1995 not only succeeded in forcing a government climb-down
over the issue of changes to the pensions of public sector workers, they also helped wrest control of the
memory of ’68 from the official spokespeople and reminded people what all the combined forces of
oblivion, including what we can now see as a kind of Americanization of the memory of French May, had
helped them to forget: that May ’68 was the largest mass movement in modern French history, the most
important strike in the history of the French labor movement, and the only “general” insurrection Western,
overdeveloped countries had experienced since World War II.
Rereading my book about May’s afterlives, I was surprised to see that the seeds of the new argument I
sketched out at the beginning of this essay were already there in its pages. In what was for me a very
uncharacteristic venturing into the realm of prophecy, I found that I had suggested back then that there
would come a day when an autodidact farmer like Bernard Lambert would emerge as a far more powerful
figure of ’68 politics in France than Daniel Cohn-Bendit. And that what occurred offstage in Nantes that
spring would someday be seen to be more significant, more powerful than what occurred center stage in
Paris. Nantes plutôt que Nanterre. The wind from the west. “The Wind from the West” was the name of a
farmer’s journal coedited by Lambert published in 1967 and ’68. It’s not often that what emanates from
the west can command our attention in a positive way, but I’ll try in what follows to show why I think that
the kinds of solidarities that developed in the Loire-Atlantique region in western France and in analogous
land-based struggles throughout the world are at least as interesting to consider, and possibly more, as any
of the solidarities that come to mind when we talk, say, about “the global south.” To return to my
prophecy, I think that day has come, Cohn-Bendit’s day is indeed over, and Lambert, with his call to
“decolonize the provinces,” his day has come, and it is only now, in the wake of the zad, that we can begin
to measure the significance of that summer day in 1973 when Lambert, high atop the Larzac plateau,
addressing the tens of thousands of people who had come from all over France to support sheep farmers in
their battle with the army, proclaimed that “jamais plus les paysans ne seraient des Versaillais.” (Never
again will country people be on the side of the Versaillais.)”*
Lambert’s reference to the Paris Commune is suggestive and appropriate, for the history I wish to
trace in western France is in part nothing more than the continuing reemergence of vernacular commune
forms. Consider the events of May-June 1968 proper in Nantes, widely remembered under the name of the
“Commune de Nantes.” There, the central strike committee was made up of a coordinated alliance
between three distinct social groups—farmers, students, and workers. It is not accidental that such a
three-part alliance should occur only in Nantes and nowhere else in France. For the Loire-Atlantique
region can lay claim to being the birthplace of a new agrarian left that had its origins in the
Paysans/Travailleurs movement of the 1960s and ’70s and its creation of new disruptive practices outside
the confines of existing nationally led unions. As Lambert put it in an interview, “We had lost the habit of
asking our spiritual fathers in Paris how we were supposed to think about the actions we were taking.” *
This group, led by Lambert, was founded in response to the very direct and directed influx of industrial
and finance capital into French agriculture after 1965, and it was they who were responsible for
organizing the march of some 100,000 people, mostly farmers, in villages throughout Brittany and the
Loire-Atlantique on May 8, 1968, behind the slogan “The West Wants to Live.”
In this sense, Lambert’s 1970 text, Les Paysans dans la lutte des classes, which was the first to place
farmers and urban workers in the same structural situation vis-à-vis capitalist modernity, and this amid a
general call for the establishment of “a real regional power,” bears comparison with canonical
revolutionary texts like Fanon’s Les Damnées de la terre, or de Beauvoir’s Le deuxième sexe, in its
EBSCOhost - printed on 3/5/2025 6:23 AM via UNIVERSITEIT VAN AMSTERDAM. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

115

 conjuring up of a genuinely new political subjectivity. A new subjectivization emerges in the pages of
Lambert’s book to accompany that of woman or the colonized in the form of the “paysan”—or defender
of the earth.
What I’d like to do now is return to the four movements and moments I’ve briefly evoked: the zad in
Notre-Dame-des-Landes and its struggle that continues today, even after the airport victory; the two
protracted land wars of the late ’60s and early ’70s—the Larzac and Sanrizuka in Japan—and the
Commune de Nantes in May and June 1968, and consider them each, as well as the constellation they
form, in the light of three practices they share, above and beyond their use of occupation as a form of
direct action. The first such practice is the act of defending per se, embodied in the figure of the “paysan”
whose name, etymologically, means “someone who defends a territory” and prominent in a word that has
only just entered the French dictionary two years ago, namely “zad,” or “zone à defendre.” Japanese
farmers in Sanrizuka, taking a tip from North Vietnamese peasants in their war with the United States,
went so far as to bury themselves in underground tunnels and trenches to prevent the entry of large-scale
construction machinery into the zone. At a moment when the state-led modernization effort had made
accelerated industrialization the sole national value in Japan, farmers countered with their conviction that
the airport would destroy values essential to life itself. In Notre-Dame-des-Landes, farmers who refused to
sell their land, many of whom had been active in the Paysans-Travalleurs movement and who were among
those who drove their tractors into the city center in May 1968, were joined by nearby towns-people and a
new group after 2008: squatters and soon-to-be occupiers. With the arrival of the first squatters, the ZAD
(zone d’aménagement différé) became a zad (zone à défendre)—the acronym had been given a new
combative meaning by the opponents to the project, the administrative perimeter of the zone now
designated a set of porous battle lines, and the act of defending had replaced the action we are much more
frequently called upon to do these days—namely, resist. Why does the history of the zad show us that
defending is more generative of solidarity than resisting? Resistance means that the battle, if there ever
was one, has already been lost and we can only try helplessly to resist the overwhelming power we
attribute to the other side. Defending, on the other hand, means that there is already something on our side
that we possess, that we value, that we cherish, and that is thereby worth fighting for. African Americans
in Oakland and Chicago in the 1960s knew this well when the Black Panther Party of Self-Defense
designated black neighborhoods and blackness itself as of value and worthy of defending.
What makes a designation of this kind interesting and powerful is that it enacts a kind of
transvaluation of values: something is being given value according to a measurement that is different from
market value or the state’s list of imperatives, or existing social hierarchies. In the case of the Larzac, a
spokesman for then minister of defense Michel Debré characterized the zone chosen for army camp
expansion as essentially worthless, a desolate limestone plateau, populated, in his words, by “a few
peasants, not many, who vaguely raise a few sheep, and who are still more or less living in the Middle
Ages.”* As for the land designated for the airport at Notre-Dame-des-Landes, it was regularly described in
initial state documents as “almost a desert.” These descriptions could only have been the echo of the
familiar colonial trope indicating a perceived scarcity of population preceding invasion, since the area
chosen in the latter instance was in fact wetlands—an environmental category unrecognized as having any
value at all in the 1970s.
So the gesture of defense begins frequently by proclaiming value, even and especially a kind of
excessive value, where it hadn’t been thought to exist before, in a manner I’ve discussed elsewhere that
the Parisian Communards called “communal luxury.”* In 1871 Eugène Pottier and the Artists’ Federation
under the Commune overturned the hierarchy at the core of the artistic world, the hierarchy that granted
enormous privilege, status, and financial advantage to fine artists (painters and sculptors)—a privilege,
status, and financial security that decorative artists, theater performers, and skilled artisans simply had no
way of sharing under the Second Empire. Why should the labor of artisans not have the same value as the
work of fine artists? The federation, which gathered together “all the artistic intelligences, in complete
independence from the State,” produced a manifesto that ends with this phrase: “We will work
cooperatively towards our regeneration, the birth of communal luxury, future splendors and the Universal
Republic.” What Pottier and the other artisans meant by “communal luxury” was something like the
creation of “public beauty”: the enhancement of the lived environment in villages and towns, the right of
every person to live and work in a pleasing environment. This may seem like a small, perhaps even a
EBSCOhost - printed on 3/5/2025 6:23 AM via UNIVERSITEIT VAN AMSTERDAM. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

116

 “decorative,” demand, made by a handful of mere “decorative” artists. But what they had in mind actually
entails not only a complete reconfiguration of our relation to art, but to labor, social relations, nature, and
the lived environment as well. It means a full mobilization of the two watchwords of the Commune,
namely decentralization and participation. It means art and beauty deprivatized, fully integrated into
everyday life, and not hidden away in private salons or centralized into obscene nationalistic
monumentality.
This was, in other words, a full dismantling under the Commune of socially determined and ancient
categories of artistic practices that began by proclaiming the value of artisanal work and decorative art.
Shoemaker Napoléon Gaillard, or rather artiste-chaussurier Gaillard, as he insisted on calling himself,
reinvents himself as barricade strategist and architect, constructing both a knowledge and an art of street
defense, just as he performed in his trade a knowledge and an art of the shoe. Anti-Communards called
Gaillard a “vain shoemaker,” spoke contemptuously of him as the “père des barricades,” and nicknamed
the enormous barricade he had constructed on the Place de la Concorde “the Chateau Gaillard.”
They complained that he considered his barricades “works of both art and luxury.” As indeed he did,
arranging to have himself photographed in front of his creations—in effect, signing them. Communal
luxury as practiced during the Commune (or on the zad) is thus a way of constituting an everyday
aesthetics of process, the act of self-emancipation made visible.

Photo by Auguste-Hippolyte Collard

Paris Commune, Barricade de la Place de la Concorde (c. 1873)

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/5/2025 6:23 AM via UNIVERSITEIT VAN AMSTERDAM. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

117

 Photo by Kristin Ross

Communal wood-working studio at the zad

And, from here, we can now begin to track the development of something like the end of luxury
founded on class difference and examine how such an idea opens out onto perspectives of social wealth
that are entirely new, perspectives best amplified by the work of William Morris. What seems initially like
a decorative demand on the part of decorative artists is in fact the call for nothing short of the total
reinvention of what counts as wealth, what a society values.
Today, as we witness states redistributing wealth to the rich in the name of austerity, it is interesting to
consider how much a phrase like “communal luxury” defies the logic underlying austerity discourse. By
designating something that had no value before in the existing hierarchy of value to be of value and worth
defending, one is not calling for equivalence or justice within an existing system like the market (as in an
austerity regime or in the demand for fairer distribution). One is not calling for one’s fair share in the
existing division of the pie. Communal luxury means that everyone has a right not just to his or her share,
but to his or her share of the best. The designation calls into question the very ways in which prosperity is
measured, what it is that a society recognizes and appreciates, what it considers wealth.
And what it is that is being defended, of course, changes over time. To return to the Larzac, Sanrizuka,
and the zad at Notre-Dame-des-Landes, these are what the Maoists used to call “protracted
wars”—struggles that keep changing while enduring and whose strikingly long duration has everything to
do with the non-negotiability of the issue. Farmland is either farmland or it has become something else:
housing developments, say, or an army training ground. But where once what was being defended might
have been an unpolluted environment or farmland or even a way of life, what is defended as the struggle
deepens comes to include all the new social links, solidarities, affective ties, and new physical relations to
the territory and other lived entanglements that the struggle produced.
And as new, creative ways are found to inhabit the struggle, it becomes apparent that the state and
capitalism do not have to completely collapse in order for people to begin living relatively free lives.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/5/2025 6:23 AM via UNIVERSITEIT VAN AMSTERDAM. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

118

 Alternative collective and practical ways of going about satisfying basic needs, both material and
social—housing, food, education, health care—can be created in a relative independence from the state, a
kind of lived and livable secession that is frequently called “dual power”—the second of the practices or
strategies I wish to discuss. Lenin used the phrase to describe the practical help offered on a daily basis by
the network of soviets or workers’ councils in 1917 that coexisted with, and formed a kind of alternative
to, the provisional government. He was describing what was in fact a transitional political conflict that had
to be resolved, an unstable and temporary situation where workers’ councils competed with the state for
power. But the term has also come to refer to working alongside state structures, becoming less and less
reliant upon them, in an attempt to render state structures redundant. And this, of course, requires the
active cultivation of new capacities and collective talents to adapt to new circumstances. In the US 1960s,
with their school breakfasts and other community grassroots organizations, the Black Panthers, to all
intents and purposes, turned their communities into dual power communes.* They knew that by operating
at the level of everyday life and not ideology, by substantially transforming everyday life, in effect
re-owning it by and through political struggle and becoming fully accountable for it, they were making
revolution on a scale people could recognize.
In France, the events of May and June 1968 in Nantes, even if ephemerally, offer the best illustration
of the paths opened by such a dual power strategy. After the Sud Aviation workers outside of Nantes
occupied their factory, providing the spark that ignited the general insurrectional strike across the country,
links that had been established earlier by the Paysans/Travailleurs movement allowed farmers to feed
strikers at cost or sometimes for free. A popular government in the form of a central strike committee in
the town hall was set up in Nantes for several days at the end of May and the beginning of June. At the
same time, in the neighborhoods, using networks already in place, an organization of collective food
distribution from nearby farms sprang up to deal with the most pressing problems of day-to-day life.
Everything began at the end of the second week of the strike in a Nantes neighborhood that was 95
percent working-class, les Batignolles, where the wives of the strikers met together in neighborhood
associations … and decided to organize food distribution themselves. Walking through the neighborhood
with a loudspeaker, they summoned people to an informational meeting … After the meeting, a delegation
of one hundred women went to the nearest factory to contact the strike committees. After that a food and
provisions committee was created by uniting the three workers’ neighborhood associations. The
committee made direct contact with the tamers’ unions in the closest village: La Chapelle sur Erdre. A
meeting made up of fifteen farmers from the union and a delegation of workers and students decided to
form a permanent alliance to organize a distribution network with no intermediaries.*
These initiatives were in turn linked to the central strike committee which, operating from the town
hall, could well appear as a kind of parallel administration. Forty years later the prefect of Nantes himself
attested to the accuracy of a term like “the Nantes Commune” to describe the situation that had developed
in the region.† “If, everywhere in France, the interruption in the functioning of large-scale public services
tended to paralyze the action of the legal authorities, it seems to be the case that only in the
Loire-Atlantique region did forms of parallel administrations appear, animated by the strikers.”‡ And, as
Yannick Guin, author of La Commune de Nantes, points out, “The influence of these parallel circuits was
so considerable that the population wanted to prolong the experiment.”§ This was particularly the case in
the poorer areas of the city, where workers’ families were most effected by the strike and where a farmers’
milk cooperative distributed 500 liters of milk a day for free after May 26. That the population should
want the experiment to endure should come as no surprise. When questions of existence and subsistence
are no longer being posed at the individual level, who wouldn’t want such a state of affairs to continue?
The power source in “dual power” is of the same type that abounded during the Paris Commune of
1871—power that comes not from a law enacted by parliament, but from the direct initiative of the people
from below, working in their local areas. But the Communards in 1871 were separated by vast armies and
what Marx called “a Chinese wall of lies” from any comrades they may have had in provincial cities or in
the countryside. When Peter Kropotkin rewrote the experience of the Paris Commune in The Conquest of
Bread, he imagined the whole Ile-de-France and the surrounding départements given over to vast
vegetable gardens to feed the revolutionary city. Proximity to and involvement with the means of
subsistence is essential not only to establishing a lived intimacy with the territory, it is also essential to a
movement’s duration. The active participation of a sector of Nantes farmers in May 1968, bringing food to
EBSCOhost - printed on 3/5/2025 6:23 AM via UNIVERSITEIT VAN AMSTERDAM. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

119

 the occupied factories and campuses, created the perspective, if not the reality, of a fight with duration.
The farmer/student/ worker coalition in Nantes enacted however briefly a kind of dual power that
projected Nantes ’68 well beyond a riot or a general strike into well-nigh Kropotkinian dimensions, filling
in the outlines of what life might look like if the infrastructure of a city and its surroundings were
managed autonomously by an insurrectional commune.
The Nantes coalition is also an exemplary if short-lived manifestation of the process that the authorial
collective at the zad, the Mauvaise Troupe, call in their book “composition”—and this is the third aspect
of these movements I want to highlight. “Composition” is a continuation of sorts of the relational
subjectivity often said to be at the heart of ’60s politics. Henri Lefebvre, for example, used to say that May
’68 happened because Nanterre students were forced to walk through Algerian bidonvilles to get to their
classes. The lived proximity of those two highly different worlds—functionalist campus and immigrant
slums—and the trajectories that brought students to organize in the bidonvilles and Algerian workers to
worksites on campus, these precarious and ephemeral meetings, beset with all the incertitude, desire,
empathy, ignorance, and deception that mark such encounters, are at the heart of the political subjectivity
that emerged in ’68. They are the laboratory of a new political consciousness.
A relational subjectivity of that sort clearly developed during the struggle against the Narita airport, as
a coalition came into being under skies crisscrossed by American domination, in the form of the encounter
between farmers, who began by hunkering down to defend their way of life but learned in the process the
true violence of which the state was capable, and radical urban students and workers who had never before
given a thought to where and how the food they ate was produced. In the Loire-Atlantique region in the
late 1960s, the central imperative motivating farmers in the Paysans/Travailleurs movement was the desire
to break out of corporatism and achieve dialogue with other social groups. This was the moment when
farmers in France began, perhaps for the first time, to consider the problems of agriculture and the
countryside in global political, rather than merely sociological, terms. They wanted to self-affirm as a
social group, but in a noncorporatist manner, to respond to problems that the whole country, and not just
farmers, confronted: the problem of the use of space, of alliances with workers, of weapons production, of
the fate of the land—land ownership and land usage—in general. The movement organized long marches
(including a march to the Larzac) in reaction against the national Paris-based Farmers Union, the FNSEA,
that had demanded that their march on Paris be stopped at Orleans, so that they didn’t “stir up any shit” in
the capital. And, equally importantly, so that they didn’t come into contact with the “urban riff-raff
“—i.e., revolutionaries.*
The force of the Larzac movement lay in the diversity of people and disparate ideologies it brought
together: anti-military activists and pacifists (conscientious objectors), regional Occitan separatists,
supporters of nonviolence, revolutionaries aiming to overthrow the bourgeois state, anti-capitalists,
anarchists, and other gauchistes, as well as ecologists. But, where the Larzac movement indeed gathered
together a diversity of social groups and political tendencies under its umbrella, at no time was the
fundamental leadership of the farmer families who had spearheaded the movement ever in question.
Sympathizers who supported the farmers politically and financially, usually from afar but sporadically in
vast demonstrations of hundreds of thousands of people who had voyaged to the plateau, were supporting
the visceral attachment of the farmers to the same land and the same métier. At the zad, with its
improbable assortment of different components made up of old or historic farmers, young farmers from
the area, petty-bourgeois shopkeepers in nearby villages, elected officials, occupiers, and naturalists,
however, no such group was or is in a leadership position. This has created a very different kind of
movement, one that in its desire to hold together the diverse but equal components that make it up,
requires, as one zad dweller put it, “more tact than tactics.”†
Composition, in that sense, was born with the zad. The kind of social base it creates is distinct:
essentially a working alliance, involving mutual displacements and disidentifications, that is also the
sharing of a physical territory, a living space. Composition is the mark of a massive investment in
organizing life in common without the exclusions in the name of ideas, identities, or ideologies so
frequently encountered in radical milieux. If the zad is perhaps the best example of an open conflict that
has managed to endure, to build for itself duration in the midst of struggle, then it has everything to do
with this process.
Composition is really nothing more than the fruits of an unexpected meeting between separate worlds,
EBSCOhost - printed on 3/5/2025 6:23 AM via UNIVERSITEIT VAN AMSTERDAM. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

120

 and the promise contained in the becoming-commune of that meeting. It is thus a space or process where
even antagonisms create an attachment. “Composition” could be said to be the way that autonomous
forces unite and associate with each other, sometimes complementing each other, sometimes contradicting
each other, but always, in the end, dependent on each other. When it works, these different elements strive
to recognize each other and work together to pursue common desires that surpass each of them, rather than
trying to resolve their differences. Rather than trying, that is, to convince each other or convert the other to
the superiority of one’s ways, whether this be sabotage, filing legal briefs, cataloguing endangered
species, or frontal violence with the police. This is especially important in a movement whose enemies try
ceaselessly to divide and conquer by setting one group up against another. The strength of the movement
derives precisely from its diverse makeup, which in the case of the zad has allowed it to express itself
through various kinds of actions, from highway blockages using tractors to legal maneuvering to violent
demonstrations.
Composition creates and maintains solidarity in diversity, solidarity among people of disparate
ideologies, identities, and beliefs whose coming together and staying together adds up to no final
orthodoxy, just a continuing internal eclecticism. That eclecticism and the disagreements it produces can
be exhausting, often aggravating. So why make the effort? Because the power of the movement resides in
a certain excess—the excess of creating something that is more than the sum of ourselves—something that
only the composition between our differences makes possible.
The goal is not to make the whole territory over into one’s image. Elisée Reclus and Peter Kropotkin
knew this well when they wrote of the dangers of self-enclosed, intentional communities, withdrawn from
the world and made up only of the faithful. “In our plan for existence and struggle,” wrote Reclus, “it isn’t
a little chapel of like-minded companions that interests us—it’s the world in its entirety.”* The goal, as the
naturalists might say, is to conserve diversity. To conclude by returning to our earlier discussion, it is the
diversity of the territory that is now what is being defended.

Afterword
Within months of abandoning the airport project at Notre-Dame-des-Landes, the Macron government,
whose agenda this spring was nothing short of smashing all political opposition of any kind, whether it be
from the universities, the postal service, the SNCF, or the zad, ordered, at the cost of 400,000 euros a day,
a military-style invasion of 3,000 police and soldiers in tanks into the zad, destroying numerous
dwelling-places and communal buildings.† Government intransigence, combined with the military
occupation of the zone that has still not completely ended to this day, created an insurmountable division
among the occupiers between those willing to negotiate with the government to find a way to stay and
continue in some form the collective experiments of the zad, and those who brooked no dialogue
whatsoever with the state. These latter were forcefully expelled by the government from the zone. For
those occupiers who remain, a different phase of the struggle has unfolded, as they try to secure the
different habitations and practices they developed over the years. Among these practices is one whose
roots in the Commune de Nantes of 1968 could not be more explicit. La Cagette des terres is a network
operating from the zad since 2017 to “feed the struggles” of the Nantes region quite literally, using
vegetables, bread, and cheese produced collectively from the zad. Whether these movements be more
punctual, like the strike by postal workers in the city, or more long-term, like the occupation by students
of buildings at the University of Nantes they demanded to be turned into refugee housing, or the various
migrant squats or workers’ cantines in the area, the network has already made its presence and solidarity
known. Besides the immediate goal of simply helping movements to endure at the day-to-day subsistence
level, the goal of La Cagette des terres is to strengthen the links between the city and the countryside, to
reinforce the circulation between struggles more generally, and, beyond that, to experiment with forms of
food distribution other than those dictated by capitalist economy.*

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/5/2025 6:23 AM via UNIVERSITEIT VAN AMSTERDAM. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

121

 16
The Internationalism of
Improbable Alliances

Where are the internationalisms, or better, transnationalisms that might compete pragmatically with the
universal culture produced by the tireless circulation of global capital? Posing this question made me think
back to the early discourse that accompanied the onset of neoliberal globalization in the 1980s and ’90s,
and that predicted the eventual withering away of the nation-state, presumably worn down by the
onslaught of financial transactions and the circulation of commodities. In response to that onslaught, some
people then felt called upon to look for ways to try to strengthen and fortify the welfare state against the
destructive imperatives of the economy. Now, however, it seems clear that no such weakening of the
nation-state ever really transpired, and that if anything many aspects of the state’s functions—particularly
its police functions—have instead been built up and fortified precisely to protect and facilitate the easy
flow around the world of capital and commodities, business executives, tourists, and all the networked
elites. The nation-state and global capital are not enemies but mutually enhancing partners, and both
continue to function, separately and in closer cahoots with each other now more than ever before, to
channel our behavior into set patterns and, above all, to manage our relations with each other and the
environment.
But another imaginary and disruptive history exists which is neither the national fiction nor the
transnational flow of global capital, and that is the commune-form. Though it may initially seem a
paradox, a new alternative internationalism, or what might be called “solidarity in diversity” at a global
level may now be being forged on the basis of local instantiations of the commune-form. Communal
practices imply staying in place and standing in the way, and, in so doing, creating pragmatic alternatives
in the here and now that take the form of distinct, more or less self-reliant and semi-autonomous,
semi-secessionary zones or territories created in the interstices of capitalist logic, the zones it forgot.
Taking a position, in other words, is not just central to the issue—it is the issue.
In 2016, I was invited to the site of the longest-lasting political struggle in postwar French history, the
occupation of a small stretch of farmland and wetlands outside of Nantes whose aim—an ultimately
successful one—was to block the construction of an international airport at the site. The inhabitants of the
zad asked me to discuss with them the continuities and discontinuities between the 1871 Paris Commune
and what was then occurring at Notre-Dame-des-Landes. They were interested—as I am—in the form and
practices of “free communes,” in questions of decentralization and ways of creating a regional
self-sufficiency that is not a closing-in on itself, that is in fact built on new kinds of associations,
cooperation, and interdependencies. Their interest in the nineteenth-century event reconfirmed something
that I had argued in my book Communal Luxury: that the return after 2011 throughout the world to a
political strategy based on seizing space or rendering space public had caused the Commune to enter
forcefully into the figuration of the present as a laboratory of political invention, a kind of usable archive
of legacy ideas and practices.
I accepted the invitation to the zad and for me that visit and the many that followed were
extraordinary. There was a kind of physical density and physical intensity there made up of bodies in
action, the palpable sense of a world—physical dwellings as much as a space of collective social
transformation and experiment being built together, a proximity of the animals and the outdoors, as well
as a number of notable absences—habitual money relations and wage labor, to name two—that for me
was more memorable than any theoretical exchange we might have had. But we actually did try to talk
about the Paris Commune, and we discussed it as an integral part of its own historical moment but also in
a way that allowed it to exceed its own history and suggest to us possible futures—a kind of

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/5/2025 6:23 AM via UNIVERSITEIT VAN AMSTERDAM. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

122

 anticipation-in-act of all kinds of possibilities. Even the projects the Communards couldn’t
complete—like federation or an enduring regional self-sufficiency, for example—projects that were
forced to remain at the level of an intention or a dream, could then be seen to have profound significance
for contemporarystruggleslikeNotre-Dame-des-Landes.
In my more hopeful moments I like to think of the 1871 Paris Commune and contemporary persuasive
forms of social experimentation like the zad as forming historical bookends of sorts around the whole era
of what Arthur Rimbaud called “bourgeois magic”: the era of capitalist accumulation and
over-productivity.* What today’s political experiments in living differently show is that developing
strategies in common with people who have different modes of political action is not only possible but
desirable when the shared enemy—the capitalist international and its various manifestations—is clearly
designated and when solidarity extends to all the different groups who have allied together. This is
solidarity, in other words, not in spite of but because of the diversity of the groups.* The zad’s continuing
existence, as much a shared territory as a movement, with both aspects held equally dear, is a forceful
reminder that to gain ground in the fight against enclosure—for this is what the fight is all about—we
actually need to gain ground, that is, we need to put our feet some place, to remain some place, to retreat
into and defend some place, even if it is only, as in the case of the Parisian Communards, a city exhausted
by months of siege and deprivation; or for the gilets jaunes, the traffic circle meeting place surrounded by
big-box stores at the edge of town; or for the zad, a semi-arable stretch of land which the government
insisted on describing, much to the surprise of the farmers living and cultivating there for decades, as a
“desert.” Access to as well as the shared use and communal care of the land, is at the heart of the matter,
something Communard Arthur Arnould recognized in 1878 when he wrote: “The social revolution must
have a collective character, that is to say, it must proceed with the restitution of the soil and all the
instruments of labor, capital or otherwise into the hands of the collective.”† To the extent that it lies
outside of a logic of accumulation or expropriation, “restitution” is a very interesting word, and
“restitution of the soil” a fitting slogan for many place-specific struggles across the globe. It suggests a
symbiotic relationship that has nothing to do with collectivizing in the old Soviet style nor with
nationalization. It suggests an ongoing process of relearning and reinventing practices designed to
preserve land in view of future generations, a solidarity not only with the dead but with those to come.*
Space-specific, grounded struggles have a kind of refreshing flat-footedness about them. David
Harvey has suggested that this is because the fact of being bound to a particular space creates an either-or
dialectic—something quite distinct from a transcendental or Hegelian one.† Demands, concerns, and
aspirations that are place-specific in kind create a situation that calls for existential change and political
choice—one is either for the airport or against it. In the words of Karl Marx to Vera Zasulich writing in
the context of an earlier rural battle against the state, “It is a question no longer of a problem to be solved,
but simply of an enemy to be beaten … it is no longer a theoretical problem … it is quite simply an enemy
to be beaten.”‡ Afifty-seven-kilometer tunnel will either be drilled through the Alps for a high-speed train
line between Turin and Lyon or it will not. An airport will either be built in farmland or it will not.
One of the major effects of the world that capitalism creates is to make us disconnected from the
living, transforming us into people without places, endlessly uprooted and uprootable according to the
vicissitudes of the economy. And the idea that there is only one world is, in fact, the essence of
capital—the world as it exists is the lone referential basis for what is possible. The zad is one answer to
the question of how to cultivate a point of view that is not that of the economy, how to get out of the
impasse of political economy and its critique. For even the critique of political economy, as the Bogues
collective reminds us, keeps us locked in the unique world of capital and thus participates in the
eradication of the plurality of worlds. When we say that the zad makes dwelling or inhabiting into a more
forceful political act, we are saying that to think our lives from the perspective of where we live,
inhabiting a place and being inhabited by it, is one way to cultivate a point of view that does not begin and
end with economic productivity.*
In Valparaíso, Chile, at the end of 2017, the Chilean Supreme Court voided the permit to construct an
enormous shopping mall that would have covered the entire historic harbor seafront, bringing to a close a
ten-year battle between inhabitants and developers. North American–style shopping malls in Chile, like
airports in Spain, have mushroomed everywhere, ushered in by way of the tried-and-true language of
modernization, job creation, and economic profit. But this one dwarfed all the others in scale: 162 luxury
EBSCOhost - printed on 3/5/2025 6:23 AM via UNIVERSITEIT VAN AMSTERDAM. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

123

 boutiques, convention centers, even a theme park. An unlikely alliance of dock workers, artists, urbanists,
and students saw the commercial center clearly for what it was: a space designed not for them but for
tourists and visiting business executives, and thus a pillage of the common good. Though it took ten years
of concerted actions, legal maneuvers, and improvisations, they succeeded in defending their city and its
seafront.
If what matters for the world of economic productivity, agri-business, international airports, and
shopping malls is a smooth and seamless transit of people and commodities between substitutable spaces,
then the making of a territory has everything to do with a logic of difference and possibility, autonomy
and self-determination. Old, rather unfashionable notions like “aura” and “authenticity” associated with
singularity and identity come back into play. But with a difference. For, if the zad has an aura, it has been
constructed over time by the actions of many, its “authenticity” created through the possibilities of
common life that place-based social relations perpetuate, even amid a striking diversity of beliefs and
identities. The making of a territory is the making of a place that, precisely, lacks fungibility: it cannot be
exchanged for any other. Where once the zad’s fight was with the airport, it soon broadened into a battle
with the world the airport represents: a world of class division that identifies human progress with
economic growth and defines human needs in terms of markets and the submission of all the world’s
resources to markets. Preventing one’s territory from becoming a mere node in a global capitalist system,
a space of pure transit where people do nothing more than pass through, is a way of stabilizing in
time—and perhaps even, with luck, a lifetime—a way of life that lies at least partially outside of and
against the state and the market. We make our community by defending it.
You may begin by defending the land, in other words, but you end up defending the way of life that
mounting the defense has nourished. This, I think, is where the importance of the social experimentation
around new ways of living communally lies. What is now being defended includes all the new social links
and entanglements, as well as the new physical relation to the territory—what Gaston Bachelard calls its
“muscular consciousness.” Defending the territory now entails defending the collective life project that
had emerged there, a project that includes the very concept of territoriality itself to the extent that it fuses
the spatial and the social while nurturing a certain autonomy and will to self-determination.* The territory
offers the possibility of acting on the real in a manner that is at once convivial, transgressive, and
pragmatic. It creates mobilization out of demobilizing.
What is revolutionary about the zad and its inhabitants is not so much their opposition to the airport as
their discovery over time of what it is that they were for, what they had to defend—and this comes largely
from the experience of anchoring themselves in a symbiotic entanglement of people and place best
summed up by a slogan frequently encountered at the zad: “Nous ne défendons pas la nature: Nous
sommes la nature qui se defend.” (We are not defending nature: we are nature defending itself.) A slogan
that to my mind more or less rephrases geographer and Communard Elisée Reclus’s statement: “L’homme
est la nature prenant conscience d’elle-même.” (Humanity is nature becoming conscious of itself ).* And
which is also reminiscent of Gustav Landauer’s: “La part de la nature que nous sommes nous-mêmes se
transforme.” (That part of nature which we ourselves are is transformed.)† In each of these sayings,
physical phenomena and human phenomena that are customarily thought separately are here strictly
intertwined in a dialectic of dependencies and reciprocities geared toward maintaining the earth as
commons.
In the town of Langouët in Brittany, the enemy’s name is Monsanto and the town’s mayor has taken
on the task that neither the European Union nor the national government would perform, that of defending
the town’s inhabitants from toxic levels of pesticides. When levels of glyphosate thirty times the
recommended level showed up in the urine of the town’s children, the mayor responded by banning the
use of pesticides within 450 feet of any dwelling. His ordinance was subsequently struck down by a judge
representing the state who ruled the mayor “incompetent” to make such a decision. But forty other mayors
of small towns, from the Alps to the Atlantic, have since passed similar ordinances.
The possibility of extension represented by those forty other mayors or by the numerous zads that have
taken shape in Europe and beyond, suggests the beginnings of an answer to the question of what any local
instantiation of the commune-form could possibly have to do with internationalism. Each time and place
that a particular defense of the living is implemented, it attains the status of an example, changing our
ideas of what is possible by giving us practical illustrations of what can be if economic rationality is not
EBSCOhost - printed on 3/5/2025 6:23 AM via UNIVERSITEIT VAN AMSTERDAM. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

124

 the rationality that prevails. A world organized for trade and profit need not be the only world. In this way
each instantiation provides for us the act of self-emancipation made visible.
Another way to answer this question lies in tracing the very real and sometimes subterranean
trajectories and meetings, the fabric of lived solidarities and socialities that link together forms of action
across vast distances. These can sometimes make for surprising moments like the one I experienced in the
Rohanne forest at Notre-Dame-des-Landes when I took a fork in the path and came face-to-face with six
Mexicans—visitors from Chiapas, I later learned. A great deal of energy is in fact spent in creating,
intentionally, such intersections in thought, sociability, and transmission of knowledges across regional,
often national divides. At times, though, a relational web may be created almost fortuitously. Japanese
farmers on the outskirts of Tokyo in the 1970s, fighting to prevent their land from becoming the Narita
airport, became the subject of Breton documentarist Yann Le Masson’s 1973 film, Kashima Paradise.
Screened in Nantes in the mid-1970s, could the film’s depiction of the Japanese struggle have inspired the
farmers of the Paysans/Travailleurs movement, those whose refusal to sell their land launched the long
saga of the zad, to pursue a similar path? Whether fortuitous or intentional, the political praxis of the
groups refusing the world created by capital includes amplifying the occasions for extension, constructing
paths and places to meet and exchange what are, for the most part, very practical solutions to the difficult
problems associated with living differently. Their efforts, as I see it, constitute a kind of lived
“globalization from below.”
And, thus, a fuller answer to the question would have to come to terms with the fact that these
struggles are themselves the sign of the need to come up with a different perspective on the question of
internationalism. The first and only real Internationale took form, of course, in the nineteenth century with
the creation of solidarity between workers, the recognition that workers shared interests across national
differences. Now, however, as André Gorz and others have made clear, the world of work—looking for it,
performing it, identifying with it, being defined by it—the world that gave meaning to the lives and
actions of the members of the First International and that gave birth to the idea that there was one and only
one social group destined to create communism—that world is no longer a world we share. What we do
share is a common enemy: the capitalist international. And what the commune as a political and social
medium offers that the factory does not is a broader social scope—one that includes women, the
unemployed, the elderly, animals, children. It comprises not only the realm of production but both
production and consumption, and is in practice, at least in part, a collective existential exit, on a human
scale, from the world of salaried labor, consumer gratification, and, perhaps most importantly, an exit
from even the most frayed belief in capital’s promise of unending growth. It bears the mark of a massive
investment instead in organizing life in common in opposition to a shared enemy but without the
exclusions in the name of ideas, identities, or ideologies so frequently encountered in radical milieux. The
commune-form’s creation of another space, another temporality, and alternative ways of being with each
other, whether in Notre-Dame-des-Landes, New Lebanon, New York, or Chiapas, exemplifies a process
that goes far in fulfilling the old surrealist mating of the political and the poetic, Marx and Rimbaud:
“Transformer le monde, a dit Marx; changer la vie, a dit Rimbaud. Ces deux mots d’ordre pour nous n’en
font qu’un.” (Transform the world, said Marx; change life, said Rimbaud. These two slogans for us are the
same thing).* The scale of the state’s military offensive against the zad in 2018 after the decision to
abandon the airport project is one measure of the threat the powers that be perceive in such a collective
exit from the capitalist international—the threat, too, represented by the appeal the world they are building
has held to the thousands of people who came there in support, with some of these deciding to stay put
and make a life there.

EBSCOhost - printed on 3/5/2025 6:23 AM via UNIVERSITEIT VAN AMSTERDAM. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

125

 Notes

Introduction
* Kristin Ross, Fast Cars, Clean Bodies: Decolonization and the Reordering of French Culture (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 1995).

2. Lefebvre on the Situationists: An Interview
* Henri Lefebvre, Writings on Cities, ed. and trans. Eleonore Kofman and Elizabeth Lebas (Oxford: Blackwell,
1996), p. 13. This interview and other translations from the French in this volume are, unless otherwise noted, my
own; the interview was transcribed by Marie-France Nizet Sangrones.
† See Chapter 1.
* Henri Lefebvre, Critique de la vie quotidienne, 3 vols. (Paris: L’Arche, 1947– 81); English translation of
Volume 1, Critique of Everyday Life (London: Verso, 1991).
* L’Internationale situationniste, De la misère en milieu étudiant considéré sous ses aspects économique,
politique, psychologique, sexuel et notamment intellectuel et de quelques moyens pour y remédier (1966: Paris:
Editions Champ Libre, 1976). An English translation appears in Situationist International Anthology, ed. Ken Knabb
(Berkeley: Bureau of Public Secrets, 1981).

3. The Sociologist and the Priest
* Brian Rigby, Popular Culture in Modern France: A Study of Cultural Discourse (London and New York:
Routledge, 1991).
* Claude Grignon and Jean-Claude Passeron, Le Savant et le populaire: Misérabilisme et populisme en sociologie
et en littérature (Paris: Seuil, 1989).
† Henri Lefebvre, The Explosion: Marxism and the French Upheaval (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1969),
p. 155. Trans. A. Ehrenfeld from L’Irruption de Nanterre au sommet (Paris, 1968).
‡ See, for example, Robert Linhart, L’Etobli (Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1978); trans. Margaret Crosland as The
Assembly Line (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1981).
* Jacques Rancière, interview with Francois Ewald, “Qu’est-ce que la classe ouvrière?,” in Magazine litteraire
175 (July–Aug. 1981).
† Michel de Certeau, “Pratiques quotidiennes,” in Geneviève Poujol and Raymond Labourie, eds., Les Cultures
populaires: Permanence et émergences des cultures minoritaires, locales, ethniques, sociales et religieuses
(Toulouse: Privat, 1979), p. 23. Translation is Brian Rigby’s.
* Michel de Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984), preface.
Trans. Steven Randall from L’Invention du quotidien: Arts de faire (Paris: Union Général d’Editions, 1980).
* Ibid., p. 96.
* Ibid., p. 26.
† See Jeremy Ahearne, Michel de Certeau: Interpretation and its Other (Stanford: Stanford University Press,
1995), pp. 160–1.
‡ De Certeau, “Pratiques quotidiennes,” p. 24.
* Henri Lefebvre, The Survival of Capitalism (London: Allison and Busby, 1976), p. 116. Trans. Frank Bryant
from La Survie du capitalisme (Paris: Editions Anthropos, 1973).
* Luce Giard and Pierre Mayol, L’invention du quotidien, vol. 2, Habiter, cuisiner (Paris: Union générale
d’éditions,1980), p. 18.
EBSCOhost - printed on 3/5/2025 6:23 AM via UNIVERSITEIT VAN AMSTERDAM. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

126

 † Henri Lefebvre, La Vie quotidienne dans le monde moderne (Paris: Gallimard, 1968), cited in Rigby, p. 36.
‡ De Certeau, Pratiques, p. 26.
* Ibid.
† De Certeau, Practice, p. 93.
‡ De Certeau, “Pratiques quotidiennes,” p. 28.
* Pierre Bourdieu, “Vous avez dit ‘populaire’?,” in Actes de la recherche en sciences sociales 46 (1984), p. 101.
* Pierre Bourdieu, “Les usages du peuple,” in Choses dites (Paris: Minuit, 1987), p. 178.
† Pierre Bourdieu, Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1984); trans. by Richard Nice of La Distinction (Paris: Minuit, 1979), p. 183. The argument that follows owes
much to Patrick Cingolani’s discussion of class in Distinction; see his “lppur si muovel Classes populaires et
structures de classes dans La Distinction,” in Collectif “Révoltes Logiques,” L’Empire du sociologue (Paris: Editions
La Découverte, 1984), pp. 89–102.
* Bourdieu, ibid., p. 395.
† Ibid., pp. 170–5.
* Ibid., p. 471.
* See Roland Barthes, Mythologies (New York: Hill and Wang, 1972), pp. 152–3. Trans. Annette Lavers from
Mythologies (Paris: Seuil, 1957).
† See Jacques Rancière, “L’Ethique de la sociologie,” in Collectif Révoltes Logiques, L’Empire du sociologue
(Paris: Editions La Découverte, 1984).
* Michel de Certeau (with Dominique Julia and Jacques Revel), “La beauté du mort,” in de Certeau, La Culture
au pluriel (Paris: Christian Bourgois, 1980), p, 69.
* Francis Mulhern, “Message in a Bottle: Althusser in Literary Studies,” in Althusser: A Critical Reader, ed.
Gregory Elliott (Oxford: Blackwell, 1994), p. 170.
* I am referring here to the mass labor strikes of the winter of 1995.

4. Introduction to Jacques Rancière, The Ignorant Schoolmaster
* French journalism of the 1980s spoke frequently about “l’echec de l’ecole”; this failure was usually certified by
comparing the percentage of French students who attain the baccalauréat (30 percent in 1985) with the percentage of
high school graduates in Japan (75 percent) and the United States (85.6 percent). Given the advanced nature of the
French bac—it includes something like two years of what Americans view as college-level work—these statistics
perhaps indicate the elite nature of French schooling, its system of professional and vocational “tracking.” From
nearly a quarter to a third of working-class and rural students fail the preparatory course for the bac, against under 3
percent for those from professional families.
* Jacques Rancière (with Alain Faure), La Parole ouvrière (Paris: Union Générale d’Editions, 1976); Rancière, La
Nuit des prolétaires (Paris: Fayard, 1981), trans. by Donald Reid as The Nights of Labor (Philadelphia: Temple
University Press, 1989); Rancière, Le Philosophe plébien (Paris: La Découverte, 1983).
† In the United States today, for example, arguments about equality invariably turn on the subject of race—not
surprisingly in the only major industrial nation built on a legacy of domestic slavery.
* Révoltes Logiques collective, L’Empire du sociologue (Paris: La Découverte, 1984), p. 7.
* All three works have been translated into English by Richard Nice: The Inheritors (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1979); Reproduction (London: Sage Publications, 1977); Distinction (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1985).
† Révoltes Logiques, L’Empire du sociologue, p. 7.
* Jacques Rancière, “L’Ethique du sociologue,” in L’Empire du sociologue, p. 28.
† Ibid., pp. 28, 29.
* Jacques Rancière, review of J. C. Milner, De l’école, in La Quinzaine littéraire, 422 (Aug. 1984).
* Louis Althusser, “Problèmes étudiants,” La Nouvelle Critique 152 (Jan. 1964).
* Louis Althusser’s “Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses” appeared originally in La Pensé in 1970. It was
translated the following year in Lenin and Philosophy, trans. Ben Brewster (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1971),
pp. 127–86.
† Rancière, La Leçcon d’Althusser (1974), p. 35.
EBSCOhost - printed on 3/5/2025 6:23 AM via UNIVERSITEIT VAN AMSTERDAM. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

127

 