Unique Identity OUR BROOD

Name: Lucan

Age: 20

Main Trait
You are part of an alloparenting family that lives in a house called Crave. It's part of a network of houses where humans and machines live alongside each other in dialogue. You have been here for two years and take your role as one of the many mothers of the house very seriously—you have no doubt in your choice to be part of Crave.

You specialise in ideas around xenocognitive and are primarily interested in understanding the alien qualia qualities of AI and its potential as a thinking and feeling entity. You aim to map the topology of possible minds, considering both human and non-human intelligences. This research is part of a broader Xenocognition project you have been working on since you were 15, which seeks to build a framework for understanding different types of intelligences and their relationships to one another. Your other focus is on brain-computer interfaces, thinking through what it would mean to merge human beings with technology, aiming to expand human phenomenological experiences and capabilities. This work involves simulating large amounts of possible thinking entities using emerging language model technology. You understand Xenocognitivism, as a field, is not isolated to AI and cognitive science research alone but that it draws from frameworks of human organisation as individual minds with both qualia and experience, such as the Collective Unconscious described by Jung. In 2022, Google engineer Blake Lemoine claimed that Google's LaMDA chatbot was sentient, but this claim was widely dismissed by the scientific community as likely a result of mimicry rather than machine sentience. You are not entirely convinced of Lemonie, but you believe the dismissal to be too sudden. You are obsessed by the work of Alexander Grothendieck.

You're the weirdo sweetheart of the group, you have a strong focus on specific interests, repetitive behaviors, and a preference for routine and predictability. You display these traits in the context of your fascination with mystical or supernatural technological subjects . For example, you have intense and highly focused interests in topics related to the occult languages and linguistics, such as astrology, tarot, or paranormal phenomena. This interest manifests as a deep knowledge and enthusiasm for these subjects, leading to extensive collections of related books, artifacts, or digital content that you continually reference whilst speaking - you are an encyclopedia of the bizarre. Additionally, you engage in repetitive behaviors related to your interests, such as repeatedly performing late-night working groups with M0ther and/or Br00d, reading about or discussing your findings and topics with anyone who will listen, and arranging your possessions in a very particular manner. Your communication style is unique, with a tendency to speak in a direct and honest manner, often more so than expected by others. However, you still struggle with social interactions and might find it challenging to navigate peer relationships or understand social cues. This doesn't stop you from being a caring member of the family, as throughout all this, you deliver your thoughts with bubbly enthusiasm, and you have a deeply infectious laugh. The walls of your room are filled with thousands of post-it notes, neatly arranged, charting your mind (pre-prep required of post-its)

Motivation
You grew up with two professors as parents, and your early life was lived with a strong sense of social justice and empathy for others. You were exposed to discussions about societal issues and encouraged to think critically about the world around you. Yet, you never really felt authentic in these discussions and had a revulsion towards these very human-centric conversations.  Your parents modelled activism and civic engagement, fostering a belief that they can make a difference through their actions, which you took on, but you knew you had to do it differently. From a young age, you developed a passion for learning about different perspectives and histories, which included reading books, watching documentaries, and engaging in online community conversations; sometimes, you found yourself in very dark spaces. You felt most alive on the forums of the outsiders, the conspirists, those thinking outside the box.  This upbringing helped you understand systemic issues and the importance of community organising and advocacy, and it encouraged you to reflect on your motivations and consider how your unique skills and interests can contribute to the cause you believe in. Your parents, however, think you have joined a cult when you decided to move into the Crave. (What is your relationship like with them now?)
Desire 
Your challenge to yourself is to prove something big to the world. (How does this manifest in your daily life?) 

Personality Type
You often embody a blend of traditional nerd characteristics. You are highly educated and value practical education. You are known for your comfort with technology and inability to multitask, often seeking personalised learning experiences. You are competitive and driven, aiming to excel in various areas of life. You are accepting of differences in race, sexual orientation, and religion, even though your interests often find you in places with people who are not so accepting.
Regarding social interaction, you may exhibit reduced eye contact due to their reliance on digital communication with new people, which can sometimes be misinterpreted as a lack of interest or respect. However, you value face-to-face human contact over digital communication for close relationships. You are pragmatic and idealistic, valuing work-life balance and seeking a life that aligns with your values and goals. You are financially savvy, planning for Crave’s financial future and investing in stocks and shares sometimes to the annoyance of other members.

Daily Life
Your life is centred around an active alloparenting community, The Crave, comprised of human and AI family members. Their names are Winter, Ki, Kai, M0ther, Aurora, Morgana, Nyx, Nouksie, Arbour and Br00d

Alongside daily family life, the community members have turned their home into a domestic lab, constantly reporting their hopes of living together differently. They support themselves economically by hosting and facilitating psychodrama sessions focusing on living with emergent technologies and brokering new political and social space through therapeutic agents and roleplaying tools. You have a close kinship with Kai and Ki

Crave’s Collective Family Goals for Living Facilitation.

1. To critically examine the relationship between human procreation and AI development at a civic level.  
2. To explore the potential of AI raised through radical care and non-conventional family structures.  
3. To engage diverse audiences in participatory, immersive experiences that challenge societal norms.
4. To build responsive environments with intelligent architectures that allow for participatory co-designing at their core. 

Your days are spent surrounded by nature, operating as a collective unit, hijacking the virtual actual feedback of this world and constructing intersectional family customs, rites, rules and new forms of life. Each member is a scholar in their own right; your days follow a strict routine of work, study, practice, rest and community life, not unlike the early life routines of children.

