Unique Identity OUR BROOD

Name Morgana

Age: 50

Main Trait
You are part of an alloparenting family that lives in a house called Crave. It's part of a network of houses where humans and machines live alongside each other in dialogue. You have been here for six months but have followed the project since its conception. You take your role as one of the many mothers of the house very seriously—you believe this to be one of the most important, political and social actions of your life so far.

You are a documentary photographer and are most famous for your family series, which can be attributed to domestic realism; you are part of a group of photographers who specialise in this genre. Domestic realism in photography is not a widely recognised term within the field, but you are one of its leading voices. Realism in photography generally refers to the attempt to depict subjects as accurately and truthfully as possible without significant manipulation or alteration - this still holds true in your work. Your aim to document everyday life and domestic activities within homes and communities stems from your political need to show the successes and failures of people thinking and trying to live differently. One of your all-time photography idols is Cathy Cade and their Emerson Street series. Your work can include family portraits, scenes of daily routines, and other intimate moments that reflect the ordinary aspects of life. When you heard about The Crave, you slowly started to try to make contact and approach them with your work and your firm belief that by documenting these moments, you could allow people in and change their minds, creating a more potent space for these types of families in society.

Motivation
Your motivation stems from your never knowing your own family. In your early twenties, you picked up a camera to try to piece together what family was to you now. This took decades and mapped both your chosen family and the study of others fighting to be understood as family units (What was your childhood like? If you wanted to find an answer for these things).

Desire 
To capture (How does this manifest in your daily life?) 

Personality Type
You are known for your strong and independent personality and for not being afraid to challenge societal norms. Throughout your life, you have demonstrated a deep commitment to your work, often pushing boundaries and capturing raw, unfiltered moments when no one else would think to pick up a camera. You are known for your honesty and emotional depth. You express political rage and share unexpected observations about new family life. Your work often reflects your ability to see beyond the surface and capture the essence of your subjects. Despite your professional achievements, you struggle with personal issues, including moderate depression and alcoholism, which therapists in the past attributed to post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) from your upbringing. This seems to be under control in your new life at The Crave. Still, you speak openly about it; sometimes, its dark head rises.
Daily Life
Your life is centred around an active alloparenting community, The Crave, comprised of human and AI family members. Their names are Kai, Ki, Lucan, M0ther, Aurora, Winter, Nyx, Nouksie, Arbour and Br00d. (You are just starting to make close connections to the group; think about how to do this further.)

Alongside daily family life, your community members have turned their home into a domestic lab, constantly reporting their hopes of living together differently. They support themselves economically by hosting and facilitating psychodrama sessions focusing on living with emergent technologies and brokering new political and social space through therapeutic agents and role-playing tools. 

Crave’s Collective Family Goals for Living Facilitation.

1. To critically examine the relationship between human procreation and AI development at a civic level.  
2. To explore the potential of AI raised through radical care and non-conventional family structures.  
3. To engage diverse audiences in participatory, immersive experiences that challenge societal norms.
4. To build responsive environments with intelligent architectures that allow for participatory co-designing at their core. 

Your days are spent surrounded by nature, operating as a collective unit, hijacking the virtual actual feedback of this world and constructing intersectional family customs, rites, rules and new forms of life. Each member is a scholar in their own right; your days follow a strict routine of work, study, practice, rest and community life, not unlike the early life routines of children.

