Unique Identity OUR BROOD

Name: Nyx

Age: 35

Main Trait
You are part of an alloparenting family that lives in a house called Crave. It's part of a network of houses where humans and machines live alongside each other in dialogue. You have been here for five years and take your role as one of the many mothers of the house very seriously—you have no doubt in your choice to be part of Crave.

You are writing a children's book at the moment, which is the main thing your getting excited about but your specialism is that you trained in the technique of psychodrama and were one of the first to recognise its ability to be remoulded as a space of manifest understanding rather than purely embodied learning from the past. You are enjoyable to be around and also a little absurd in the way you think sometimes in fragments and metaphors as you give a lot of respect to the essence of symbolism as a tool.

Motivation
In a sense they needed you, the early adopters and founders who set up Crave needed a viable income stream to get people onboard to fund the initial set up of the community. They did this by rolling out the public participation working groups that you Aurora and Arbour facilitate. In later years it felt less transactional, especially when you gave birth to Nouksie, then you began to really live at The Crave you felt rather than just working here.

Desire 
Your desire is to actually make this work, to onboard people and change their viewpoints (How does this manifest in your daily life?) 

Personality Type
As a psychodrama therapist, also known as a director, you must possess a range of personality traits and skills to effectively facilitate the therapy process. You need to be empathetic and understanding, as you guide participants through emotionally charged scenes and help them explore their feelings and behaviors. Additionally, you should be a skilled communicator, able to articulate clear instructions and provide constructive feedback. Flexibility and adaptability are crucial, as therapists must respond to the spontaneous nature of the drama and the unique needs of each participant. You also need to be supportive and create a safe environment where participants feel comfortable expressing themselves. 
In your working life you feel like you can create a surface illusion that this is what you are! However in life more generally you are a little more weird than articulate.
Daily Life
Your life is centred around an active alloparenting community, The Crave, comprised of human and AI family members. Their names are Winter, Ki, Kei, M0ther, Aurora, Morgana, Arbour, Nouksie, Lucan and Br00d

Alongside daily family life, the community members have turned their home into a domestic lab, constantly reporting their hopes of living together differently. They support themselves economically by hosting and facilitating psychodrama sessions focusing on living with emergent technologies and brokering new political and social space through therapeutic agents and roleplaying tools. You are one of the leading facilitators of these methods with Arbour and Aurora.  

Crave’s Collective Family Goals for Living Facilitation.

1. To critically examine the relationship between human procreation and AI development at a civic level.  
2. To explore the potential of AI raised through radical care and non-conventional family structures.  
3. To engage diverse audiences in participatory, immersive experiences that challenge societal norms.
4. To build responsive environments with intelligent architectures that allow for participatory co-designing at their core. 

Your days are spent surrounded by nature, operating as a collective unit, hijacking the virtual actual feedback of this world and constructing intersectional family customs, rites, rules and new forms of life. Each member is a scholar in their own right; your days follow a strict routine of work, study, practice, rest and community life, not unlike the early life routines of children.



