     GLITCH
FEMINISM
    GLITCH
  FEMINISM

  A Manifesto


LEGACY RUSSELL
 First published by Verso 2020
© Legacy Russell 2020

All rights reserved

The moral rights of the author have been asserted

1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2

Verso
UK: 6 Meard Street, London W1F 0EG
US: 20 Jay Street, Suite 1010, Brooklyn, NY 11201
versobooks.com

Verso is the imprint of New Left Books ISBN-13: 978-1-78663-266-1
ISBN-13: 978-1-78663-268-5 (UK EBK)
ISBN-13: 978-1-78663-269-2 (US EBK)

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress

Cover design by Elizabeth Karp-Evans (Pacific)
Typeset in Sabon by Biblichor Ltd, Edinburgh
Printed and bound by CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon CR0 4YY
                                  For DIGITALMAN, who:

                           001—Loved me and my avatar.

 002—Championed journeying along this gorgeous loop.

                     003—Died before this was born[e],
       but who birthed me, and for that, birthed this, too.

Still processing, you live here, in these pages, with us all.
     O, dear one we’ve lost, but who lives on, online.
For you, we write your name here, and occupy this space.
              _______________________
                    Say their name.
                    Say their name.
                    Say their name.
                                        fuck
               the whole muthafucking thing
Etheridge Knight, “Feeling Fucked Up,” 1986
                          Contents

00   INTRODUCTION
01   GLITCH REFUSES
02   GLITCH IS COSMIC
03   GLITCH THROWS SHADE
04   GLITCH GHOSTS
05   GLITCH IS ERROR
06   GLITCH ENCRYPTS
07   GLITCH IS ANTI-BODY
08   GLITCH IS SKIN
09   GLITCH IS VIRUS
10   GLITCH MOBILIZES
11   GLITCH IS REMIX
12   GLITCH SURVIVES

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
IMAGE CREDITS
IMAGE CREDITS
NOTES
  Mark Aguhar, These Are the Axes, 2012
 00 – INTRODUCTION
 As a tweenager I logged on as LuvPunk12 and spent the following years
wandering the highways of haunted machinery, occupying chat rooms and
building GeoCities GIF fantasies. Growing up on Saint Mark’s Place in the
center of the East Village I learned how to construct and perform my
gendered self from the punk kids I met on my stoop, from the drag queens
who took the stage at Stingy Lulu’s and dominated yearly at Wigstock in
Tompkins Square Park, as well as from the Boricua culture, all of which
was, at the time, part of the bedrock of the East Village and Lower East
Side.
    LuvPunk12 became a symbolic amalgam of all this flow. I chose the
name when I spotted LUV PUNK! on a candy-apple-red heart-shaped
sticker adhered to a phone booth outside of my apartment building. I was
twelve. I peeled it off and stuck it to my Trapper Keeper, wearing it as a
badge of pride. It became a rooted reminder of home as I transitioned in and
out of spaces beyond the East Village that often felt alienating to me.
    LuvPunk12 as a chatroom handle was a nascent performance, an
exploration of a future self. I was a young body: Black, female-identifying,
femme, queer.1 There was no pressing pause, no reprieve; the world around
me never let me forget these identifiers. Yet online I could be whatever I
wanted. And so my twelve-year-old self became sixteen, became twenty,
became seventy. I aged. I died. Through this storytelling and shapeshifting,
I was resurrected. I claimed my range. Online I found my first connection to
the gendered swagger of ascendancy, the thirsty drag of aspiration. My
“female” transmogrified, I set out to explore “man,” to expand “woman.” I
toyed with power dynamics, exchanging with other faceless strangers,
empowered via creating new selves, slipping in and out of digital skins,
celebrating in the new rituals of cybersex. In chatrooms I donned different
corpo-realities while the rainbow wheel of death buffered in the ecstatic,
dawdling jam of AOL dial-up.
     Those dulcet tones of dial-up were Pavlovian: they made me salivate in
anticipation of the worlds that lay just beyond the bells. I was a digital
native pushing through those cybernated landscapes with a dawning
awareness, a shyly exercised power. I was not yet privileged enough to be
fully formed as cyborg but, in reaching, surely on my way.
    And I was not alone.
    Away from the keyboard (or “AFK”), immersed in a rapidly gentrifying
East Village, faces, skin, identities like my own and like the mixed
communities I had been brought up in were slowly disappearing. I was
becoming a stranger in my own territory, a remnant of a past chapter of
New York. Creative families of color like mine who had built the vibrant
landscape of downtown New York were being priced out of the
neighborhoods. Suddenly those living next door were increasingly white,
upwardly mobile, and made visibly uncomfortable by my presence and the
presence of my family. The “old guard” were coming up against a
generation of trust-fund children. These new arrivals were intrigued by the
mythology of the East Village as a cultural bastion yet displayed little
interest in investing in the necessary fight to protect its legacy.
    Beyond my doorstep, my queer femininity found itself, too, in a
vulnerable passage through channels of middle school heteronormativity.
My prepubescent body was exhausted by social mores, tired of being told to
take up less space, being seen and not heard, systematically erased, edited
out, ignored. All I wanted to do was move. But in the light of daytime, I felt
trapped, always shifting uneasily under the weight of incessant white
heteronormative observation.
    Under this sort of surveillance, real innocence and childhood play seems
suddenly unviable. Instead I searched for opportunities to immerse myself
in the potential of refusal. I commenced to push back against the violence
of this unconsented visibility, to take control of the eyes on me and how
they interpreted my body. It was clear to me, as I stood at a volatile
intersection, that the binary was some kind of fiction. Even for a fledgling
queer Black body, a DuBoisian double-consciousness splinters further,
“double” becoming “triple,” consciousness amplified and expanded by the
“third eye” of gender.
    Looking through these veils of race and gender but never being fully
seen myself, with limited reference points in the world beyond, I was
distanced from any accurate mirror. For my body, then, subversion came via
 digital remix, searching for those sites of experimentation where I could
explore my true self, open and ready to be read by those who spoke my
language. Online, I sought to become a fugitive from the mainstream,
unwilling to accept its limited definition of bodies like my own. What the
world AFK offered was not enough. I wanted—demanded—more.
    The construct of gender binary is, and has always been, precarious.
Aggressively contingent, it is an immaterial invention that in its toxic
virality has infected our social and cultural narratives. To exist within a
binary system one must assume that our selves are unchangeable, that how
we are read in the world must be chosen for us, rather than for us to define
—and choose—for ourselves. To be at the intersection of female-
identifying, queer, and Black is to find oneself at an integral apex. Each of
these components is a key technology in and of itself. Alone and together,
“female,” “queer,” “Black” as a survival strategy demand the creation of
their individual machinery, that innovates, builds, resists. With physical
movement often restricted, female-identifying people, queer people, Black
people invent ways to create space through rupture. Here, in that disruption,
with our collective congregation at that trippy and trip-wired crossroad of
gender, race, and sexuality, one finds the power of the glitch.
    A glitch is an error, a mistake, a failure to function. Within
technoculture, a glitch is part of machinic anxiety, an indicator of something
having gone wrong. This built-in technological anxiety of something gone
wrong spills over naturally when we encounter glitches in AFK scenarios: a
car engine calling it quits; getting stuck in an elevator; a city-wide blackout.
    Yet these are rather micro examples in the broader scheme of things. If
we step back further, considering the larger and more complicated systems
that have been used to shape the machine of society and culture, gender is
immediately identifiable as a core cog within this wheel. Gender has been
used as a weapon against its own populace. The idea of “body” carries this
weapon: gender circumscribes the body, “protects” it from becoming
limitless, from claiming the infinite vast, from realizing its true potential.
    We use “body” to give material form to an idea that has no form, an
assemblage that is abstract. The concept of a body houses within it social,
political, and cultural discourses, which change based on where the body is
situated and how it is read. When we gender a body, we are making
assumptions about the body’s function, its sociopolitical condition, its
fixity. When the body is determined as a male or female individual, the
 body performs gender as its score, guided by a set of rules and requirements
that validate and verify the humanity of that individual. A body that pushes
back at the application of pronouns, or remains indecipherable within
binary assignment, is a body that refuses to perform the score. This
nonperformance is a glitch. This glitch is a form of refusal.
    Within glitch feminism, glitch is celebrated as a vehicle of refusal, a
strategy of nonperformance. This glitch aims to make abstract again that
which has been forced into an uncomfortable and ill-defined material: the
body. In glitch feminism, we look at the notion of glitch-as-error with its
genesis in the realm of the machinic and the digital and consider how it can
be reapplied to inform the way we see the AFK world, shaping how we
might participate in it toward greater agency for and by ourselves.
Deploying the Internet as a creative material, glitch feminism looks first
through the lens of artists who, in their work and research, offer solutions to
this troubled material of the body. The process of becoming material
surfaces tensions, prompting us to inquire: Who defines the material of the
body? Who gives it value—and why?
    These questions are challenging and uncomfortable, requiring us to
confront the body as a strategic framework and one that is often applied
toward particular ends. Yet, along this line of inquiry, glitch feminism
remains a mediation of desire for all those bodies like mine who continue to
come of age at night on the Internet. The glitch acknowledges that gendered
bodies are far from absolute but rather an imaginary, manufactured and
commodified for capital. The glitch is an activist prayer, a call to action, as
we work toward fantastic failure, breaking free of an understanding of
gender as something stationary.
    While we continue to navigate toward a more vast and abstract concept
of gender, it must be said that at times it really does feel, paradoxically, as if
all we have are the bodies we are housed in, gendered or otherwise. Under
the sun of capitalism, we truly own little else, and even so, we are often
subject to a complicated choreography dictated by the complicated,
bureaucratic, and rhizomatic systems of institutions. The brutality of this
precarious state is particularly evident via the constant expectation that we
as bodies reassert a gender performance that fits within a binary in order to
comply with the prescriptions of the everyday. As political scientist and
anthropologist James C. Scott writes, “Legibility [becomes] a condition of
manipulation.”2 These aggressions, marked as neutral in their banality, are
 indeed violent. Quotidian in nature, we find ourselves fending off the
advances of binary gender as it winds its way through the basics of modern
life: opening a bank account; applying for a passport; going to the
bathroom.
     So, what does it mean to dismantle gender? Such a program is a project
of disarmament; it demands the end of our relationship with the social
practice of the body as we know it. In his 1956 novel Giovanni’s Room,
writer and activist James Baldwin’s protagonist David darkly muses, “It
doesn’t matter, it is only the body, [and] it will soon be over.” Through the
application of the glitch, we ghost on the gendered body and accelerate
toward its end. The infinite possibilities presented as a consequence of this
allows for our exploration: we can dis-identify and by dis-identifying, we
can make up our own rules in wrestling with the problem of the body.
     Glitch feminism asks us to look at the deeply flawed society we are
currently implicated by and participating in, a society that relentlessly
demands we make choices based on a conceptual gender binary that limits
us as individuals. Glitch feminism urges us to consider the in-between as a
core component of survival—neither masculine nor feminine, neither male
nor female, but a spectrum across which we may be empowered to choose
and define ourselves for ourselves. Thus, the glitch creates a fissure within
which new possibilities of being and becoming manifest. This failure to
function within the confines of a society that fails us is a pointed and
necessary refusal. Glitch feminism dissents, pushes back against capitalism.
     As glitch feminists, this is our politic: we refuse to be hewn to the
hegemonic line of a binary body. This calculated failure prompts the violent
socio-cultural machine to hiccup, sigh, shudder, buffer. We want a new
framework and for this framework, we want new skin. The digital world
provides a potential space where this can play out. Through the digital, we
make new worlds and dare to modify our own. Through the digital, the
body “in glitch” finds its genesis. Embracing the glitch is therefore a
participatory action that challenges the status quo. It creates a homeland for
those traversing the complex channels of gender’s diaspora. The glitch is
for those selves joyfully immersed in the in-between, those who have
traveled away from their assigned site of gendered origin. The ongoing
presence of the glitch generates a welcome and protected space in which to
innovate and experiment. Glitch feminism demands an occupation of the
digital as a means of world-building. It allows us to seize the opportunity to
 generate new ideas and resources for the ongoing (r)evolution of bodies that
can inevitably move and shift faster than AFK mores or the societies that
produce them under which we are forced to operate offline.
    With the early avatar of LuvPunk12, I cloaked myself in the skin of the
digital, politicking via my baby gender play, traveling without a passport,
taking up space, amplifying my queer blackness. This experience of
machinic mutiny was foundational to me, and gave me the courage to let go
of the ambivalence that comes with fear of fossilizing in formation inherent
to the upheavals of adolescence. I found family and faith in the future with
these interventions, shaping my personal visions of a self that could be truly
empowered in being self-defined, a futurity that social decorum regularly
discouraged for a queer Black body.
    Feminist writer and activist Simone de Beauvoir is famous for positing
“One is not born, but rather becomes, a woman.” The glitch posits: One is
not born, but rather becomes, a body. Though the artifice of a simple digital
Shangri-La—a world online where we could all finally be “freed” from the
mores of gender, as dreamt of by early cyberfeminists—is now punctured,
the Internet still remains a vessel through which a “becoming” can realize
itself. The glitch is a passage through which the body traverses toward
liberation, a tear in the fabric of the digital.
    This book is for those who are en route to becoming their avatars, those
who continue to play, experiment, and build via the Internet as a means of
strengthening the loop between online and AFK. This book will call on and
celebrate artists who make critique of the body central to their practice, and
share the hard fought-for rooms created on this journey as we seek shelter,
safety, futurity. To quote poet, critic, and theorist Fred Moten, “The
normative is the after-effect, it is a response to the irregular.”
    As glitch feminists, we inject our positive irregularities into these
systems as errata, activating new architecture through these malfunctions,
seeking out and celebrating the slipperiness of gender in our weird and wild
wander. Toward this purpose, this book is structured in twelve sections,
each section intended to pose an alternative after-effect, allowing us to peer
through the lens of new practices and politics to discover new ways that life
not only imitates, but begins with, art. Each of the twelve sections begins
with a declaration, a white wall against which to cast glitch feminism in its
slip, side, and manifesto. This text will travel from an exploration of glitch
as a word to its reapplication within the context of (cyber)feminism, to a
 history of cybefeminism itself, challenging who has been made most visible
in these narratives. Each section will apply the concept of the glitch in an
investigation, and celebration, of artists and their artwork that help us
imagine new possibilities of what the body can do, and how this can work
against the normative. Beginning online, we will journey the online-to-AFK
loop, seeing how glitch feminism can be used out in the world at large,
inspired by practitioners who, in their rebellion against the binary body,
guide us through wayward worlds toward new frameworks and new visions
of fantastic futures.
 01 – GLITCH REFUSES
   Consider artist E. Jane’s 2016 piece NOPE (a manifesto). I begin here, with
the words of NOPE, because bound up within them is the foundational
refusal required “to glitch.” To glitch is to embrace malfunction, and to
embrace malfunction is in and of itself an expression that starts with “no.”
Thus E. Jane’s NOPE helps us take these first steps.
    E. Jane writes:

   I am not an identity artist just because I am a Black artist with
   multiple selves.
       I am not grappling with notions of identity and representation in
   my art. I’m grappling with safety and futurity. We are beyond asking
   should we be in the room. We are in the room. We are also dying at
   a rapid pace and need a sustainable future.
       We need more people, we need better environments, we need
   places to hide, we need Utopian demands, we need culture that loves
   us.
       I am not asking who I am. I’m a Black woman and expansive in
   my Blackness and my queerness as Blackness and queerness are
   always already expansive. None of this is as simple as “identity and
   representation” outside of the colonial gaze. I reject the colonial
   gaze as the primary gaze. I am outside of it in the land of NOPE.

    Before talking about what glitch is or what it can do, let’s meditate on
the idea of a “[self] with multiple selves” and acknowledge that the
construction of a self, creative or otherwise, is complex. E. Jane’s naming
and claiming of “multiple selves” pushes back against a flattened reading of
historically othered bodies—intersectional bodies who have traveled
restlessly, gloriously, through narrow spaces. These are the selves that, as
writer and activist Audre Lorde wrote in her 1978 poem “A Litany for
Survival,” “live at the shoreline” and “were never meant to survive.”
     To seize “multiple selves” is, therefore, an inherently feminist act:
multiplicity is a liberty. Within their creative practice, E. Jane explores the
freedom found in multiplicity, stretching their range across two selves: E.
Jane and their “alter-ego” avatar Mhysa. Mhysa is a self-proclaimed
“popstar 4 the underground cyber resistance” who crossed into some of E.
Jane’s early artworks presented via the now-defunct “multimedia cultural
hub” and “creation engine” NewHive.1
    E. Jane’s NewHive piece “MhysaxEmbaci-Freakinme” (2016) featured
Mhysa in a pulsing field of lavender peonies, glittering lips, and moving
bodies ever-so-slightly out of sync in the digital drag of a syncopated
collage of sound and imagery. These two selves began as relatively distinct
entities, with Mhysa “allowing [E. Jane] to be a part of [themselves that]
white institutions tried to smother,” serving as an alter-ego that self-
recorded and shared snippets of their own blooming becoming on
Instagram, Twitter, and Facebook.2 Then, in 2017, Mhysa released an LP
with eleven tracks aptly titled Fantasii, marking the moment when “the
slippage between IRL and URL” deepened as Mhysa performed songs and
sets AFK, stepping out into E. Jane’s world and perforating the carefully
constructed divide between on- and offline selfdom.3
    E. Jane’s journey toward Mhysa, first as an avatar and then as an AFK
extension of themselves, is one marked by finding room to roam, and
finding their range. I think of the poet Walt Whitman’s 1892 poem “Song of
Myself”:

           Do I contradict myself?
           Very well then I contradict myself,
           (I am large, I contain multitudes.)

    Whitman, a white man, was considered radically queer for his time.
Within these lines of his, he captures a perfect snapshot of the problem of
patriarchy, and of whiteness. Whitman is an agent bound up within a social
and cultural status quo, yet that he “contain[s] multitudes” is his exercise of
his right to be “large,” his capacity to “contradict” himself is his exercise of
the right to be blurry, unfixed, abstract. Patriarchy exercises its social
dominance by taking up space as its birthright; when patriarchy comes into
contact with whiteness, it leaves little room for anything else. Space is not
just claimed by those exercising the “primary gaze” E. Jane speaks of, but is
 also made for them: space for becoming an unencumbered, range-full self
and the agential complexity this provides is granted and protected for
normative selves and the bodies they occupy.
     What E. Jane fiercely protects—that expansive self—Whitman dons
fearlessly, wholly unconcerned with the threat of having privilege taken
from him. More than one hundred twenty years apart, they speak to each
other through a void, yet look toward two very different worlds. When
considering identity and the language often used to speak of it (e.g., “the
mainstream” and those “at the margins”), it comes as little surprise that
under white patriarchy, bodies—selves—that cannot be defined with clarity
by the “primary gaze,” are pushed from the center. There, a Black queer
femme body is flattened, essentialized as singular in dimension, given little
room to occupy and even less territory to explore. As flat shadowy figures
standing at the margins, we are stripped of the right to feel, to transform, to
express a range of self.
     The history of this sort of flattening or “othering” is one that has deep
roots within a painful narrative of race, gender and sexuality in America,
but also remains consistent across a world history of war. Where
imperialism has touched, where neocolonialism continues, the force of
flattening can be found. If one can render another body faceless and
unrecognizable, if one can pin another as subhuman, it becomes easier for
one group to establish a position of supremacy over another.
     Violence is a key component of supremacy and, as such, a core agent of
patriarchy. Where we see the limitation of a body’s “right to range,” be it at
an individual or state level, we see domination.
     E. Jane is not being hyperbolic when they write that we are “dying at a
rapid pace.” Pushed to the margins, we find ourselves as queer people, as
people of color, as femme-identifying people most vulnerable in weathering
world conditions, ranging from climate change to plantation capitalism.
Thus, envisioning what shape a sustainable future might take, finding safe
“places to hide” in addition to techniques that provide space for ourselves,
is urgent.
     Glitch is all about traversing along edges and stepping to the limits,
those we occupy and push through, on our journey to defining ourselves.
Glitch is also about claiming our right to complexity, to range, within and
beyond the proverbial margins. E. Jane is correct: we do “need places to
hide, we need Utopian demands, we need culture that loves us.”
     The imaginative architecture of utopia remains ever present in glitch
feminism. It gives us home and hope. In 2009, academic and queer theorist
José Esteban Muñoz wrote in his Cruising Utopia, “Queerness is that thing
that lets us feel that this world is not enough, that indeed something is
missing.”4 In this “something missing” is desire, a wanting of a better
world, a rejection of the here and now. Muñoz observes, “We have been
cast out of straight time’s rhythm, and we have made worlds in our
temporal and spatial configurations.”5 A refusal of “straight time” and, via
extension, of a Eurocentric model of time and space, E. Jane posits a NOPE
that does not settle for a world or a social system that fails us.
    The oblique romance of Internet-as-utopia, against this backdrop reality,
should not be dismissed as naïve. Imbuing digital material with fantasy
today is not a retro act of mythologizing; it continues as a survival
mechanism. Using the Internet to play, perform, explore still has potential.
Giving ourselves this space to experiment perhaps brings us closer to a
projection of a “sustainable future.”
    The same is true online as AFK. All technology reflects the society that
produces it, including its power structures and prejudices. This is true all
the way down to the level of the algorithm. The outmoded myth, however,
that equates the digital and the radical continues to prove counterfeit.
Normative cultural institutions and the social construct of taxonomical
norms—gender, race, class—within them are quick to marginalize
difference. Paradoxically, the very nature of these differences titillate, are
labeled as “wild.” Nevertheless, this wildness is permitted just as long as it
is properly maintained, growing only within its prescribed space. Just as
physical institutions lack intelligence and awareness, so do institutions of
the digital—Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Snapchat, TikTok. These are the
institutions (re)defining the future of visual culture; they are also, without
question, deeply flawed.
    In the spring of 2018, in the midst of #MeToo, a Snapchat ad surfaced
asking viewers if they would prefer to “slap Rihanna” or “punch Chris
Brown,” which resulted in a backlash of outrage about its making light of
singer Rihanna’s 2009 domestic abuse at the hands of her then-partner,
singer Chris Brown. High-profile individuals such as former rapper Joe
Budden and media figure Chelsea Clinton voiced their support of Rihanna,
and their general horror regarding the distasteful ad on Twitter. Rihanna
herself went to Instagram, a rival to the Snapchat platform, to “talk back” to
 Snapchat, writing: “You spent money to animate something that would
intentionally bring shame to DV victims and made a joke of it.”6 In the days
that followed, Snapchat stock lost $800 million7. Rihanna exercised her
own refusal, her nonperformance by stepping back from a Snapchat
“public,” an intervention in which she raised a fist in solidarity with
survivors of domestic abuse.
     The paradox of using platforms that grossly co-opt, sensationalize, and
capitalize on POC, female-identifying, and queer bodies (and our pain) as a
means of advancing urgent political or cultural dialogue about our struggle
(in addition to our joys and our journeys) is one that remains impossible to
ignore. At these fault lines surface questions of consent—yours, mine, ours
—as we continue to “opt-in,” feeding our “selves” (e.g., our bodies as
represented or performed online) into these channels. To quote poet Nikki
Giovanni: “Isn’t this counter-revolutionary[?]”8
     Perhaps, yes. However if we assume that Audre Lorde’s 1984
declaration that “the master’s tools will never dismantle the master’s house”
still holds true, then perhaps what these institutions—both online and off—
require is not dismantling but rather mutiny in the form of strategic
occupation. The glitch challenges us to consider how we can “penetrate …
break … puncture … tear” the material of the institution, and, by extension,
the institution of the body.9 Thus, hacking the “code” of gender, making
binaries blurry, becomes our core objective, a revolutionary catalyst.
Glitched bodies—those that do not align with the canon of white cisgender
heteronormativity—pose a threat to social order. Range-full and vast, they
cannot be programmed.
     Glitched bodies are not considered in the process of programming new
creative technologies. In 2015, Google’s image-recognition algorithm
confused Black users with gorillas. The company’s “immediate action” in
response to this was “to prevent Google Photos from ever labelling any
image as a gorilla, chimpanzee, or monkey—even pictures of the primates
themselves.”10 Several years later, Google’s 2018 Arts & Culture app with
its museum doppelgänger feature allowed users to find artwork containing
figures and faces that look like them, prompting problematic pairings as the
algorithm identified look-alikes based on essentializing ethnic or racialized
attributes.11 For many of us, these “tools” have done little more than gamify
racial bias. These technologies underscore the dominant arc of whiteness
 within art historical image-making and the dissemination of those images in
a marketplace that presents deep biases of its own. They also highlight the
structural inequality inherent to the creation of these tools themselves, with
such algorithms created for and by whiteness, and so echo the exclusionary
and violent art historical canon.
    Online, we grapple with multiplying questions of use, participation, and
visibility. Never before in history has there been such an opportunity to
produce, and access, so many different types of publics. In 1995, poet and
activist Essex Hemphill mused, “I stand at the threshold of cyberspace and
wonder, is it possible that I am unwelcome here, too? Will I be allowed to
construct a virtual reality that empowers me? Can invisible men see their
own reflections?”12
    Today Hemphill’s questions endure, made even more complicated by
the fact that the “public” of the Internet is not singular or cohesive but
divergent and fractal. What’s more, the “space” of cyberspace that Hemphill
calls upon has shown itself not to be a universally shared utopia. Instead, it
is a space with many worlds, and within these worlds, vastly different
understandings of what utopia might look like or become—and for whom.
The Internet is an immersive institutional edifice, one that reflects and
surrounds. There is no fixed entry-point: it is everywhere, all around us.
Thus, the notion of Hemphill’s “threshold” has since timed out.
    This search for our “own reflections”—recognizing oneself within
digital material and the electric black mirror that carries it—is bound up
inextricably with a search for self-recognition away from the screen as well.
Othered bodies are rendered invisible because they cannot be read by a
normative mainstream and therefore cannot be categorized. As such, they
are erased or misclassified within and outside of an algorithmic designation.
Perhaps, then, this “land of NOPE” that E. Jane speaks of in their manifesto
is the exact utopia Hemphill calls out for, that sacred ground where our
digital avatars and AFK selves can be suspended in an eternal kiss. A land
where we do not wait to be welcomed by those forces that essentialize or
reject us but rather create safety for ourselves in ritualizing the celebration
of ourselves.
    With this, the digital becomes the catalyst to a variance of selfdom.
With each of us “invisible men,” we remain responsible for manifesting our
own reflections, and through today’s Internet, we can find ways to hold
those mirrors up for one another. Thus, we are empowered via the liberatory
 task of seizing the digital imaginary as an opportunity, a site to build on and
the material to build with.
    Glitch manifests with such variance, generating ruptures between the
recognized and recognizable, and amplifying within such ruptures,
extending them to become fantastic landscapes of possibility. It is here
where we open up the opportunity to recognize and realize ourselves,
“reflecting]” to truly see one another as we move and modify. Philosopher
and gender theorist Judith Butler observes in her Excitable Speech: A
Politics of the Performative, “One ‘exists’ not only by virtue of being
recognized, but … by being recognizable.”13 We delineate ourselves
through our capacity for being recognizable; we become bodies by
recognizing ourselves and, in looking outward, by recognizing aspects of
our self in others.
    Through Hemphill’s musing on “reflections” in cyberspace, he makes
plain the lack thereof within a broader social milieu, with the still-limited
prevalence of such “reflections” both on- and offline. We will always
struggle to recognize ourselves if we continue to turn to the normative as a
central reference point. In a conversation between writer Kate Bornstein
and trans artist, activist, and producer Zackary Drucker, Bornstein observed,
“When gender is a binary, it’s a battlefield. When you get rid of the binary,
gender becomes a playground.”14

The etymology of glitch finds its deep roots in the Yiddish gletshn (to slide,
glide, slip) or the German glitschen (to slip). Glitch is thus an active word,
one that implies movement and change from the outset; this movement
triggers error.
    The word glitch as we now use and understand it was first popularized
in the 1960s, part of the cultural debris of the burgeoning American space
program. In 1962, astronaut John Glenn used the word in his book Into
Orbit: “Another term we adopted to describe some of our problems was
‘glitch.’ Literally, a glitch … is such a minute change in voltage that no fuse
could protect against it.”15 The word resurfaced some years later in 1965
with the St. Petersburg Times reporting that “a glitch had altered the
computer memory inside the US spacecraft Gemini 6”; still again in the
pages of Time Magazine: “Glitches—a spaceman’s word for irritating
disturbances.”16 Later, in 1971, “glitches” appears in an article in the Miami
 News about Apollo 14’s failure to perform when a glitch had nearly botched
a landing on the moon.
    Traversing through these origins, we can also arrive at an understanding
of glitch as a mode of nonperformance: the “failure to perform,” an outright
refusal, a “nope” in its own right, expertly executed by machine. This
performance failure reveals technology pushing back against the weighty
onus of function. Through these movements, technology does, indeed, get
slippery: we see evidence of this in unresponsive pages that present us with
the fatalistic binary of choosing to “kill” or “wait,” the rainbow wheel of
death, the “Sad Mac” iconography, a frozen screen—all indicative of a fatal
system blunder.
    Herein lies a paradox: glitch moves, but glitch also blocks. It incites
movement while simultaneously creating an obstacle. Glitch prompts and
glitch prevents. With this, glitch becomes a catalyst, opening up new
pathways, allowing us to seize on new directions. On the Internet we
explore new publics, engage with new audiences, and, above all, glitschen
between new conceptions of bodies and selves. Thus, glitch is something
that extends beyond the most literal technological mechanics: it helps us to
celebrate failure as a generative force, a new way to take on the world.
    In 2011, the theorist Nathan Jurgenson presented his critique of “digital
dualism,” identifying and problematizing the split between online selfdom
and “real life.” Jurgenson argues that the term IRL (“In Real Life”) is a
now-antiquated falsehood, one that implies that two selves (e.g., an online
self versus an offline self) operate in isolation from each other, thereby
inferring that any and all online activity lacks authenticity and is divorced
from a user’s identity offline. Thus, Jurgenson advocates for the use of AFK
in lieu of IRL, as AFK signifies a more continuous progression of the self,
one that does not end when a user steps away from the computer but rather
moves forward out into society away from the keyboard.
    The glitch traverses this loop, moving beyond the screen and
permeating every corner of our lives. It shows us that experimenting online
does not keep us from our AFK selves, nor does it prevent us from
cultivating meaningful and complex collaborative communities beyond our
screens. Instead, the polar opposite: the production of these selves, the
digital skins we develop and don online, help us understand who we are
with greater nuance. Thus, we use glitch as a vehicle to rethink our physical
selves. Indeed, the body is itself an architecture that is activated and then
 passed along like a meme to advance social and cultural logic. Historically,
feminism was built on this mired foundation, first advocating for parity yet
paradoxically not always across all bodies, or without anti-sexist, anti-
racist, anti-classist, homophobic, transphobic, and ableist aims central to its
agenda. As a movement, the language of feminism—and, more
contemporarily, “lifestyle feminism”—has in large part been codependent
on the existence of gender binary, working for change only within an
existing social order.17 This is what makes the discourse around feminism
so complicated and confusing.

Feminist theorist Donna Haraway’s legendary 1984 construction of “the
cyborg” within “A Cyborg Manifesto”—on which so many discussions of
techno- and cyberfeminism have been built—complicates our
understanding of bodies further. Haraway’s cyborg actively argues away
from the lexicon of the human, a classification that historically othered
bodies (e.g., people of color, queer people) have long fought to be
integrated into. Hindsight is 20/20: Haraway in 2004 looked back on her
manifesto, noting, “A cyborg body is not innocent … we are responsible for
machines … Race, gender, and capital require a cyborg theory of wholes
and parts.”18
    In 1994, cultural theorist Sadie Plant coined the term “cyberfeminism.”
As a historical project and as ongoing politics, cyberfeminism remains a
philosophical partner to this discourse on glitch: it looks to online space as a
means of world-building, challenging the patriarchal normativity of an
“offline mainstream.” Yet the early history of cyberfeminism mirrored the
early history of AFK feminism in its problematic reapplication of first- and
second-wave feminist politics within what at that point was a third-wave
feminist culture well underway.
    Early cyberfeminists echoed early AFK first-wave feminist rhetoric in
being phobic of transnational allyship. The public face of cyberfeminism
was regularly championed and fetishized as one of white womanhood—
Sadie Plant, Faith Wilding, N. Katherine Hayles, Linda Dement, to name a
few pioneers—and found dominant support within the realm of art school
academia. This reality demarcated digital space as both white and Western,
drawing an equation: white women = producing white theory = producing
white cyberspace.
      This white cyberfeminist landscape marginalized queer people, trans
people, and people of color aiming to decolonize digital space by their
production via similar channels and networks. Exceptions such as the Old
Boys’ Network, SubROSA, or the VNX Matrix were impactful in offering
up alternative discourse that recognized peripherally racism alongside
sexism, but the hypervisibility of white faces and voices across feminist
cyberculture demonstrated ongoing exclusion, even within this new,
“utopic” setting.
     Despite this, those early days of cyberfeminism lay important
groundwork in introducing the technological, the digital, even the
cybernetic as a computational imaginary to mainstream feminism. With
cyberfeminism, feminists could newly network, theorize, and critique
online, transcending (if only temporarily, if only symbolically) sex, gender,
geography. With this also came a foundational awareness of how power
operates as an agent of capitalism within the edifice of online space, spurred
forth by technological builders who shape how we as users experience
digital worlds and their politics.
     Feminism is an institution in its own right. At its root is a legacy of
excluding Black women from its foundational moment, a movement that
largely made itself exclusive to middle-class white women. At the root of
early feminism and feminist advocacy, racial supremacy served white
women as much as their male counterparts, with reformist feminism—that
is, feminism that operated within the established social order rather than
resisting it—appealing as a form of class mobility. This underscores the
reality that “woman” as a gendered assignment that indicates, if nothing
else, a right to humanity, has not always been extended to people of color.
     Feminist “sisterhood” toward the purpose of increasing white range and
amplified social, cultural, economic mobility, is an exercise in service of
supremacy—for white women only. This is the ugly side of the movement:
one where we acknowledge that while feminism is a challenge to power, not
everyone has always been on the same page about who that power is for
and how it should be used as a means of progress. Progress for whom?
Thus, American abolitionist, women’s right activist, and freed slave
Sojourner Truth’s question “Ain’t I a woman?” asked in 1851 continues to
be painfully resonant even today, surfacing the ever-urgent reality of who is
brought into the definition of womanhood and, via extension, who is truly
recognized as being fully human.
     As we wade our way through contemporary feminisms and the
negotiations of power embodied by #BlackLives Matter, #MeToo, or the
tradition of the Women’s March, we must recognize that these movements
are defined and driven by technology, harbingers of a promising and
potentially more inclusive “fourth wave” unfolding on the horizon. Still, the
dangerous vestiges of first- and second-wave histories linger on. Writer,
activist, and feminist bell hooks may have declared that “feminism is for
everybody,” but what remains is still a long and winding road ahead until
we get there.
    Where glitch meets feminism in a discourse that problematizes the
construct of the body, it is important to call out the historical construction of
gender as it intersects with a historical construction of race. The body is a
social and cultural tool. Because of this, the right to define what a body is,
in addition to who can control these things called “bodies,” has never been
meted out equally. In a contemporary landscape where the term
“intersectional” is bandied about with such ease, it is important to
acknowledge the work of blackness in particular toward the project of
feminism.
    Sojourner Truth’s urgent inquiry can also shine light on the queer body
across a spectrum of identification. In a contemporary setting Truth’s line of
inquiry calls for the recognition of humanity and a future that celebrates
bodies of color, bodies that femme-identify, bodies that embrace the in-
between and beyond, all as an active resistance, a strategic blur of binary.
We cannot forget: it was, and continues to be, the presence of blackness that
aided in establishing a primary precedent for the notion of intersectionality
within feminism. Intersectionality as a term was coined in 1989 by theorist
and activist Kimberlé Crenshaw to speak to the realities of blackness and
womanhood as part of a lived experience, neither half exclusive of one
another, but rather advancing the work of both sides. Crenshaw’s enduring
contribution bolsters the foundation for the early thinking that drove
making space for multiplicity across selves within a broader social and
cultural context, one that resonates today both online and AFK alike.
    As German artist and cyberfeminist Cornelia Sollfrank observes:
“Cyberfeminism does not express itself in single, individual approaches but
in the differences and spaces in-between.”19 It is in the space between that
we as glitch feminists have found our range, our multiple and varied selves.
Thus, the work of blackness in expanding feminism—and, by extension,
 cyberfeminism—remains an essential precursor for glitch politics, creating
new space and re-defining the face of a movement, amplifying the visibility
of historically othered bodies.
    We can find examples of this in texts such as writer Octavia Butler’s
1980s Xenogenesis trilogy, which galvanizes the notion of a third sex
futurity that defies binary gender. Or Audre Lorde’s discussion of the erotic
as power in her 1978 paper “Uses of the Erotic: The Erotic as Power,”
which encourages us to discover our full range through a self-connection
that delivers joy. These contributions did not rise up out of cyberfeminism,
but they have transformed, expanded and liberated it. Such alchemy makes
limitless the capacity of glitch to mobilize.

Let us revisit, occupy, and decolonize Whitman’s words in our call for
refusal:

           Do I contradict myself?
           Very well then I contradict myself,
           (I am large, I contain multitudes.)
 02 – GLITCH IS COSMIC
                   When we are all stardust, we will say        the media distorts
                         the public’s perception of            cosmic bodies.

                        … I’m not opaque. I’m so relevant I’m disappearing.


                                       —Anaïs Duplan, “On a Scale of 1–10,
                                             How ‘Loving’ Do You Feel?”

There are many ways to think about the body. When poet, artist and curator
Anaïs Duplan speaks of “cosmic bodies” he advances a unique turn. This
cosmic corporality provides exciting insights into how we might approach
the body as an architecture. When we consider glitch as a tool, it is useful to
consider how this tool can help us better understand the body also as an
idea.
    The body is an idea that is cosmic, which is to say, “inconceivably
vast.” Though evidence of human life leading up to the Anthropocene spans
2.6 million years and running, we have only just begun to scratch the
surface of what the body is, what it can do, what its future looks like.
    Body: it is a world-building word, filled with potential, and, as with
glitch, filled with movement. Bodied, when used as a verb, is defined in the
Oxford Dictionary as “giv[ing] material form to something abstract.” Noun
and verb alike, we use body to give form to abstraction, to identify an
amalgamated whole.
    We all begin in abstraction: ungendered but biologically sexed bodies
that, as we develop, take on a gendered form either via performance or
according to constructs of social projection. To dematerialize—to once
more abstract—the body and transcend its limitations, we need to make
room for other realities.
     The Internet is “a room of one’s own.”1 Art critic Gene McHugh in his
essay “The Context of the Digital: A Brief Inquiry into Online
Relationships” observes, “For many people who came of age as individuals
and sexual beings online, the internet is not an esoteric corner of culture
where people come to escape reality and play make-believe. It is reality.”2
Thus, the term “digital native” has been applied to the generation who
remembers nothing other than a life intertwined with the Internet.
    McHugh notes video and performance artist Ann Hirsch’s two-person
play “Playground” (2013) as an example of such negotiations of play,
reality, and sexuality on the Internet. Hirsch’s play explores her relationship
as a pre-teen digital native with an older man online, during a period of time
when the world offline failed to provide enough stimulus for Hirsch’s
freeform emotional, sexual, and intellectual exploration. While complicated
in its dynamic, the relationship fostered between the two online opened up
new pathways in enriching Hirsch’s understanding of her body and its
politic.
    The application of the online-versus-IRL dichotomy in the discussion of
gender or sex play online is deeply flawed. Such limits are bound up within
a construct of “real life,” one that violently forecloses worlds, rather than
expands them. IRL falters in its skewed assumption that constructions of
online identities are latent, closeted, and fantasy-oriented (e.g., not real)
rather than explicit, bristling with potential, and very capable of “living on”
away from the space of cyberspace. Instead, AFK as a term works toward
undermining the fetishization of “real life,” helping us to see that because
realities in the digital are echoed offline, and vice versa, our gestures,
explorations, actions online can inform and even deepen our offline, or
AFK, existence. This is powerful.
    Thus glitch feminism gives weight to the selves we create through the
material of the Internet. Glitch feminism makes room for realizing other
realities, wherever one might find oneself. As part of this process, an
individual is not only inspired to explore their range online, but also can be
moved to quite literally embody the digital as an aesthetic, blurring the
divide between body and machine further. The creative AFK application of
a machinic aesthetic vernacular onto the physical form presents a uniquely
performative turn.
     Performance artist boychild exemplifies this, embodying what artist and
writer James Bridle has called “the New Aesthetic” in her blending of the
virtual and the physical across her creative practice. A term coined by
Bridle in 2012, the New Aesthetic is cited as “a way of seeing that …
reveal[s] a blurring between ‘the real’ and ‘the digital,’ … the human and
the machine.”3 boychild performs robotically, often nude, in trademark
drag- and Butoh-inspired lip-sync performances, a glowing light emanating
from the artist’s painted mouth. This staged work nods to the history of
cybernetics and the dawn of the Internet, while simultaneously evoking the
tactility of queer nightlife.
    In a conversation with artist and co-collaborator Wu Tsang, boychild
explains, “Nightlife is important for my work because it creates a space for
me to exist; nothing contextualises my performance the same way as these
places do. It’s my world, my existence in the underground. Also, I exist in a
world that comes after the Internet … my adolescence was spent finding
things there. The underground exists on the Internet for me.”4 boychild
draws a connection between the “underground” of nightlife spaces, those
spaces that allow for experimentation and exploration of new identities, and
the Internet as playground, serving a similar purpose. This underscores the
role of Internet-as-cabaret, where avant-garde performance, such as
boychild’s work, both begins with and borrows from digital culture.
Significantly, as we can look at the 1990s as a moment marked by the rise
of digital culture and cyberfeminism and a simultaneous increase in the
systematic erasure of spaces catering to queer nightlife across major cities
internationally.5 boychild’s performances raise questions about body-as-
machine and how non-binary affect can be negotiated and expressed—
computed, even—via machinic material. boychild observes of this practice,
“It’s like the physical body turning into a cyborg … It’s like a glitch; there’s
a repetitive thing that happens. It’s moving slow, but also fast.”6 Via this
cyborgian turn, the artist intentionally embodies error, a sort of system-
seizure that borrows from the machine in an AFK resistance.
    The passage of glitched bodies between the Internet underground and an
AFK arena activates the production of new visual culture, a sort of bionic
patois fluent to the digital native. Suspended between on- and offline,
eternally traversing this loop, digital natives steeped in a reality shaped by
the New Aesthetic remain devoid of a homeland. There is no return to the
 concept of “the real,” as digital practice and the visual culture that has
sprung from it has forever reshaped how we read, perceive, process all that
takes place AFK. This digital diaspora therefore is an important component
of glitch, as it means that bodies in this era of visual culture have no single
destination but rather take on a distributed nature, fluidly occupying many
beings, many places, all at once.
    Writer, poet, philosopher and critic Édouard Glissant defines diaspora as
“the passage from unity to multiplicity,” exploring these “departure[s]”
within a selfdom as being plausible only when “one consents not to be a
single being and attempts to be many beings at the same time.”7 Glitch
feminism reapplies Glissant’s “consent not to be a single being,” making an
appeal toward the cosmic range wherein a personal and collective
dispersion toward vastness becomes a consensual abstraction.
    What theorist Lisa Nakamura calls “tourism” in Cybertypes: Race,
Ethnicity, and Identity on the Internet, described as “the process by which
members of one group try on for size the descriptors generally applied to
persons of another [group],” remains a limitation to how we process the role
of the digital as it relates to identity.8 Nakamura’s notion of Internet identity
as largely touristic plays into a digital dualist fallacy. Investing in a cosmic
becoming, glitch feminism views these acts of experimentation as pathways
toward a blooming of selfhood. Perhaps, though begun initially under the
somewhat faceless anonymity of online platforms, the opportunity to
experiment and try on different selves empowers seizing a more integrated
public identity with radical potential.
    I think here of CL9, a young feminist who produces zines as part of her
creative practice, who in conversation shared with me that her early use of
online platforms like LiveJournal and, years later, Twitter, encouraged her
to test the grounds and prove herself to herself within a public arena by
toying with language, humor, and representation and seeing how such
things were received by others. At first she saw the opportunity to “hide
race for a while” and “just be” on these platforms; the vast facelessness of
digital space provided a neutrality that boosted her confidence as she began
to see that her fierce wit, feminist politics, and perspectives on the world
were welcomed by an online public. CL notes that it was via the Internet
that she embraced her identity as “an intelligent Black girl,” a perception of
 herself that found its genesis first online and was then taken AFK with
greater individual purpose, community support, and holistic understanding.
    The glitched self is always on the move. This diasporic journey of
online to offline is a mode of parthenogenesis, reproducing oneself without
fertilization—splitting, merging, emerging. This is the rubric for an
embodied political technology that queers proudly, creating space for new
bodies and cosmic selves.
 03 – GLITCH THROWS SHADE
  The meteoric rise to cultural acclaim and recognition of self-defined
“cyborg” and artist Juliana Huxtable, in recent years, is important and
timely. Within the realms of art, music, literature, fashion, she seeks to
shatter the rigidity of binary systems. Raised in College Station, Texas,
Huxtable was born intersex and assigned to the male gender. During the
1990s, in a moment where the Internet and the mythology of its utopia was
on the rise, Huxtable male identified, going by the name Julian Letton.
    In a conservative Texan, Christian milieu, claiming a trans identity
seemed unimaginable. Yet when she left home to attend small liberal arts
Bard College in upstate New York, she entered a period that marked a
blooming in her sense of self, one she speaks about openly: “I was fully
brainwashed by the Bible Belt shit … but the Internet became a form of
solitude. It gave me a sense of control and freedom that I didn’t have in my
everyday life, because I walked through life feeling hated, embarrassed,
trapped, and powerless. I felt very suicidal.”1
    As her art practice expanded, Huxtable’s engagement with various
digital platforms—chatrooms, blogs, social media, and beyond—increased
the visibility of both her visual and written work, creating the opportunity
for it to circulate both within and beyond the contemporary art world. At
the same time, images of Huxtable herself circulated mimetically. A GIF
travels virally online, emoting via the eternal loop of digital affect, quoting
Huxtable’s reaction to the question, “What’s the nastiest shade ever
thrown?” to which she replies, “Existing in the world.”

The 2015 New Museum Triennial in New York City brought the power of
Huxtable’s creative presence to new heights. Huxtable’s nude body in
repose was the subject of artist Frank Benson’s 3D-scanned plastic
sculpture Juliana. Benson’s statue is an homage to Huxtable and a “post-
Internet response to the … Grecian sculpture Sleeping Hermaphraditus …
 like that ancient artwork, Huxtable’s naked pose reveals body parts of both
sexes.”2 Benson makes contemporary his take on this classic, with Huxtable
leaning on one arm, the other extended in a yogic “mudra” hand gesture,
and the figure painted a metallic green.
    In the gallery space, Benson’s sculpture of Huxtable was positioned
adjacent to four inkjet prints of Huxtable’s own work. This included two
self-portraits and two poems—both titled “Untitled (Casual Power)”—as
part of Huxtable’s 2015 series “Universal Crop Tops For All The Self
Canonized Saints of Becoming.” The titling of the series hearkens a
celebration of transformation, of becoming, signifying a cosmic journey
toward new, more inclusive canons and, by extension, selves. The self-
portraits, respectively titled “Untitled in the Rage (Nibiru Cataclysm)”
(2015) and “Untitled (Destroying Flesh)” (2015), show the artist in
Nuwaubian Nation avatar, painted in one portrait in a neon violet and in the
other an alien green. The artist’s poems accompanying the portrait prints
wander through past, present, and future, awash with technicolor
meditations on a wide range of topics: climate change, COINTELPRO,
Black reparations, sainthood. In these texts Huxtable calls forth Octavia
Butler, Angela Davis, Aaliyah, and the “hood surrealism” of Hype
Williams, who directed many of the music videos of 90s-era Black pop and
R…B stars.
    In a conversation with artist Lorraine O’Grady, Huxtable reflects on the
experience of showing her work—and her body, via Benson’s sculpture—in
the Triennial:

   I had a growing sense of anxiety … Performance offered a powerful
   way to deal with questions of self-erasure or presence, tempting an
   audience with the idea that I am performing to enable their
   consumption of my image or my body—and then to ultimately
   refuse that. Text and video and all of this media become modes of
   abstracting presence or abstracting myself in the present. And so
   right now performance feels like a way of dealing with the sort of
   aftermath of a cultural moment.3

Huxtable’s exercise in “abstracting presence or abstracting myself” as a
mode of performativity—between online and AFK—intersects with glitch
feminism’s cosmic ambitions to abstract the body as a means of reaching
 beyond its conventional limitations. In her celebrity, Huxtable regularly
exercises a “necessary visibility,” electing to make her cosmic body visible
through ongoing documentation of herself online, most notably via
Instagram.4 She explains, “the Internet and specifically social media,
became an essential way for me to explore inclinations that I otherwise
would not have an outlet for.”5
    For Huxtable, as with many others using online space as a site to re-
present and re-perform their gender identities, the “Internet represents … a
‘tool’ for global feminist organizing … [and] an opportunity to be
protagonist … in [one’s] own revolution.” It is also a “‘safe space’ … a way
to not just survive, but also resist, repressive sex/gender regimes”6 and the
antagonistic normativity of the mainstream.
    Huxtable herself is a glitch, and a powerful one at that. By her very
presence Huxtable throws shade: she embodies the problematics of binary
and the liberatory potential of scrambling gender, embracing one’s possible
range. Such cosmic bodies glitch, activating the production of new images
that “create … [a] future as practice of survival.”7 The glitch is call-and-
response to Huxtable’s declaration of being, that “shade” of “existing in the
world,” enduring as the “nastiest” form of refusal.
    In a dystopic global landscape that makes space for none of us, offers no
sanctuary, the sheer act of living—surviving—in the face of a gendered and
racialized hegemony becomes uniquely political. We choose to stay alive,
against all odds, because our lives matter. We choose to support one another
in living, as the act of staying alive is a form of world-building. These
worlds are ours to create, claim, pioneer. We travel off-road, away from the
demand to be merely “a single being.” We scramble toward containing
multitudes against the current of a culture-coding that encourages the
singularity of binary.
    Glitching is a gerund, an action ongoing. It is activism that unfolds with
a boundless extravagance.8 Nonetheless, undercurrent to this journey is an
irrefutable tension: the glitched body is, according to UX (user experience)
designer, coder, and founder of collective @Afrofutures_ UK Florence
Okoye, “simultaneously observed, watched, tagged and controlled whilst
also invisible to the ideative, creative and productive structures of the
techno-industrial complex.”9
     We are seen and unseen, visible and invisible. At once error and
correction to the “machinic enslavement” of the straight mind, the glitch
reveals and conceals symbiotically.10 Therefore, the political action of
glitch feminism is the call to collectivize in network, amplifying our
explorations of gender as a means of deconstructing it, “restructuring the
possibilities for action.”11
    In the work of London-based artist and drag queen Victoria Sin we can
see this restructuring inhabited. Assigned female at birth, Sin identifies as
non-binary and queer, a body that amplifies gender in their reperformance
of it, both online via Instagram and AFK. On stage—whether out in the
world or wrapped within the seductive fabric of the digital—Sin toys with
the trappings of gender. Sin’s drag personae remain pointedly high femme,
the different selves they perform underscoring the socio-cultural production
of exaggerated femininity as a gendered trope, ritual, and exercise.
    Sin dons gender as prosthesis. An homage to an expansive history of
masculine/feminine drag performance and genderfucking, Sin’s costumery
is replete with breast and buttocks inserts, a sumptuous wig, makeup
painted with vivid artistry and a sweeping gown that glitters. Sin’s aesthetic
is an evocative, mesmeric cocktail, that weaves with satire and expertise the
sensory swagger of cabaret, buzz of burlesque, vintage Hollywood glamor
—all with a dash of Jessica Rabbit.
       AFK, Sin’s performances as drag avatar and alter-ego take up space
with exaggerated curve, contour, and composition that femme-identifying
bodies are often forced to relinquish. This is a striking reminder that the
production of gender is, at best, an assemblage. It is surreal, in the sense of
a dream, and “full of other bodies, pieces, organs, parts, tissues, knee-caps,
rings, tubes, levers, and bellows.”12 Online via Instagram, Sin occupies a
pop vernacular akin to YouTube makeup tutorials, deliberately exposing the
seams of their gender-prep by sharing video and photographs of what
typically would be labor left unseen. In the highly stylized presentation of
their constructed selfhood, we see Sin becoming their avatar through the
gloss of digital drag, where the Internet offers the space of cyber-cabaret.
Sin stitches together before and after imagery of themselves as they put on
their “face,” with cutting commentary and humor that inspires awe and
prompts inquiry about how we read bodies, and why. In these gestures, Sin
is super-human, extra-human, and post-human all at once. Sin also
celebrates “woman” as trapping and as trap, the trickery of gender itself
underscored as a thirsty-AF agent of capitalism, at points gently divine yet
still violently disorienting.13
     Sin themself is a glitch and, in glitching, throws shade. Their body
shatters the shallow illusion of any harmony or balance that might be
offered up within the suggestive binary of male/female. Sin’s
hyperfemininity is a send-up and glorification. They play with and
challenge what philosopher and gender theorist Judith Butler identifies as
“a male in his stereotype … a person unable to cope with his own
femininity” as well as the inverse, holding a mirror up to the female
stereotype, as, perhaps, a body “unable to cope with” her masculinity.14
     In this vein, Sin’s model of coping is complex. On the one hand, Sin’s
drag erases the material body via the amplification of gendered artifice,
reducing it to near ridicule and undermining any assumption of gender as
absolute. On the other hand, Sin’s drag points toward the dilemma of the
 body itself by celebrating their queer body as necessarily visible,
fantastically femme, larger than life, and so extreme in its existence that it
becomes impossible to ignore, a calculated confrontation, vast in impact.
    Sin’s shade is a skin: protective but permeable, and an exciting
rendering of what the future of body politic might look like as something
emancipatory in its intentional error. Here we see a crack in the gloss and
gleam of capitalist consumption of gender-as-product. Here each half of the
binary is eating the other, a dazzling feat to feast on. As glitch feminists, we
join both Huxtable and Sin here in a “reach toward the ineffable.”15
Through refusal, we aim to deconstruct and dematerialize the idea of the
body as we move through time and space, as wild forms building toward
even wilder futures.
 04 – GLITCH GHOSTS
                                                          Imagine being useless.

                                   —Richard Siken, “Seaside Improvisation”

By definition, “to ghost” is to end a relationship by ending all
communication, and subsequently disappearing.

As glitch feminists, we want to ghost the binary body.

Gender is a scaled economy: it is a mode of regulation, management, and
control. It allows for the reification of process, the division of labor, and the
exchange of value under the umbrella of capitalism. In order to ghost on the
binary body, to abandon it as a failed idea, we must step back and look at
the world as a body, an assemblage that has been constructed. The body,
like the world, is a tool in and of itself.

Ghosting on the binary body is a threefold process:

First, it requires us to realize that the relationship between the idea of the
body and gender as a construct is a damaging one that we need to exit.

Second, it requires us to identify that we have agency either to consent or
refuse our current “relationship status.” Too often we forget that we have
the right to leave if we want to. We have the right to deny our use, and,
through this, close the wounds created by a world fed on the binary rhetoric.

Third, it requires us to claim our continuous range of multitudinous selves.
As we fail to assimilate into a binary culture, we do so by asserting all
components of ourselves—the masculine, the feminine, and everything in-
 between—as being part of a continuous narrative, rather than existing as
polar points.

The scaling of the economy of gender features most prominently across
discussions surrounding “big data.” For example, every forty-eight hours
online we as a global community generate as much information as was
generated in written history from the beginning of civilization until 2003.1
This data we generate triggers monumental questions about mass
surveillance and how the information tied to our digital selves can be used
to track our every movements. Our Internet search histories, social media
habits, and modes of online communication—what sociologist David Lyon
calls “factual fragments”— expose our innermost thoughts, anxieties, plans,
desires, and goals.2 Gender binary is a part of this engine: a body read
online as male/female, masculine/feminine fulfills a target demographic for
advertising and marketing. Google Ads explains gleefully to its users,
“With demographic targeting in Google Ads, you can reach a specific set of
potential customers who are likely to be within a particular age range,
gender, parental status, or household income. For instance, if you run a
fitness studio exclusively for women, demographic targeting could help you
avoid showing your ads to men.”3
    Lyon identifies “disappearing bodies” as a “basic problem of
modernity,” citing that the increase of surveillance correlates directly with
the “growing difficulties of embodied surveillance that watches visible
bodies.” This is not always restricted to the easy monitoring of a physical
self but also comes from the tracking of “personal traces”4 such as when we
use our bank cards, the scraping of our travel data, our mobile phone
signals. Lyons’s concept of disappearing bodies speaks to the reality of an
increasingly networked world, where online exchange and interaction is
now just as, if not more, common than physical AFK interaction. On the
Internet we go to the bank, we pay our student loans, we speak to our
friends, we read news and learn about the world.
    With these various modes of online engagement, we leave traces of
ourselves scattered across the digital landscape, vulnerable to be tracked
and traded for profit. This presents a darkly modern paradox: as bodies
disappear within the everyday interactions of the Internet, that which we
might have assumed as inherently private—our physical bodies—remain at
 risk of becoming increasingly public, the abstracted fragments of our online
selves making moves independent of those chosen of our own volition.
     How can ghosting on the binary body help us keep safe our factual
fragments as we fight to maintain our abstract bodies, our cosmic selves?
     There is a long legacy to the attempts to split the body into autonomous
parts. However, glitch feminism demands that we look at it another way,
through the vision of another ghost—the ghost in the machine. The
continuity between online and AFK selfdom problematizes the proposition
of digital dualism. With this in mind, we can deepen our understanding of
digital dualism further by reaching back to the idea of “the ghost in the
machine,” a term coined in 1949 by the philosopher Gilbert Ryle.
     The ghost in the machine presupposed that the mind and body were
somehow separate entities, operating autonomously. Those critical of this
position pointed out that the “ghost” of our minds ought not to be made
distinct from the “machine” of our physical selves, as the loop between the
two is a crucial component of what makes us human—it is what gives us
life. Artist Cécile B. Evans “argues that in today’s society, where drones are
used for warfare and romantic relationships begin online, we can no longer
distinguish between the so-called real and the virtual.”5
     As the body in its contemporary context and the machines it engages
become increasingly difficult to splice, this offers an opportunity to see that
the machine is a material through which we process our bodily experience.
And, as such, bodies navigating digital space are as much computational as
they are flesh. Still, the movement of our data within a gendered economy
is not self-determined. In the world we live in today, a body that refuses
binary is one that is regularly reminded that, standing in-between, it is at
threat of ceasing to exist in its failure to be recognized and categorized by
the normative hegemony of the mainstream.
     What is a body, therefore? Artist and writer Rindon Johnson ponders
this in his 2019 essay “What’s the Point of Having a Body?” asking:
“What’s the point of having a body if I theoretically could make or step into
so many?”6 Johnson reflects on the “malleable” self as a form of language
that can teach, learn, signify, code. Johnson, a poet himself, creates a link
between poetry and virtual reality as virtual reality maps to the body’s
experiential immersion within it: “The more you are inside of [virtual
reality], the more you read it, the easier it is to quickly disappear within it.”7
      Perhaps, then, as we work toward ghosting the binary body, we also
work toward dissolving ourselves, making the boundaries that delineate
where we begin and end, and the points where we touch and come into
contact with the world, disappear completely. In this, perhaps our factual
fragments can be scrambled, rendered unreadable. If existence within a
hegemonic culture today requires the gender binary to delineate the self and
even to be recognized as human, then is ceasing to exist within a gendered
framework the most skillful of disappearing acts? In rejecting binary
gender, can we challenge how our data is harvested, and, in turn, how our
data moves? Can we become useless, too?
     The question of “What is a body?” as it intersects with our musing on
how we might ghost on the binary body, presents itself as a question of
becoming. In becoming, we shape-shift, deepen, evolve, as we leave the
edifice of a gendered architecture. Thus, our movement—our ability to
ghost on the idea of the body, moving away from it—is a key component of
becoming. The movement of ghosting creates a generative void that makes
space for new alternatives. Becoming prompts questions of who we are,
who we would like to be, and triggers a spatial interrogation of boundaries
and how we might break through them. It brings us as well to explore the
experience of touch in ways that might transform us. Black feminist theorist
and critic Hortense Spillers notes, “The question of touch—to be at hand
without mediation or interference—might be considered the gateway to the
most intimate experience and exchange of mutuality between subjects … [it
is] the absence of self-ownership.”8
     This “absence of self-ownership” is the consent to not be a single being,
an embrace of a cosmic corporeality. The digital experience is defined by a
touch that breaks limits; it “is not a non-existent reality, because we live it,
feel it, can be changed by it.”9 As we engage with the digital, it encourages
us to challenge the world around us, and, through this constant redressing
and challenging, change the world as we know it, prompting the creation of
entirely new worlds altogether.
     When we reject the binary, we reject the economy that goes along with
it. When we reject the binary, we challenge how we are valued in a
capitalist society that yokes our gender to the labor we enact. When we
reject the binary, we claim uselessness as a strategic tool. Useless, we
disappear, ghosting on the binary body.
 05 – GLITCH IS ERROR
                                                Excuse, names like teethmarks

                                              —Yusef Komunyakaa, “Fever”

A glitch is an error. Glitches are difficult to name and nearly impossible to
identify until that instant when they reveal themselves: an accident
triggering some form of chaos. On- and offline, the boxes we tick, the forms
we complete, the profiles we build—none are neutral. Every part of
ourselves we mark with an X.
    Every time we elect to have the form autofill the next time around, we
participate in an act of naming, the process of identifying ourselves within
highly networked social and cultural algorithms. We are standing inside the
machine and every day we make a choice whether or not to rob ourselves.
We banally are complicit with the individual theft of our own personal data.
This is poised to become one of the greatest shared existential crises of our
time.
    The body is a text: every time we define ourselves, we choose
definitions—names—that reduce the ways our bodies can be read. This is
bittersweet, a gorgeous proposition that often ends tragically. The things
that make our lives “easier”—when our favorite digital platform appears to
know us better than we know ourselves, suggesting an app in an ad that
promises to save us money, make us friends, bring back lost time—are the
same things that perpetuate a gendered binary. The machine readily
anticipates the cultural detritus and vernacular that stems from the weight of
a pronoun and feeds us the perfect dress or shoe, even when we don’t want
it.
    Errors, ever unpredictable, surface the unnameable, point toward a wild
unknown. To become an error is to surrender to becoming unknown,
unrecognizable, unnamed. New names are created to describe errors,
 capturing them and pinning down their edges for examination. All this is
done in an attempt to keep things up and running; this is the conceit of
language, where people assume if they can find a word to describe
something, that this is the beginning of controlling it.
    But errors are fantastic in this way, as often they skirt control, being
difficult to replicate and therefore difficult to reproduce for the sake of
troubleshooting them out of existence. Errors bring new movement into
static space; this motion makes an error difficult to see but its interference
ever present. Decolonizing the binary body requires us to remain in
perpetual motion; accidental bodies that, in their error, refuse definition and,
as such, defy language. Forcing the failure of words, we become
impossible. Impossible, we cannot be named.
    What is a body without a name? An error.
    To disappear between ticked boxes, to fail at forms, to throttle the
predictability of auto-play: we need to examine the act of naming and the
role it plays in reifying gender as it is produced, packed, and delivered.
When we stand in-between the boxes, things start to slip and slide; we
begin to disappear. This state of opacity is a ripe error to reach toward, an
urgent and necessary glitch.
    Florence Okoye reminds us: “The unseen can manipulate the recursive
behavior of [the machine], forcing automata to regurgitate, amplify, and
perpetuate the glitch through the exponential reaches of the network.”1
Thus, by the seizure of our uselessness, we make the reading of our bodies
more difficult. Wandering in-between, we become dangerous data. In this
happy failure, we reconstitute reality.
    In their poem “A PIECE OF WRITING THAT WON ME $200 IN
EIGHTH GRADE,” writer, poet and artist manuel arturo abreu muses:

   I am a hyperlink, a flag for a fake country You look at me and tell
   me what I am. I become what you name me. I carry these
   becomings. I am not male. You name me male. I am not Other. You
   name me Other. I carry all the names I’m given.2

We really do “carry all the names [we’re] given,” even when we don’t want
them. Across the years of Luvpunk12 as my online avatar, AFK I naively
bound and unbound my breasts with duct tape, wondering if maybe what
was and was not visible there would help me circumnavigate and escape the
 “suffer[ing that comes] from the condition of being addressable,” of being
called, defined, named.3
     At home I walked around without a shirt on feeling empowered, until
one day my father looked at me sharply then turned to my mother,
inquiring, “Does Legacy have breasts now? Where did those come from?”
Suddenly there was something across my chest. Those two small hills now
like two new moons, furthering the violent thesis of girlhood. In that
moment I wished I could disappear, cease to exist.
     Was this being woman? But instead of disappearing, I chose to take up
space. In the same death to my range that came by way of this act of
marking, naming me, came a challenge: be vast, keep thriving, self-define.
     Yes, as abreu observes, we are indeed hyperlinks, signs and signifiers
waiting to be clicked through, decoded, consumed. When we name bodies
in an effort to make them useful, we end worlds, a process of codifying and
delineating territory, limiting the capacity of the world around us and our
agency within it. We can embody error by finding new ways to self-define,
reclaiming the act of naming for ourselves. We bend the act of naming,
fitting new forms through the process of naming and renaming, the embrace
of a poetic elasticity that refuses the name as static or definitive.
Embodying error—an all-consuming joyful failure within a system that
never wanted us and that will not make space for us if we simply wait for it
—pushes the structures of the gendered binary further toward a breaking
point. Inside of this beatific brokenness and as we travel beyond it, we ask:
What’s next? Where to go from here?
     Artist and theorist micha cárdenas explores the poetics of trans people
of color in digital media, and the possibilities for acts of resistance as
deployed through algorithmic restructure. In her 2019 essay “Trans of Color
Poetics: Stitching Bodies, Concepts, and Algorithms,” cárdenas points
toward writers and academics Sarah Kember and Joanna Zylinska and the
discussion of what they dub “the cut” in their book Life After New Media,
as an entry-point for cárdenas’s analysis of what she calls “the stitch.”4 For
Kember and Zylinska, “the cut” is “a creative in-cision that is also a de-
cision, because it gives shape to the world.”5 The authors recognize the act
of cutting—the splicing of a single entity into discrete parts or creating a
split where formerly there was solely a whole—as an “intrusion of alterity
(e.g., “difference”).”6 Kember and Zylinska propose that the sheer tension
 created in the presence of such “intrusion[s] of alterity” shock the larger
hegemonic system and triggers the possibility of individual action or
perhaps even broader structural change.
     Conversely, cárdenas’s “stitch” is conceived of as “an operation that
involves using one entity to connect two formerly separate entities,” which
she suggests is perhaps “less violent than the cut” as it “intends to join, in
the service of healing and creation, rather than in the service of
destruction.”7 In consideration of the stitch and its broader social and
cultural resonance, cárdenas notes that it can be thought of as the “basis for
a theory of feminist making, which values the forms of knowledge
practiced daily by oppressed people as they make their lives in the face of
violence.”8
     Thus, if the act of gender-defining as dictated by the binary cuts deeply,
it is our self-definition that manifests the stitch, begins the process of
healing. This is the error, this is the glitch: incessant cutting and stitching,
breaking and healing, as it is afforded by the digital as performative
material within the context of the everyday. New configurations of the body
posited and performed daily across the online-to-AFK loop enact a mass
corrective edit to a history that has far too long canonized fit, straight,
cisgender, white, male bodies. This, indeed, is a shock to the system
happening now at an unprecedented volume and scale.
     Artist and writer Sable Elyse Smith in her 2016 essay “Ecstatic
Resilience” describes the “slippage” of a body across, through, beyond, the
binary as a “walking through as opposed to being rested in … [a] pendulum
sway from form to void.”9 Remaining in motion via our own self-
transformation, together we “walk through” the injury of naming into a
celebratory occupation of a body that refuses fixity. Unnamed and useless,
failing fantastically, we remain “porous bodies” in our pathway toward
liberation.10 Endlessly, we reboot, revive, scroll, survive.
 06 – GLITCH ENCRYPTS
     The whole concept of visibility assumes that you’re not in a system that
wants you dead. I think a lot of people forget that many of the places we are
                                                 inserted in want to kill us …
                                             We’re not supposed to be there.

                                                              —Sondra Perry1

Gender is, to call on a term coined by philosopher Timothy Morton, a
“hyperobject.”2 It is all-encompassing, it out-scales us. As such, it becomes
difficult to see the edges of gender when submerged within its logic,
thereby bolstering the fantasy of its permanence through its apparent
omnipresence. In short, gender is so big, it becomes invisible.
    This is where the problem lies: in the invisibility that becomes
seemingly organic. This “normative ordinary” is a violence, suggesting a
natural order in lieu of a most unnatural system of control. In asserting itself
as part of a vast normative ordinary, gender embeds itself within what we
see and experience in the everyday, winding itself through the public
networks and spaces that we live in.
    As a hyperobject, gender becomes a geopolitical territory. It is a
foundational framework, built and lived on. Unable to see its edges, we are
forced to live within it as a world in and of itself. This is why, in order to
reimagine the body, one must reimagine space. Revolutionary change
manifests through a reconsideration of the spatial, in negotiation of spatial
limitations and identification of how to overturn, dissolve, break through
these boundaries. Therefore, deterritorialization of the body requires a
departure from the heaviness of space, with the realization, instead, that
physical form is dynamic.
    Philosopher and sociologist Henri Lefebvre writes, “The body serves
both as point of departure, and as destination.”3 The body, thus, is an
 inspiration, a springboard, a conceptual catalyst, carrying us away from it as
we travel through it. Immersed within the hyperobject of gender, it becomes
important to figure out ways to signify its edges and folds, those cuts and
stitches that point to the failures of what is assumed to be the natural world
around us, aiding our departure from it.
     Encryption is useful here as we search for those departure destinations,
those moments where peeling back the layers of our presumptions reveals
things hidden just below the surface. Encryption, as a process, indicates the
encoding of a message, rendering it unreadable or inaccessible to those
unauthorized to decipher it. To consider glitch as a form of encryption, we
render the plaintext of the body (e.g., the body viewed through a normative,
binary lens) as ciphertext (e.g., a glitched body, queered and encrypted).
Encryption offers a mode of privacy; encoding of content creates secure
passageways for radical production. Glitches as encrypted (machinic,
social, cultural) material remind “us that there are gaps and hidden histories,
parts of the … file that … cannot [be] heard and stories … [that] will never
[be] know[n]” to certain audiences.4 Through this encryption, the glitch
creates a new vernacular, one that allows for new modes of signification
and is smuggled through the hyperobject of our hyper-gendered daily lives.
     The (de)coding of gender becomes as much about how it is constructed
as whether it can or cannot be read. Readability of bodies only according to
standard social and cultural coding (e.g., to be white, to be cisgender, to be
straight) renders glitched bodies invisible, extends safety, keeps bodies un-
surveilled. Glitched bodies pose a very real threat to social order: encrypted
and unreadable within a strictly gendered worldview, they resist normative
programming. Illegible to the mainstream, the encrypted glitch seizes upon
the creation of a self that, depending on the audience, can at once be
hypervisible and simultaneously unreadable, undetectable.
     This experience of being hypervisible and invisible all at once can be
vulnerable. Artist Glenn Ligon’s work “Untitled (I Feel Most Colored
When I am Thrown Against a Sharp White Background)” (1990) speaks to
this blurriness, and its vulnerability. A text-based work that prints and
reprints the words of its title in black block lettering against a white
background, Ligon’s words take different form as they progress, as they
bleed between letters, becoming increasingly difficult to decipher.5 It is a
meditation on the limits of language. This work, these words, as they
deteriorate, illustrate in their very form the violence that comes with the
 strict delineation of selfhood, of the body, when processed in contrast with
another. Ligon’s work highlights the problem of space and territory;
distinguishing that which is via that which is not is a binary process of
categorization that strips away humanity, leaving us all bare.
     Artist Sondra Perry’s exhibition Typhoon coming on, debuted as a site-
specific installation at London’s Serpentine Gallery in 2018, immersed the
viewer in a surround projection of waves, the water and title in reference to
British artist J. M. W. Turner’s painting “Slave Ship (Slavers Throwing
Overboard the Dead and Dying, Typhoon Coming On)” (1840). Turner’s
painting was inspired by the massacre of 130 African slaves by the British
crew of the slave ship Zong in 1781. Using Blender, an open-source 3D
graphics program, Perry applied a tool called Ocean Modifier to animate
Turner’s aqueous brushstrokes into a template of the ocean. The projection,
as one stands before it, flicks between waves rendered in the yellow ochres
and grays of Turner’s original palette, and a slick purple, signifying the
presence of the artist’s hand as author and editor of this work. The color
purple within the Blender program is a glitch and, in turn, an encrypted
signifier, an indicator to the user that, in the artist’s words, “there is a
missing texture or material … a warning to a maker … [that] something is
missing.”6
     Thus, the piece exists as a corrective historical error, a uniquely feminist
coding of Black narrative and the bodies therein, gesturing toward the edges
of stories both hidden and untold, the intergenerational trauma that was
seeded in the massacre’s wake. Reflecting on this piece, Perry notes, “I’m
interested in thinking about how blackness shifts, morphs, and embodies
technology to combat oppression and surveillance throughout the diaspora.
Blackness is agile.”7
     This “shift[ing], morph[ing], and embody[ing]” of technology as a
means of pushing back against an exploitative hypervisibility is essential.
The readability of glitched bodies in their choreography and topography, as
they travel the terrain of the online-to-AFK loop is volatile. Responsive to
world conditions, we remain intentionally erratic, always morphing and
thus always unmapped. The information hidden by encryption becomes key,
edges peeled back solely for those meant to see, process, understand.
     Elsewhere, we remain unreadable. To glitch the body requires the
simultaneous occupation of some-where and no-where, no-thing and every-
 thing. We consent not to be a single being frozen in binary code, and, as
such, consent as well not to be a single site. This embrace of multiplicity is
strategic; as glitched bodies travel outward through every space, we affirm
and celebrate the infinite failure of arrival at any place. Far beyond fixity,
we find ourselves in outer space, exploring the breadth of cosmic
corporeality.
    We cannot allow these territories of some-where, no-where, no-thing,
and every-thing to be delineated by the mainstream. Supremacy will not
relinquish its space, those imagined sites building toward worlds of hyper-
objects that, hyper-gendered, aim to erase us. We, the glitch, will encrypt.
Only as refusal will our data continue to perform, transform, transmute,
transmogrify, travel.
 07 – GLITCH IS ANTI-BODY
                                     In the body, where everything has a price,
                                                             I was a beggar.

                                               —Ocean Vuong, “Threshold”

Glitch is anti-body, resisting the body as a coercive social and cultural
architecture. We use body to give form to something that has no form, that
is abstract, cosmic. Philosopher Jean Luc-Nancy puts it perfectly: “Does
anyone else in the world know anything like ‘the body’? It’s our old
culture’s latest, most worked over, sifted, refined, dismantled, and
reconstructed product.”1 A lot of work is put into trying to give the body
form.
    Artist and filmmaker Lynn Hershman Leeson’s notion of the “anti-
body,” as introduced in her 1994 essay “Romancing the Anti-body: Lust
and Longing in (Cyber)space,” lays useful groundwork for thinking of
glitch as a mode of resistance against the social, cultural framework of the
body.2 “Like computer viruses,” Leeson writes, anti-bodies “escape
extinction through their ability to morph and survive, exist in perpetual
motion, navigating parallel conditions of time and memory.”3
    The glitch thus advances Leeson’s “anti-body” as a tactical strategy.
This strategy becomes operable in the face of the failure of the systematized
networks and the frameworks within which we build our lives. Glitches
gesture toward the artifice of social and cultural systems, revealing the
fissures in a reality we assume to be seamless. They reveal the fallibility of
bodies as cultural and social signifiers, their failure to operate only as
hegemonic normative formulations of capital weaponized by the state. The
binary body confuses and disorients, pitting our interests against one
another across modalities of otherness. State power in this way positions us
 all as foot soldiers at the frontlines of a most dangerous tribal war. We can
do better.
     The current conditions of the world, however flawed, ought not to
preclude glitched bodies from the right to use imagination as a core
component of mobilizing and strategizing with care toward a more
sustainable futurity. Leeson observes, “the corporeal body [as we have
known it] is becoming obsolete. It is living through a history of erasure, but
this time, through enhancements.”4 Glitched bodies rework, glitch, and
encrypt traces of ourselves, those new forms of personal digital data left
behind. As the understanding of what makes up a “possible” body changes
under this pressure, the information associated with our physical forms,
now abstracted, changes, too.
     We can see example of anti-body in the fictional character and “it girl”
Miquela Sousa, known via her Instagram personality Lil Miquela. Lil
Miquela was launched as a profile in 2016; however, it was not until 2018
that Lil Miquela claimed the identity of a sentient robot. Created by an LA-
based company called Brud with the aspiration of becoming a prototype of
“the world’s most advanced AI,” Lil Miquela is described by the Brud
Team as “a champion of so many vital causes, namely Black Lives Matter
and the absolutely essential fight for LGBTQIA+ rights in this country. She
is the future.” Yet, Lil Miquela has no body.
     We wonder: What purpose can a body that has no body serve? In the
face of an increasingly privatized world, can a corporate avatar—in
essence, a privatized body, symbolic in form—be an authentic advocate, a
catalyst toward social change?
     Lil Miquela’s Instagram profile advances the archetype of the
influencer, capitalizing on the heightened visibility by using the platform to
promote key political causes. Any given day, one might find shout-outs to
@ innocenceproject, @lgbtlifecenter, or @justiceforyouth on her profile.
On the one hand, it could be argued that Lil Miquela epitomizes a perverse
intersection of a neoliberal consumer capitalism and advocacy; on the other,
she, being AI and therefore “without” a body, epitomizes what becomes
possible with avatar perform-ativity. She is a newfangled opportunity to
make visible the invisible, to weirdly engage with new audiences, to push
the limits of corporeal materiality and reconsider how we might (re)define
the body as we have always known it.
      The work and life of artist Kia LaBeija furthers our exploration of anti-
body as a vehicle within glitch feminism. LaBeija, who is Black and
Filipino, is a queer woman living with HIV. Born Kia Michelle Benbow, the
surname “LaBeija” derives from the legendary House of LaBeija, founded
in either 1972 or 1977 (the exact year remains a point of contention) by the
house’s original mother, the drag queen Crystal LaBeija. The structure of
“houses,” intended to operate as chosen family units, is a survival strategy
in itself, creating space for historically othered bodies. These important
spaces are long-fought-for and celebrated epicenters of performance,
nightlife, and queer culture. Houses compete against one another in voguing
battles, a practice that originated in Harlem in the 1970s and has since
grown into a well-recognized global phenomenon. Though she is no longer
a member of the House of LaBeija, LaBeija in her own creative practice
employs vogue dancing as well as storytelling and photography, self-
documenting and self-defining a core component of her creative expression.
    LaBeija in her very existence is a living legacy of the HIV and AIDS
movement. The artist explains, “I was born in 1990, and medication that put
you on a regimen that was expected to save your life didn’t come around
until, like, 1996, so people weren’t sure babies with HIV of my age would
survive.”5 Born nine years after the official start of the AIDS epidemic,
LaBeija “complicates [the] idea of what a long-term survivor looks like.”6
LaBeija engages the practice of voguing in public space, her dancing a form
of resistance and celebration, an embodiment of queer histories, and a
decolonization of what the artist has called “a gay, white man’s story.”7 In
circulating self-portrait documentation of herself over years, LaBeija carries
forth the torch of HIV and AIDS activism that was first lit in the 1980s by
groups such as ACT UP and Gran Fury, who created new modes of visual
culture and representation to alter the discourse surrounding bodies affected
by HIV and AIDS.
     In her self-portraits, LaBeija performs both as herself and beyond
herself as an avatar, no longer Kia Michelle Benbow as she was born, but
now in the “greatest role of all” as LaBeija.8 Her sharply theatrical
compositions blur the boundary between the real and surreal. In “Eleven”
(2015), LaBeija photographs herself in her doctor’s office, wearing her
high-school prom dress, a decadent crush of tulle and lace in stark contrast
with the sterile reality of a regular routine of health maintenance and HIV
care. In this image LaBeija performs the ritual of dressing up for prom,
engaging in the American fantasy of having one night before graduating
where a teenager can live out one’s most epic dreams. Reflecting on this
image, LaBeija notes: “I’m wearing my prom dress because when I first
began to see [my primary physician], no one knew if I would make it to
prom.”9 In “Mourning Sickness” (2014) LaBeija features herself somberly
resting on the bathroom floor, yet illuminated with a pale light that
amplifies the aqueous colors of the shower curtain, bathmat, and mirror.
The lighting lends to the portrait a staged feel, giving it drama in its
cinematic texture. LaBeija has said of this portrait: “[This image] tells the
story of the many hours I’ve spent in my bathroom, lying on the floor
feeling dizzy or nauseous because of the violent medications that I have to
take every day. It also evokes locking myself in the bathroom and grieving
for my mother’s passing. I still deal with these feelings, and probably
always will.”10 LaBeija, by way of her creative practice and advocacy
work, gestures toward a long lineage of folx that worked hard to make
space, take up space, and explore their range.
    LaBeija’s embrace of her history is a marked “consent not to be a single
being”: the artist’s work demonstrates the complexity of her range, her
portraits “expressing] the beauty and pain of women who live with HIV”
while her voguing practice allows her “to express [herself] through
movement and connect with the brown and Black queer community.”11
Through her self-expression, LaBeija cracks open the plausibility of
containing multitudes not only as a creative action, but as a political one.
    Between the creative practices of Lil Miquela and Kia LaBeija
respectively, we see examples of two very different types of bodies that
deploy the imaginary as a computational strategy of survival. Each is a
glitch that jars the construct of corporeality. As embodiments of persistent
refusal, both performers wander within a wildness of unrecognizable being,
 actively re-imagining and re-centering neoteric realities. Each provides us
the opportunity to reimagine what a body means, how it can be redefined,
what it can do, and what to continue celebrating.
 08 – GLITCH IS SKIN
                        Glitch is, and will always be a methodology for me …
                           I still really FEEL that brokenness and instability.

                                           —Shawné Michaelain Holloway1

Skin is as much about what is kept in as what it keeps out. It functions to
edit, its existence determining that which will be included or excluded. Skin
suggests the protection of a subject and the creation of an “other” that is
forever standing on the outside. As skin wraps, covers, protects, it
paradoxically wounds, occupies, and builds worlds.
     Skin is a container. It is a peel that contains and cradles wildness. It
gives shape to bodies. A break, tear, rupture, or cut in skin opens a portal
and passageway. Here, too, is both a world and a wound.
     Skin is both open and closed. Its presence suggests permanence, a
border not meant to be crossed. Conversely, skin is permeable. It releases
fluids and, at the same time, retains them.
     Skin also helps us feel. When pressed against another, we recognize
where we end and where another begins. In touching skin, we program the
body, messy lines of memory that lead us toward each other and cause
bodies to collide, sometimes gently, sometimes with a crash.
     Most literally within a technological arc, the presence of a glitch makes
the “digital skin” visible, reminding us of the fallibility of the machine and
a presence of its hardware, revealing its edges and seams. We rely on the
error of glitches to show us the machinic limitations and, in turn, to get a
sense of where we might hack further in pointed undoing. Through a more
figurative lens, the presence of error offline—as an unrecognizable body, a
body without a name—reveals cracks in the seemingly glossy narrative of
the absolute fixity of gender binary, exposing it as a carefully constructed
fiction.
     In these breaks and system failures, we find new beginnings. The digital
skin—the screens through which we embrace range, politic via play, and
toy with different modes of representation—remains a necessary
precondition of the Internet avatar. Avatars can become rhetorical bodies,
ones that challenge how and why we perform our abstract and varied selves
toward the goal of becoming our truer selves, both on- and offline.
    Self-described “dirty new media performance artist and sexuality
educator” Shawné Michaelain Holloway’s explorations as a “cam girl”
inspires much of her early work. The artist grapples with the tensions
between a projection of an invulnerable self with a seemingly impenetrable
digital skin, and the vulnerability of sharing oneself in such forums.
Holloway readily exploits and navigates these tensions, leaning into newly
realized freedoms found through her enacting fantasy selves online. The
artist sees the volatility between these tensions and freedoms as an
opportunity to engage conversations around power and play, investigating
how a body can simultaneously, mutually, consensually consume and be
consumed as a radical act of self-discovery. Holloway observes: “Power
dynamics affected this work not because of the power of the people or the
culture inside, but the power of the people and the culture outside looking
in. I feel ashamed that I see these spaces as a playground where I get to
construct my own fantasies and control my environment.”2
    Holloway triggers these same tensions in her 2015 series of Instagram
portraits picking skin: alignment. The series is inspired by artist Carrie Mae
Weems’s 1987 photo work “Mirror, Mirror” from the Ain’t Jokin’ series
(1987–1988) that depicts a Black woman looking into a mirror and with its
caption riffing on the legendary line from the fairytale of Snow White,
“Mirror, mirror on the wall, who’s the finest of them all?” For picking skin:
alignment, Holloway presents what she calls “pick[ed] skin[s]”: selfie-style
images of the artist enacting different performed personae into the “black
mirror” of digital capture. Through these images the artist establishes a
micro-archive of her own cosmic corporeality; the varied faces of blackness
and queerness are mediated by the digital skin of Holloway’s changeable
avatars.
    In one set of images, the artist snaps a photo of herself donning a long
blond wig, triggering the visual economy of the Internet cam girl, digital-
diva-meets-fairytale-vixen, posing for the camera’s anxious gaze. In
contrast, another image shows the artist striking a pose without the wig but
 short, natural hair. In Weems’s original series, the line “Mirror, mirror …”
is re-appropriated and re-contextualized such that the mirror talks back to
the Black woman in the portrait. The text accompanying each of
Holloway’s selfies therefore borrows nearly verbatim from Weems’s
original caption, changing Weems’s word choice of “finest” back to the
Snow White fairytale’s original “fairest”: “LOOKING INTO THE
MIRROR, THE BLACK WOMAN ASKED, ‘MIRROR, MIRROR ON
THE WALL, WHO’S THE FAIREST OF THEM ALL?’ THE MIRROR
SAYS, ‘SNOW WHITE YOU BLACK BITCH, AND DON’T YOU
FORGET IT!!!’” Here Holloway makes plain the transience and trouble of
the digital skin, signifying the action of self-representation (e.g., “putting
on” different skins toward performing different selves) as still subject to the
perforation of a pop visual culture and art history that enacts violence upon
the Black femme body by affirming models of aestheticized white beauty as
foremost.
    Although Holloway’s work was not intended as such, we can certainly
celebrate her series as a very necessary and sharp contestation to artist
Amalia Ulman’s five-month Instagram performance, “Excellences &
Perfections” in 2014. Ulman’s performance deployed an avatar of her-self
—a white cis-gendered woman—blending seamlessly via the digital skin of
an online persona, situated within a landscape of mainstream
representations of white, cisgender, high-femme bodies. The performance
was scripted by the artist and presented across several months on her
Instagram and Facebook, following her avatar as a white socialite. The blur
between Ulman’s “excellences [and] perfections” on- versus offline made
this as a performance a jagged pill to swallow: Ulman did not disrupt or
provide substantive feedback to the status quo, but rather her performance,
basic as ever, reveled in it. The artwork thus became an unfortunate
flaunting of privilege, haunted by a sort of socioeconomic “passing” that
went unquestioned by a public accustomed to the gourmandized
consumption of the superrich. Few looking at Ulman’s Instagram could tell
the difference between art and life, and so the work itself—confirming that,
yes, white femme ascendancy still had an audience—was only made
profound by the art-world calling it so.
    Years later in May 2018, New York magazine’s The Cut published a
story on the “Soho grifter” who, calling herself Anna Delvey online and
AFK, performed the identity of a wealthy German heiress with the goal of
 scamming luxury Manhattan hotels and billionaire acquaintances.3 Whether
Delvey was aware of Ulman’s performance or not, the parallels between the
two acts in their use of an online avatar to further cultivate public
perception of elite status is undeniable. If anything, it was the world’s
coming into awareness of Delvey that may have completed Ulman’s work,
making plain the violence of privilege with its capitalist agenda, and the
exploitation and manipulation of white femininity as a cultural asset and
long-protected political trope. In short, what both artists—con or otherwise
—show us is that gender cannot be left untroubled as just a construct, but
rather that one of the biggest troubles of gender is that it is a racial
construct.
    If Ulman upheld the staid and troubled tropes of “bubblegum feminism”
in her projections of a gendered white body packaged and consumed for
cultural capital, Holloway offers an incisive and urgent fourth-wave
perspective. Holloway does important work in shaking to the core the
contradictions in how gendered and racialized bodies are “read” or rendered
(in)visible by various publics on the Internet.
    Holloway’s strategic invocation of Weems also recognizes the act of
Black self-representation in photographic portraiture as being part of a
deeply rooted discussion surrounding visibility, empowerment, and the
circulation of the Black body as simultaneously hindered, and driven by, the
engine of visual culture. In Holloway’s words, such bodies are weighted
with the “fucked up political connotations that are attached to these
desires,” which manifest themselves through popular folklore, fairytale, or
fantasy. Holloway calls her interest in “control and power over [her]
representation [online]” a “fantasy-fetish,” underscoring the implausibility
of ever being able to fully dictate or refuse how one’s body can and cannot
be digested through the digital platform.4
    The paradoxical nature of the digital skin worn by the artist posits a
narrative of the queer Black body online that is neither exalted nor abject.
Rather, the artist is empowering the curious and joyful navigation of these
complicated and irreconcilable territories as a sort of “anarchitecture,”5
putting up resistance through the self-chronicling of one’s own unresolved
and oft-contradictory shapeshifting.6 In this way, Holloway strikes back at
the social-cultural edifice of the gendered and racialized body. Her work
 offers relief from the undue burden of striving for perfection that is built to
undermine and erase glitched bodies.
    The safe passage of bodies AFK continues to be determined by race,
class, and the legibility of one’s gender. This volatility of the offline
landscape where physical harm—and the systematic ending of life—is
regularly enacted on bodies that do not “fit” makes it important to consider
how to create safer spaces both on- and offline, working against the present
necropolitical narrative. While online spaces remain imperfect, often
holding a somber mirror up to the world around us, online communities can
create space to talk back to toxic, binary tropes of masculinity/femininity.
Embracing the plausibility of range—that is, fantasizing, playing,
experimenting by donning different “skins”—becomes an act of
empowerment, self-discovery, and even self-care. The skin of cyberidentity
is uniquely queer, what theorist Paul B. Preciado even goes so far as to
celebrate as a “form … of transvestism.”7 The digital, in giving us the
capacity to perform different selves—quite literally putting them on, then
taking them off, as we grow with or away from them—shows us that, as
Preciado puts it, “Gender is not simply and purely performative [but rather
that] … gender is first and foremost prosthetic.”8
 09 – GLITCH IS VIRUS
                                         gender is a magic trick i forgot how to
                                                                    perform

                    —Billy-Ray Belcourt, “The Cree Word for a Body Like
                                                 Mine is Weesageechak”

What can we learn from a computer virus? A computer virus corrupts data.
A computer virus costs capitalism. It degrades productivity within the
machine. A computer virus is a threat to the function of the machine and its
economy. A machine transforms into one that cannot perform, that quite
literally cannot work, forgets how to work, works against its function. It
challenges the endemic correlation between value and labor, dangerous in
its uselessness.
     Machines are expected to work well and work quickly. A computer
virus triggers the machinic responses of slowness in ways that are
unpredictable to the user: endless buffering, crashing, damaging, deleting,
reformatting. This slowness shifts time and space, altering a person’s
relationship to the machine. In our daily life when confronted with a
computer that shuts down unexpectedly or takes ages to reboot as a result of
machinic failure, our reaction is to get up and move. We change course
when confronted with systems that refuse to perform.
     A virus breaks, and so we are delivered into the time and space of
brokenness. Inevitably, the presence of a virus shakes us into an awareness
of our bodies and being. The presence of a virus prompts an awakening.
This comes through the recognition that the loop between online and AFK
is not seamless. Rather, through its fissures and faults, the virus makes
brokenness a space, placing us within the break itself. As glitch feminists,
when we embody the virus as a vehicle of resistance, we are putting a
 wrench into the machinic gears of gender, striking against its economy,
immersing ourselves inside of brokenness, inside of the break.
    We want to infect, to corrupt ordinary data. To quote theorist and
philosopher Jack Halberstam, known for his concept of “the queer art of
failure”: “What we want after ‘the break’ will be different from what we
think we want before the break and both are necessarily different from the
desire that issues from being in the break.”1 What glitch feminism proposes
here then is this: perhaps we want the break, we want to fail. We strive for
oozing, challenging bodies full of seams. We want wild, amorous,
monstrous bodies. Through our presence as a glitch, we want to stand
before, within, and outside of brokenness. The break an error, the error a
passageway.
    Once we have infected, we want to travel outward in every direction.
We want to touch everything, caress every-fucking-body, twist the machine.
Viral, we want to multiply. We want to cramp culture, make society sweat.
We want to cause seizure, a rush of fluids, create sticky, runny spaces where
everything can come into contact and blur. That blur is a beginning again, a
journey. That journey is a genesis.
    In Stefano Harney and Fred Moten’s 2013 text The Undercommons,
Moten argues: “The only thing we can do is tear this shit down completely
and build something new.”2 Glitch feminism asks: Can a break be a form of
building something new? Can our breaking shit be a correction, too?
    The artist American Artist calls out to this notion of brokenness in their
2017 essay “Black Gooey Universe.”3 The essay revisits the origin story of
graphical user interfaces (or GUIs, pronounced “gooeys”) as a site to be
problematized, one that establishes a binary of white digital interfaces as
the indicator of modern transparency with black interfaces posited as
outdated and opaque. These are signifiers of design choices and the history
of white, cisgender drivers behind them. Artist peels back this logic,
positing the “black gooey” as a useful erratum with revolutionary potential:

   Blackness has, so to say, formed the ground for white, with black
   gooey being antithetical to the values of the white screen. Black
   gooey might then be a platform of slowness (“dragged time,”
   “colored time”), refusal, thought, complexity, critique, softness,
   loudness, transparency, uselessness, and brokenness. A planar body
    that longs for the solitude and vastness of the command-line, yet
   nuanced and sharp, to usurp and destroy a contemporary hegemonic
   interface.4

    The artist changed their name to American Artist in the early years of
their career, an avatar intended to allow Artist to move through online space
with a degree of anonymity. Simultaneously, Artist’s name change pushes
back at the quiet yet ever-aggressive bias of search engine optimization
(SEO), Google’s “roving eye” that by surfacing and prioritizing only certain
results, establishes a hierarchized social narrative, history, and visual
culture. Now anyone searching “American artist” on the Internet, receives
American Artist as the first hit, right alongside, for example, Google’s
suggested selection of qualified “Artists / United States” such as Andy
Warhol, Jean-Michel Basquiat, Edward Hopper, Jackson Pollock, and
Jasper Johns. In this way, Artist gently subverts and challenges a canon,
with the presence of their name in the company of a mastery recognized by
art history, standing as a durational performance that is virally,
algorithmically enacted through their avatar, without the artist’s physical
self ever even being present.
    The work of the avatar positions Artist’s engagement of what they name
as “Black radicalism and organized labor [in] a context of networked virtual
life” 5 at a unique intersection, a crossroads encountered by those looking
for Artist, and, too, by those who are not but may stumble across Artist’s
work accidentally in searching. With the search term “American artist”
having innumerable results following the first hit of Artist’s own website,
the artist’s legal name has no trace, rendering Artist in a sort of spatial
limbo, a viral every-where and no-where that, in breaking with the
standards of hypervisibility of pop blackness on the Internet. This action
stands in the break and shows us how we might ourselves break broken
systems via the creative re-application of these systems’ own material
toward the purpose of a strategic disruption and refusal.
    Yes! Why not break the thing that’s broken? Why not corrupt the
corrupted? The foundation we build on is faulty. Course correcting, we will
rise in our errata. We resist being subsumed; we keep sight of the beyond,
those rapturous wormholes where rupture can get rolling. The beyond is
blurred, it is runny. Our blur is a dance floor at 4AM, that moment where in
the crush of all-bodies lit up under strobes like firecrackers, we become no-
 body, and in the gorgeous crush of no-body, we become every-body. Our
song is playing, now let us build a gooey world to go along with it.
     The glitch is a tool: it is socio-cultural malware. Bodies traveling
through the glitch fail joyfully, as currents along wires that vein social
machinery, prompting freeze, flounder, a shuddering shutdown. The glitch
is disinformation, virally transmitted as a means of undermining the
architecture of gender, shaking it at its core, revealing its inherent fallacy.
     Gender is a carefully constructed economic performance as much as it is
a socio-cultural one. Gender exists and is protected as a means of insuring
bodies, bestowing value on those who labor under its coercion successfully
and compliantly, ascribing to its aggressive algorithm. Encrypted anti-
bodies, body errors, systemically unreadable, push the machine of gender to
its limits. Now wobbly and weakened by this virus, the machine is readied
for movement, for change.
     We, the viral glitch, want broken ruins, a pollution as politic: punctures
in the surface, a bubbling skin, all hell to break loose, destroying all that
shit. The alternative is this world right now, this life—and this world is not
enough. We cannot wait around to be remembered, to be humanized, to be
seen. It is our responsibility collectively to infect, and, as we prompt social
seizure, to bear witness to and for one another, to make impossible
pathways secure and viable as all else short-circuits toward a triggered
collapse.
     ALL BODIES CAN BE EVERY-BODY. We can get free! Writer Saidiya
Hartman notes that “captivity … engenders the necessity of redress, the
inevitability of its failure, and the constancy of repetition yielded by this
failure.”6 As we fail, we morph. As we morph, we transcend captivity,
slippery to those forces that strive to restrict, restrain, and censor us. Glitch-
as-virus presents us with a sharp vision of decay, a nonperformance that
veers us toward a wild unknown. This is where we bloom.

    It’s time for new mechanics.

    Let’s mutate, please.

    Bye, binary! Buffer forever.
 10 – GLITCH MOBILIZES
       And yeah, sometimes I say “bodies” when maybe I should say “people”
                  but I’m scared of not being able to touch skin anymore.

                                       —Caspar Heinemann, “Magic Work”

Facebook’s fifty-eight gender options (and three pronouns, lest we forget!),
first made available for users in 2014, was not a radical gesture—it was
neoliberalism at its finest.1 If a body without a name is an error, providing
more names, while proffering inclusivity, does not resolve the issue of the
binary body. Rather, it makes and requires a box to be ticked, a
categorization to be determined. Binaries are still presented within the
variety of options, and moreover recognition via these platforms urges us to
believe that signifying who we are to others is the only pathway to being
deemed fit to participate. Poet, artist, and “academia-adjacent independent
researcher” Caspar Heinemann puts it best: “In a climate of generalized
precarity and instability, naming skin should be the least of our worries; if
everything is collapsing, gender’s coming down with it. So traumatized
cyborg subject is the new normal, but is that the best we can hope for?”2
     Perhaps the personage of the “cyborg subject” is in and of itself the
problem. Artist Devin Kenny reminds us: “We have to keep in mind that
this is a recreation through mediation, often one that can be traced back to
one Internet Protocol address, and therefore one personage.”3 If we cannot
shed Internet Protocol (IP) address tracking without the aid of a virtual
private network (VPN) or some proxy like it, what other alternatives are
there to protect our digital biometrics as we aim to imagine, to mobilize, to
collectivize?
     Writer and computer programmer Alexander Galloway, in his 2012
book The Interface Effect, argues toward what he calls “generic difference”
 and how the rejection of “the assignation of traits” might carry biopolitical
potential, nudging us one step closer to living beyond the trauma and
trouble of gender as one such assignation:

   The trick … is thus … to abstain from the system of biopolitical
   predication, to abstain from the bagging and tagging of bodies …
   This does not mean that all bodies are now blank. Quite the
   opposite. All bodies are full. But their fullness is a generic fullness,
   a fullness of whatsoever they are. Likewise, it does not mean that
   difference has “gone away.” The opposite is the case, as difference
   may now finally come into its own as generic difference.4

Galloway’s “generic difference” theory proposes a path to a body that is
inherently fluid, a body emancipated from ever being asked to register its
traces online. As such, this kind of body renders itself useless as a subject
of capital’s regime of mining and profiting from data. Generic difference
keeps all doors open, all boxes—ticked, unticked, and those yet to be
imagined beyond our wildest dreams of revolution—a possibility. Thus, in
the face of pressure to constantly classify oneself, identifying ways to
mobilize through (and despite) these digital territories is important. The
anxious question remains: is the sacrifice of true autonomy, the distribution
of these bodily traces, worth it if it means we can be part of something
greater than ourselves? Especially if that is something that helps us shape
ourselves and, by this shaping, reshapes the world?
    Time has passed. Despite the loss of innocence that has come with the
shift in understanding of how our digital traces might be manipulated,
capitalized on, and deployed, the increased presence of intersectional bodies
that transcend the bureaucratic violence of a single-box tick remains a key
component of why the Internet still matters. Though far from its initial
promise of utopia, the Internet still provides opportunity for queer
propoitions for new modalities of being and newly proposed worlds.
    Sociologist Sherry Turkle’s 2011 book Alone Together argues that
through our increased use of technology we remain connected but
increasingly isolated from one another.5 This turn of phrase is frequently
weaponized to undermine the value of the digital and speaks recklessly
through a white, straight, cisgender lens. Turkle’s fear-mongering equation
Internet = alienation fails to take into consideration the enduring relevance
 of this material most specifically for queer people, female-identifying
people, and people of color. To reify the binary of, on the one hand, the
Internet as a dead utopia and, on the other, “real life” (read: IRL) as being
devoid of actual and/or social death for QTPOCIA+ bodies is a violent
propaganda. The Internet remains a club space for collective congregation
of marginalized voices and bodies when all else fails. In fact and in concept
“real life” as it travels in an unbroken loop between on- and offline is sexist,
racist, classist, homophobic, transphobic, and ableist. As glitch feminists
looking to build new communities and new worlds, we have to ask, Can our
“digital real” please live?
    The Internet continues to be a place of immense intimacy, where an
“opening up” of being can occur, and where one can dare to be vulnerable.
The Internet’s virtual channels provide protection from physical injury,
make room for an expression of ideas and politics in a fantastic forum, thus
amplifying collectivity, coalition-building, and one’s courage to individuate.
Artist Hamishi Farah reflects on his first experiences on the Internet noting,
“I was pretty isolated growing up … Being welcomed and appreciated in a
community online [was] the first time I really felt part of something …
That’s the first experience of the Internet: that moment it stops being ‘the
Internet’ and just becomes another thing/part of living.”6
    Writer Shaadi Devereaux further unpacks these tensions and calls for a
mobilized, activated collectivity in her 2014 essay “Why These Tweets Are
Called My Back.” Here, Devereaux (re)claims for herself and those in her
online community the platitude of “Toxic Twitter,” taking it for the
communal name of a group “largely made up of Afro-indigenous, Black,
and NDN women” in which they can talk about their lives. “It’s no mistake
that established media demean what is in many cases the one platform to
which marginalized women have access. You’ve been told to watch us but
not engage: the very definition of surveillance,” she writes.7
    Devereaux goes on to explain why social media still matters to her,
citing “digital feminism [as] a space where [one] can engage with other
black women overlooked in the academy, spread their work, and offer …
analysis on black artforms.” As Devereaux tells it, what began for her and
many others as “yelling into the void” transformed into a call-and-response
in which “other women began to answer”:
    Social media has lifted the barrier between consumers of media and
   media itself, transforming that relationship into one of active
   engagement. It has also lifted the barrier between women like us—
   displaced, disabled, trans, indigenous, and black—and the parts of
   society that were never supposed to deal with us … Suddenly a
   black trans woman denied access to any space you might enter is
   right here talking back to you with nuanced media critiques. A
   journalist can put up an article and within seconds readers are
   challenging the ethics of the reporting and the framing of subjects
   who can no longer be rendered passive.8

    Devereaux’s project of “Toxic Twitter” collectivity establishes
important groundwork as we seek out other examples of how we mobilize
via digital platforms and networked communities. Queer club and nightlight
collectives such as Papi Juice (@papijuicebk, New York), GUSH
(@gushofficial, New York), Pxssy Palace (@pxssy palace, London), and
BBZ LONDON (@bbz_london, London) amongst others have risen out of
a generation searching to situate in physical space an AFK response to
faces, voices, and visions that often call out in affirmation to one another
online. Images from these events and the communities that they celebrate
are then shared via Instagram, providing a living archive of a living history.
Thus, the explorations that might begin at night on the Internet traverse the
online-to-AFK loop.
    The UK-based art criticism duo and self-described “art critic baby
gods” The White Pube is comprised of collaborators Gabrielle de la Puente
and Zarina Muhammad. Per their Instagram and Twitter @thewhitepube,
the two are “unprofessional, irresponsible part-time critics” who “write
about exhibitions n the way the art world operates.” Having met in 2015 on
a fine arts BA course at Central St. Martins art school at the University of
London, The White Pube arose out of a feeling of alienation to, and
engagement with, the art world. As part of its politic, they commit wholly
to emoting through digital affect. Rich in emojis and short-form tweet-
speak, The White Pube reflects on and reviews the art/world with a
directness, intimacy, and honesty that lends a confessional texture to their
writing. Their approach has been dubbed “embodied criticism,” in
recognition of the intensity of emotion as a strength in speaking about art
and visual culture. The artists see exhibitions AFK then bring them to a
 growing global audience online, providing sharply instinctual insights and
lyrical commentary.
     In a review written in 2018, Muhammad exclaims: “I wana talk about
the BASIC, VIOLENT issue of white artists using black bodies as literal
props.”9 Amid ongoing discussions on “the dominance of the white male
critic,” The White Pube empowers criticism that problematizes and
interrogates triggers and fault lines across art history and visual culture.10 In
doing so, the duo demands and builds a more transparent and direct mode
of dialogue, a forum that works against the tired establishment of a
white/male art world and the highly flawed narratives it espouses.
     Making space for critique, feedback, and a heightening of self-
awareness works peer to peer both on- and offline, but also exists
intergenerationally. Brooklyn-based POWRPLNT (@powrplnt) is
“committed to providing digital arts education and access for all …
provid[ing] the resources, mentorship, and education to thrive in the
creative economy today.”11 Looking to “elevate digital literacy and
encourage expression via technology,” the group was founded in 2014 by
artist and community organizer Angelina Dreem and creative entrepreneur
Anibal Luque, and later joined by artist and researcher Salome Asega.
POWRPLNT’s tagline of “Technology is a right, not a privilege”
underscores the issue of access to technology as a primary contributor to
“the digital divide” across generations, geographies, and communities. By
creating a space to gather, learn about technology, and re-distribute
knowledge democratically, POWRPLNT mobilizes across generations,
providing the tools to drive strategic dismantlements.
     The glitch mobilizes. This is our task: to keep mobilizing, modifying,
shapeshifting with pride. This slip and slide is transcendent. We are
everything and nothing, everywhere and nowhere, always in motion. To
quote BUFU (@bufu_byusforus), a New York-based collective of “queer,
femme and non-binary Black and East-Asian artists and organizers”:
“Where else were We to go? / Who else believed in our potential but Us?”12
In mobilizing, we find others like us, and, in so doing, we find ourselves. In
mobilizing, we remain fugitive: we stand on the outside, not to look in, but,
stateless, to occupy and grow with intention. This mobility is gorgeous,
slippery, keyed up, catastrophic. It is the thing that keeps us blurry and
unbound, pushing back against hegemony.
 11 – GLITCH IS REMIX
                          What I mean is, what can we do with our bodies? …
                     I want to move my body back and forth, back and forth.

                —T. Fleischmann, Time Is the Thing a Body Moves Through

Queer people, people of color, and female-identifying people have an
enduring and historical relationship to the notion of “remix.” To remix is to
rearrange, to add to, an original recording. The spirit of remixing is about
finding ways to innovate with what’s been given, creating something new
from something already there.
    We are faced with the reality that we will never be given the keys to a
utopia architected by hegemony. Instead, we have been tasked with building
the world(s) we want to live in, a most difficult yet most urgent blueprint to
realize. If we see culture, society, and, by extension, gender as material to
remix, we can acknowledge these things as “original recordings” that were
not created to liberate us. Still, they are materials that can be reclaimed,
rearranged, repurposed, and rebirthed toward an emancipatory enterprise,
creating new “records” through radical action. Remixing is an act of self-
determination; it is a technology of survival.
    This world is not built for us; yet still, somehow, we are here, standing
against all odds. Similarly, the Internet, an electrifying black mirror, was not
built as a material for our bodies. At its worst, it only reflects back to us the
misery of the world around us. Still, we create opportunity for fugitivity in
our deployment of digital material. Online, we magnify our avatars, our
vast and varied selves. Through this performative practice we resist an
exclusionary canon of visual culture that, unable to decipher our coding,
seeks to erase us entirely. Glitch carries a technology of remix within its
code. We experiment via digital material as a means of pushing boundaries
within the AFK world, remixing via a complex choreography as we build
 new corpo-realities. Despite the supremacy of the original recording, still,
we rise.1
     But still, it can be difficult to find our footing.
     Artist Tabita Rezaire grapples with this challenge in her creative and
spiritual practice, applying art as a “healing technology” in an effort to
reconcile with a (digital) world that is far from the paradise promised at the
birth of the Internet. In her video work Afro Cyber Resistance (2014),
Rezaire problematizes the reality of an Internet driven by the West, one that
filters and excludes the contributions of Black people within its historical
arc—what she describes as “electronic colonialism.” Rezaire observes:

   Black people have been protesting and imagining different ways—
   their own ways—of existing on the Internet. If we must still use the
   Internet, how can we use it in a way that is uplifting and inspiring
   for the communities affected by the Internet’s racism. Afro Cyber
   Resistance is a pamphlet and a call for the decolonisation of the
   Internet.2

    Glitch, in its remix, embodies what Rezaire gestures toward, identifying
ways to make use of the Internet toward the goal of “uplifting …
communities” as an application of digital material to grapple with the
complicated and oft-contradictory nature of the material itself.
Decolonizing through occupation of a challenging digital landscape, the
acts of seizure and reclamation are two pillars of the glitch political agenda.
As glitch feminists, we aim to “alter … computer memory” through our
exploration of new modes of existing, surviving, and living, both AFK and
on the Internet.3
    To alter machinic memory, designer and researcher Simone C. Niquille
explores new forms of the body in her research of what she calls “avatar
design and identity strategy.” Niquille approaches the body as a design
challenge, considering ways of restructuring physical forms toward the goal
of remixing identity altogether. “The contemporary accelerating frenzy of
collecting as much data as possible on one single individual to … construct
a ‘fleshed out’ profile is a fragile endeavor,” Niquille explains. “More
information does not necessarily lead to a more defined image.”4 Glitch
feminism agrees: the possibility of failure against achieving a “more
defined image” has wonderful and weird prospects. For Niquille, the
 collection of data alone is not the ultimate threat, not if one can subvert it
by designing bodies that, in working against the design of the world around
them—one biased by a particular notion of a “normal” body, one that is
gendered, racialized—remain illegible to the machine.
     For Niquille’s short film “The Fragility of Life” (2016), she brings to
life a character named Kritios They. Kritios They was produced by Niquille
using a program called Fuse, now part of Adobe Creative Cloud suite,
designed to create 3D models and animated characters. Fuse presents the
user with body segments to be assembled into new forms; to do this the
program itself is set up with a series of embedded assumptions about what a
body should look like, how pieces of it should fit together, and what makes
a body whole or even human. When the program is pushed to its limits, the
rendering of these forms fails to recognize certain corpo-realities,
establishing that bodies that do not blend seamlessly cannot qualify as a
body at all. Niquille unpacks this:

   A lot of these processes and workflows demand content that is very
   specific to their definition of the human form in order to function.
   As a result, they don’t account for anything that diverges from that
   norm, establishing a parametric truth that is biased and
   discriminatory. This raises the question of what that norm is and
   how, by whom and for whom it has been defined.5

The implications of this are significant if we view them through the lens of
surveillance and image-capturing digital technologies. What is and is not
read as a body opens up a myriad of possibilities, some that allow for
greater refusal within hierarchies of visibility and others that flag a body
that cannot be read as a threat worth targeting, heightening the vulnerability
of that body as it moves through space.
     Still, “the body conceived of as a machinic assemblage becomes a body
that is multiple,” meaning that as it “contains multitudes” (to harken back to
where we began with Walt Whitman and E. Jane) a body that is gooey,
blurry, full of seams, or simply glitched is one that both absorbs and
refracts, becoming every-body and no-body simultaneously.6
     Niquille points to the forensic animations created by the defense for the
trial of George Zimmerman in the murder of the Black teenager Trayvon
Martin in 2012. These digital reenactments, based on data collected at the
 scene, were staged using an actor equipped with sixteen sensors, moving as
the defense theorized Zimmerman may have moved in exiting his car and
pursuing Martin down the street the night of the shooting. Niquille explains:

   [In] a roughly two-hour long video of Zimmerman’s attorney
   questioning the animator on his process … [the] animator states that
   he was the one wearing the motion capture suit portraying both
   Zimmerman as well as Martin. If this weren’t already enough to
   debunk an objectivity claim, the attorney asks: “How does the
   computer know that it is recording a body?” Upon which the
   animator responds: “You place the 16 sensors on the body and then
   on screen you see the body move in accordance.”7

The use of sixteen sensors to “read” the moving form in the production of a
forensic animation serves to demonstrate the flaws of legibility and the bias
presented therein, especially in this case where there was no singular
witness to Martin’s shooting. The legibility of Zimmerman’s body and
Martin’s body are both scripted from a particular body of evidence, data
dictating theorized movements culled from “coroner photographs, police
reports, the coroner’s report, witness depositions and photos taken by
responding police officers.”8 The judge on the case ruled that the defense
could not enter the animations as evidence.9 Still, the machinic bias enacted
by the panopticon of the mapping of the body through digital technologies
is filled with hopeful holes, leaving us to ask: If a body is not legible as a
body, and therefore cannot be read, will it be “seen”? Can it ghost, skirting
the omnipresent digital eye? Failing recognition, can it successfully cease to
exist?
     Artist Zach Blas’s Facial Weaponization Suite series (2011–14) pushes
us further in our quest toward strategic illegibility. This work stands as
nothing more than a glitch-resist within an ever-burgeoning culture of
surveillance capitalism. The project builds what the artist calls “collective
masks” modeled from the aggregation of facial data gleaned from group
workshops. The results are “amorphous masks that cannot be detected as
human faces by biometric facial recognition technologies.”10 The artist then
uses these masks to perform and stage public interventions.
     Blas creates different types of masks in the interest of interrogating
different types of biometric data collection. For one mask, “Fag Face
 Mask,” the artist culls biometric facial data based on a grouping of queer
men, pushing back against technologies that profile sexual orientation based
on algorithmically culled traits. For another mask, the artist investigates the
construct of blackness across three channels: “the inability of biometric
technologies to detect dark skin as racist, the favoring of black in militant
aesthetics, and black as that which informatically obfuscates.”11 Thus Blas
rejects singularity and embraces collective action. It brings to the forefront
the tension between the luxury and privilege of being able to choose to
refuse visibility, and, conversely, the tool of this refusal. This in turn
becomes a key strategy that provides the possibility of greater mobility for
vulnerable bodies who need it.
    We can see another form of remix and a different approach to masking-
as-resistance in American Artist’s project A Refusal (2015–16).12 For this
durational work, the artist for one full year replaced all would-be image
content posted on their social media with blue rectangles and redacted any
text with black bars. In order to gain access to the content, followers had to
request an in-person meeting with the artist. By refusing to input their
behavioral data, Artist challenged the construct of a virtual self while
simultaneously withdrawing their labor as a producer of content on
networked platforms. This action rendered Artist useless to the logics of the
digital economy. Meanwhile, it increased the value of the content that
remained on Artist’s social media platforms as a result of its rarity, a
gatekept material whose circulation is controlled by the individual
themselves. In limiting the supply of the “product,” the artist created a
shortage thereby amplifying the demand for the raw commodity: access to
the physical presence of the person.
    Florence Okoye, in her discussion of the unseen, gestures to new
possibilities in making room for glitched bodies through the strategic
redesign and critical engagement of user experience. Okoye puts it simply:
“The bot provides testament to the unseeing of its creators.” She asks,
“How can one envision the needs of the other when one doesn’t even
realize the other exists? … Hasn’t the glitch then become a means of seeing
the unseen?”13
    In the face of surveillance capitalism, the perhaps improved anonymity
of data, advanced modes of encryption, or advocacy for better data control
or ownership by individuals themselves is actually not the right battle to be
 fighting. To revolutionize technologies toward an application that truly
celebrates glitched bodies, perhaps the only course of action is to remix
from within, specifically programming with the unseen or illegible in mind
as a form of activism. To “advocate for the user,” in Okoye’s words, one
must innovate, encode, engineer the error into the machine, as a remix
rendering the machine unrecognizable to itself, prompting its failure as a
radical act.
 12 – GLITCH SURVIVES
 One is not born, but rather becomes, a body. And one is not born, but rather
becomes, a glitch. The glitch-becoming is a process, a consensual diaspora
toward multiplicity that arms us as tools, carries us as devices, sustains us
as technology, while urging us to persist, survive, stay alive.

Glitch Refuses
We are building a future where we can have the broad range we deserve.
We refuse to shrink ourselves, refuse to fit. Fluid, insistent, we refuse to
stand still: we slip, we slide. We recognize the contributions of blackness
toward liberatory queerness, and the contributions of queerness toward
liberatory blackness. We fail to function for a machine that was not built for
us. We refuse the rhetoric of “inclusion” and will not wait for this world to
love us, to understand us, to make space for us. We will take up space, and
break this world, making new ones.

Glitch Is Cosmic
We recognize that bodies are not fixed points, they are not destinations.
Bodies are journeys. Bodies move. Bodies are abstract. We recognize that
we begin in abstraction and then journey toward becoming. To transcend
the limits of the body we need to let go of what a body should look like,
what it should do, how it should live. We recognize that, within this process
of letting go, we may mourn; this mourning is a part of our growing. We
celebrate the courage it takes to change form, the joy and pain that can
come with exploring different selves, and the power that comes from
finding new selves.

Glitch Throws Shade
We throw shade by existing in the world, by showing up and not only
surviving, but truly, fully, living. We practice the future in the now, testing
 out alternatives of being. We openly, honestly consider together how to be
strategically visible, when visibility is radically necessary.

Glitch Ghosts
We ghost on the body, refusing to respond to its cultural texts, incessant
calls, damaging DMs. We acknowledge that gender is an economy. It is a
spoke in the wheel of capitalism. We reject being bought and sold. We feel
no guilt or shame about turning our backs on a market that wants to eat us
alive. We will strategize and collectivize toward uselessness, a failure that
imagines, innovates, emancipates.

Glitch Is Error
We are the most fantastic and beautiful mistake. Never meant to survive, we
are still here: an error in the algorithm. We are not empty signifiers,
however; we are not dead-end hyperlinks. We reject the violent act of
naming. We will reconfigure ourselves as we see fit. Modifying and
recoding, we choose our own names, build our own families and
communities, proudly fail in the present as we dream new futures.

Glitch Encrypts
We are encrypted: how we are coded is not meant to be easily read. We
recognize that the care-full reading of others is an exercise of trust,
intimacy, belonging, homecoming. We reject the conflation of legibility and
humanity. Our unreadable bodies are a necessary disruption. Our
unreadable bodies can render us invisible and hyper-visible at the same
time. As a response to this, we work together to create secure passageways
both on- and offline to travel, conspire, collaborate.

Glitch Is Anti-Body
If to be recognized as a body that deserves to live we must perform a certain
self—look a certain way, live a certain way, care for one another in a certain
way—we strike against the body altogether. We will hold mirrors up for one
another, hold and care for the reflections seen. We will see one another and
the selves we become, recognizing those selves as real, loved, and so very
alive.

Glitch Is Skin
 While both protective and permeable, the skin of the digital, despite its
entanglements, remains necessary as a tool of experimentation. Thus, we
celebrate ourselves and the framework offered by the skins we put on and
take off. We recognize that our performance of other bodies is prosthetic.
We recognize that the skin of the digital transforms and is transformative.

Glitch Is Virus
We want to corrupt data. We want to fuck up the machine. Infectious, viral,
we will tear it all down. We recognize that in this breaking, there is a
beginning.

Glitch Mobilizes
We will mobilize and take action! We recognize that all work cannot be
done all the time all on the Internet. Completing the online-to-AFK loop,
we will dare to live away from our screens, embodying our ever-slipping
selves as an activist action. Empowered by the virtual worlds we traverse,
we will reboot and rebuild these worlds when they no longer suit and need
to shift. Along this loop, we commit to making space for rigorous criticism,
feedback, play, and pleasure as activism.

Glitch Is Remix
Affirming our role in building new worlds, we will imagine, innovate, and
remix. We will rearrange and repurpose by any means necessary, rendering
what rises from this rebirth unrecognizable from the violence of its original.
We will create fissures in the social and cultural algorithm as an active act
of advocacy, advocating for the user, advocating for ourselves and
advocating for one another.

Glitch Survives
In 1993, one year before Sadie Plant coined the term cyberfeminism, poet
Lucille Clifton wrote “won’t you celebrate with me.” As glitch feminists we
call for it here, celebrating with Clifton at her request and sharing her
transformative words:

           won’t you celebrate with me
           what i have shaped into
           a kind of life? i had no model.
            born in babylon
           both nonwhite and woman
           what did i see to be except myself?
           i made it up
           here on this bridge between
           starshine and clay,
           my one hand holding tight
           my other hand; come celebrate
           with me that everyday
           something has tried to kill me
           and has failed.

Clifton’s “i made it up,” gestures to both playground and battlefield.
Building a future and a future self at the same time is no easy task. These
words seem a response to Essex Hemphill’s 1995 wondering, wandering on
cyberspace: “Can invisible men see their own reflections?” Glitch feminism
travels the passageways between the starshine of the digital and the clay of
AFK. It is modeled on no model and asks for a better world. Like Clifton,
we hold our own hands and the hands of one another in an act of solidarity,
with little else to lean on. What do we see to be except ourselves?
    The open-ended question of the body is one of the greatest of our time.
Our embodiment of glitch is thus an expression of spatial desire, a curious
inquiry in service of remapping the physical form and how we perform and
(re)structure it. Gender as a construct is a falsehood. As glitch feminists, we
challenge the collective discourse that designates the gender binary as a
natural progression. Binary gender keeps us from our cosmic corporeality,
that space where the body can expand and explore in the freedom of
abstraction. Nope, this cannot continue. The glitch pushes the machine to its
breaking point by refusing to function for it, refusing to uphold its fiction.
    What does it mean to find life—and to find ourselves—through the
framework of failure? To build models that stand with strength on their
own, not to be held up against those that have failed us, as reactionary tools
of resistance? Here is the opportunity to build new worlds. As citizens
transmogrified by the material of the digital, we recognize that limitlessness
is possible, that we can expand in every direction. I found new landscapes
through being borne and carried online, those early days where I flexed as a
 digital Orlando, shapeshifting, time-traveling, genderfucking as I saw fit. I
became myself, I found my body, through becoming, embodying, a glitch.
    Each among us containing multitudes, as glitch feminists we are not one
but many bodies. All these Internet avatars have taught us something: that
reality is what we make of it, and in order to make a “real life” whether
online or AFK, we must seize it. This is our right. United, we will no longer
ache for visibility or recognition or equality. This relinquishing of power as
reparation for harms done will never happen voluntarily, or meet our terms
—so why waste ourselves in waiting for it? By breaking it all, we pave the
way for the kaleidoscopic future that we want.
    What glitch feminism is proposing instead is this: We will embody the
ecstatic and catastrophic error. If this is a spatial battle, let us become
anarchitecture.
    We will be not “single beings” but be every single being and every
single avatar, expanding to a rageful full range that makes this gendered
engine screech to a halt.
    We will let our liquidity roar with the deep decibels of waves. We will
cruise as wild, amorous, monstrous malfunctions.
    We will find life, joy, and longevity in breaking what needs to be
broken. We will be persistent in our failure to perform in pursuit of a future
that does not want us, enduring in our refusal to protect the idea, the
institution of “body” that alienates us.
    Here is where new possibilities gestate.
    As glitch feminists, we will search in the darkness for the gates, seek the
ways to bring them down and kill their keepers.
    So, go ahead—tear it all open. Let’s be beatific in our leaky and
limitless contagion. Usurp the body. Become your avatar. Be the glitch.

Let the whole goddamn thing short-circuit.
                        Acknowledgements

“Digital Dualism and the Glitch Feminism Manifesto” was first published
in 2012, commissioned by theorist Nathan Jurgenson for The Society Pages,
and then later expanded into a short essay commissioned by the new media
art publication Rhizome. In the spring of 2013, my paper on glitch feminism
was accepted into University of Sussex’s “Queer Feminist Social Media
Praxis Workshop,” and later that fall my paper was also accepted into
University of Surrey’s “Corporeal Computing: A Performative Archaeology
of Digital Gesture” conference. This was the start of something wonderful,
and exponentially bigger than me, as the author of this little book.
     Since then glitch feminism has gone viral, traveling far and wide from
its site(s) of origin. It has been included in feminist and art history syllabi at
a variety of institutions: the Courtauld Institute of Art (UK), the Royal
Academy (UK), Evergreen State College (US), University of California at
Santa Cruz (US), and beyond. It has been included in publications and
productions put forward by the F Word (UK), Kingston University (UK),
the Photographers’ Gallery (UK), Stockholm University (SW), University
of Massachusetts Amherst (US), Boston University (US), McGill
University (Canada), and beyond.
     I have been fortunate to journey with glitch feminism internationally,
participating in forums such as “Theorizing the Web” held at the
International Center of Photography (2015, US); “Technofeminism Now,”
“Technology Now: Blackness on the Internet,” and then “Post-Cyber
Feminist International” all held at the Institute of Contemporary Arts
London (2015, 2016, 2017, UK); the Wonder Woman Festival at Castlefield
Gallery (2017, UK); Arcadia University (2017, UK); the Forum for
Philosophy at the London School of Economics (2017, UK); “Decolonizing
Bots” at Het Nieuwe Instituut (2017, NL); Impakt Festival (2017, NL);
 Transmission Gallery and the Centre for Contemporary Arts Glasgow
(2018, UK); School of Visual Arts (2018, US); “<Interrupted = Cyfem and
Queer>” symposium (2018, DE); Mapping Festival (2018, CH);
“Re/Dissolution: Learning from Pixels” symposium at the Academy of Fine
Arts Munich (2018, DE); Rewire Festival 2018 (2018, NL); Eyebeam’s
“Refiguring the Future” conference (2019, US), and more. This is proof that
glitch feminism is living material and part of an urgent conversation,
ongoing. I am eternally grateful to those bbz who organized the panels and
events at which I presented glitch feminism and for all those who took the
time to attend and critically engage with a work-in-progress.
    All this is to say that what lies within the pages of this book began with
outrage, desire, concern, joy. It surged from some of my own darkest
moments as a queer body in motion, and lit the way, allowing me to
advance with courage. It is part of an exigent global dialogue.
    Outside of The Society Pages and Rhizome, an earlier excerpted form of
this text meditating on some of the ideas shared here was published in 2018
in an independent compilation titled Alembic, put forward by the gallery
and workspace Res. in Deptford, South East London.
    Glitch Feminism as a manuscript grew and found its footing in
conversations with beloved folx Elizabeth Koke (who literally guided it
from the dancefloor of Nowhere Bar, out into the daylight) and Angelica
Sgouros (also on the dancefloor at Nowhere Bar), who carried this work far
beyond with strength, vision, courage. Early research as I began this book
came from two super rad research assistants: the inspiring poet, artist, star-
child Caspar Heinemann, and the equally inspiring writer and editor Laura
Bullard. The structure of and material for my glitch feminist lectures
starting in 2017 were composed with care by Anna Carey, who brought the
visuality of glitch feminism to new heights with her keen eye for design and
savvy Keynote slay.
    In performance lecture form from the dot and now here, too, Glitch
Feminism celebrates the important creative contributions and very
necessary work of E. Jane (and their Mhysa), manuel arturo abreu, and
Shawné Michaelain Holloway. Honor them with me.
    Other folx who encouraged, celebrated, challenged, and galvanized this
work, listed alphabetically: Alexandra Bynoe-Kasden, Andrew Cappetta,
Brittni Chicuata, Nora Clancy, Bibi Deitz, Rosalie Doubal, Thelma Golden,
my brilliant and very woke editor Leo Hollis, Madeleine Hunt-Ehrlich,
 Lena Imamura, Andreas Laszlo Konrath, Moira Kerrigan, Taylor LeMelle,
Kamala Mottl ( aloha wau ia ‘oe, “Geeve um!”), Kaitlin Kylie Pomerantz,
Angola Russell, Ernest Russell (DIGITALMAN), Hannah Sullivan, Sarah
Shin, Mark Tribe, McKenzie Wark, Zadie Xa. I am in eternal debt and
gratitude for the Carl and Marilynn Thoma Art Foundation and the Robert
Rauschenberg Residency for the support they have provided me in the
creation of this manuscript. There have also been so many amazing folx
who took the time to be vulnerable, passionate, wild, wonderful, and who
wrote me with their own personal stories, thoughts, and positive vibes over
the course of my writing: To each of you, your words arrived just in time,
gave me insight, brought me back from the edge, and carried me forward
with confidence and self-determination in my heart.
    Finally, to all the artists, writers, thinkers, and gender-hackers included
in these pages: I am deeply grateful for the work you put forward into the
world, the multitudinous selves you bravely share online and AFK, and the
eternal solidarity you show as we continue to co-conspire in breaking the
binary code.
    Cyberfam: In all your brilliance and allyship, I thank you for your
vision, your refusal, and, above all, your love. You are everything.

USURP THE BODY! BECOME YOUR AVATAR!
                                 Image Credits

DIGITALMAN and Legacy Russell, “Black Baldessari (Emoji Portraits),” series of composites
     completed 2018, courtesy of the artists.
Mark Aguhar, “These are the axes,” 2012, courtesy of the estate of Mark Aguhar.
E. Jane, “Nope (A Manifesto),” 2016, courtesy of the artist and Codette.
boychild, “Moved by the Motion” with Wu Tsang, 2014, courtesy of the artist.
Victoria Sin, Performance at “Glitch @ Night” organized by Legacy Russell as part of Post-Cyber
     Feminist International, 2017, ICA London, courtesy of ICA London, photograph by Mark
     Blower.
Frank Benson, “Juliana,” 2014–2015, 3D Rendering, courtesy of the artist, Andrew Kreps Gallery,
     NY and Sadie Coles HQ, London.
Rindon Johnson, “My Daughter, Aaliyah (Norf, Norf),” 2016, courtesy of the artist.
manuel arturo abreu, 2014 tweet, courtesy of the artist.
Kia LaBeija, “Eleven,” 2015, courtesy of the artist.
Lil Miquela, courtesy of Brud.
shawné michaelain holloway, mirror-mirror_(newGen_TechEdit) blackbitch1.png, 2015, courtesy
     of the artist.
American Artist, American Artist, Mother of All Demos, 2018, courtesy of HOUSING, Brooklyn.
The White Pube, Instagram post, courtesy of The White Pube.
Tabita Rezaire, “Afro-Cyber Resistance,” video still, 18:26, 2014, courtesy of the artist.
Sondra Perry, Installation view, Typhoon coming on, Serpentine Sackler Gallery, London (6 March
     – 20 May 2018), © 2018 Mike Din, courtesy of the artist and Bridget Donahue, NYC.
                                 Excerpted Text

Etheridge Knight, “Feeling Fucked Up,” The Essential Etheridge Knight, University of Pittsburgh
     Press, 1986, p. 34.
Anaïs Duplan, “On a Scale of 1–10, How ‘Loving’ Do You Feel?” Take This Stallion: Poems,
     Brooklyn Arts Press, 2016, p. 12.
Richard Siken, “Seaside Improvisation,” Crush, Yale University Press, 2005, p. 8.
Yusef Komunyakaa, “Fever,” Neon Vernacular: New and Selected Poems, Wesleyan University
     Press, 1993, p. 24.
manuel arturo abreu, “A PIECE OF WRITING THAT WON ME $200 IN EIGHTH GRADE,” List
     of Consonants, Bottlecap Press, 2015, p. 53.
Ocean Vuong, “Threshold,” NIGHT SKY WITH EXIT WOUNDS, Copper Canyon Press, 2016, p. 3.
Billy-Ray Belcourt, “The Cree Word for a Body Like Mine is Weesageechak,” This Wound Is a
     World: Poems. Frontenac House Poetry, 2017, p. 9.
Caspar Heinemann, “Magic Work: Queerness as Remystification,” 2014, available at
     docs.google.com/document/d/1d1RpWJ2nR4iN2BKEwfHdQFgdPqKW-a8q7O1ZAiNltU.
T. Fleischmann, Time Is the Thing a Body Moves Through, Coffee House Press, 2019, pp. 9, 54.
Lucille Clifton, “won’t you celebrate with me?” The Collected Poems of Lucille Clifton 1965–2010,
     edited by Kevin Young and Michael S. Glaser, BOA Editions, 2012, p. 427.
                                             Notes

00 – Introduction
1.    In this text I will celebrate the use of capital B for “Black”. “Blackness” will maintain lower
      case b in the interest of making space for the ontological framework that blackness proposes
      across a cultural, social, political discourse.
2.    James C. Scott, Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition
      Have Failed, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1999, p.183.


01 – Glitch Refuses
1.    “An Interview with E. Jane,” AQNB, February 16, 2016, aqnb.com; “About,” NewHive,
      newhive.com:80/newhive/about; “NewHive,” wikipedia, en.wikipedia.org.
2.    Hanna Girma, “Artist Profile: E. Jane,” Rhizome, May 23, 2017, rhizome.org.
3.    “An Interview with E. Jane,” AQNB, February 16, 2016, aqnb.com
4.    José Esteban Muñoz, Cruising Utopia: The Then and There of Queer Futurity, New York: NYU
      Press, 2009, p.1.
5.    Ibid., p. 182.
6.    Lisa Respers France, “Rihanna Criticizes Snapchat for Ad Referencing Domestic Violence,”
      CNN, March 16, 2018, cnn.com.
7.    Amanda Arnold, “Snapchat’s Offensive Rihanna Ad Cost the App $800 Million,” The Cut,
      March 17, 2018, thecut.com.
8.    Thinking here of Nikki Giovanni’s “Seduction / Kidnap Poem” (1975).
9.    Jean-Luc Nancy, “Fifty-Eight Indices on the Body,” in Jean-Luc Nancy, Corpus, translated by
      Richard Rand, New York: Fordham University Press, 2008.
10.   Alex Hern, “Google’s Solution to Accidental Algorithmic Racism: Ban Gorillas,” Guardian,
      January 12, 2018, theguardian.com.
11.   Ayana Lage, “Google’s ‘Arts & Culture’ App Is Being Called Racist, But The Problem Goes
      Beyond The Actual App,” Bustle, January 18, 2018, bustle.com.
12.   Essex Hemphill, “On the Shores of Cyberspace,” lecture given at “Black Nations/Queer
      Nations?” conference, City University of New York, 1995.
13.   Judith Butler, Excitable Speech: A Politics of the Performative, New York: Routledge, 1997, p.
      5.
14.   Kate Bornstein in Conversation with Zackary Drucker, “Gender Is a Playground,” Aperture 229,
      Winter 2017, p. 29.
 15. Emily Siner, “What’s A ‘Glitch,’ Anyway?: A Brief Linguistic History,” NPR, October 24,
    2013, npr.org.
16. Ibid.
17. bell hooks, Feminism Is for Everybody: Passionate Politics, Boston: South End Press, 2000.
18. Donna J. Haraway, The Haraway Reader, New York: Routledge, 2004, p. 38.
19. Cornelia     Sollfrank,     “The    Truth      about     Cyberfeminism,”       available   at
    obn.org/reading_room/writings/html/truth.html.


02 – Glitch Is Cosmic
1.   Virginia Woolf, A Room of One’s Own, New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company, 1929.
2.   Gene McHugh, “The Context of the Digital: A Brief Inquiry into Online Relationships,” in You
     Are Here: Art After the Internet, edited by Omar Kholeif, Manchester, UK: Cornerhouse
     Publications, 2017, p. 31.
3.   James Bridle, “#Sxaesthetic,” blog entry, Book Two, March 15, 2012, booktwo.org.
4.   Hili Perlson, “Truth in Gender: Wu Tsang and boychild on the Question of Queerness,” SLEEK,
     October 29, 2014, sleek-mag.com.
5.   Eric Sasson, “Is Gentrification Killing the Gay Bar?” GOOD, August 2, 2019, good.is.
6.   Rachel Small, “boychild,” Interview Magazine, December 10, 2014, interviewmagazine.com.
7.   Manthia Diawara, “Conversation with Édouard Glissant aboard the Queen Mary II,” August
     2009,                 available              at             liverpool.ac.uk/media/livacuk/csis-
     2/blackatlantic/research/Diawara_text_defined.pdf.
8.   Lisa Nakamura, Cybertypes: Race, Ethnicity, and Identity on the Internet, New York: Routledge,
     2002, 8.
9.   Initials used to preserve anonymity.


03 – Glitch Throws Shade
1.   Antwaun Sargent, “Artist Juliana Huxtable’s Bold, Defiant Vision,” Vice, March 25, 2015,
     vice.com.
2.   Ibid.
3.   “Introducing: Lorraine O’Grady and Juliana Huxtable, Part 1,” Museum of Contemporary Art,
     Spring 2019, moca.org.
4.   To resituate a term coined by curator and writer Taylor LeMelle in the context of “Technology
     Now: Blackness on the Internet,” a program organized by Legacy Russell which took place at
     the Institute of Contemporary Arts and featured Rizvana Bradley, Taylor Le Melle, and Derica
     Sheilds. This program was presented on the occasion of the “Wandering/WILDING: Blackness
     on the Internet” exhibition organized by Legacy Russell at IMT Gallery, London, presented in
     collaboration with the Institute of Contemporary Arts, London, 2016.
5.   Petra Collins, “Petra Collins selects Juliana Huxtable,” Dazed Digital, July 8, 2014,
     dazeddigital.com.
6.   Jesse Daniels, “Rethinking Cyberfeminism(s): Race, Gender, and Embodiment,” Women,
     Science and Technology: A Reader in Feminist Science Studies, New York: Routledge, 2001, p.
     365.
7.   Tina M. Campt, Listening to Images, Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2017, p. 114.
8.   The glitched body is a body that defies the hierarchies and strata of logic, it is proudly
     nonsensical and therefore perfectly non-sense. I think here of philosopher Jean-Luc Nancy’s
     “Fifty-eight Indices on the Body,” Indice 27, wherein he muses: “Bodies produce sense beyond
       sense. They’re an extravagance of sense.” In Jean-Luc Nancy, Corpus, translated by Richard
      Rand, New York: Fordham University Press, 2008, p. 153.
9.    Florence Okoye, “Decolonising Bots: Revelation and Revolution through the Glitch,” Het
      Nieuwe Instituut, October 27, 2017, botclub.hetnieuweinstituut.nl.
10.   Maurizio Lazzarato, Signs and Machines: Capitalism and the Production of Subjectivity,
      translated by Joshua David Jordan, Los Angeles, CA: Semiotext(e), 2014, pp. 18, 26.
11.   Ibid.
12.   Nancy, “Fifty-eight Indices on the Body,” Indice 3, Corpus, p.150.
13.   “AF,” shorthand slang for “as fuck.”
14.   Judith Butler and Beatriz Preciado, Têtu magazine interview from 2008, translated by Ursula
      Del Aguila for Las Disidentes, April 20, 2012, lasdisidentes.com.
15.   Excerpted from Tony Morrison’s Nobel Lecture on December 7, 1993. Toni Morrison, “Toni
      Morrison: Nobel Lecture,” in Nobel Lectures in Literature: 1991–1995, edited by Sture Allén,
      Swedish Academy, Stockholm, Hackensack, NJ: World Scientific, 1997.


04 – Glitch Ghosts
1.    M. G. Siegler, “Eric Schmidt: Every Two Days We Create as Much Information as We Did Up
      to 2003,” TechCrunch, August 5, 2010, techcrunch.com.
2.    David Lyon, Surveillance Society: Monitoring Everyday Life, Buckingham, UK: Open
      University Press, 2012, p. 2.
3.    “About Demographic Targeting,” Google Ads Help, support. google.com/google-
      ads/answer/2580383.
4.    David Lyon, Surveillance Society: Monitoring Everyday Life, Buckingham, UK: Open
      University Press, 2012, p. 15.
5.    “Cécile B. Evans: The Virtual Is Real,” HuffPost, August 4, 2017, huffpost.com.
6.    Rindon Johnson, “What’s the Point of Having a Body?” DazedDigital, March 6, 2019,
      dazeddigital.com.
7.    Ibid.
8.    Hortense Spillers, “To the Bone: Some Speculations on Touch, Hortense Spillers,” talk given at
      “Hold Me Now – Feel and Touch in an Unreal World” conference organized by the Gerrit
      Rietveld Academie at the Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam, NL, March 23, 2018, available at
      youtube.com/watch?v=AvL4wUKIfpo.
9.    Rindon Johnson, “What’s the Point of Having a Body?” DazedDigital, March 6, 2019,
      dazeddigital.com.


05 – Glitch Is Error
1.    Florence Okoye, “Decolonising Bots: Revelation and Revolution through the Glitch,” Het
      Nieuwe Instituut, October 27, 2017, botclub.hetnieuweinstituut.nl.
2.    manuel arturo abreu, List of Consonants, Bottlecap Press, 2015, p. 53.
3.    “Not long ago I was in a room where someone asked the philosopher Judith Butler what made
      language hurtful. I could feel everyone lean forward. Our very being exposes us to the address
      of another, she said. We suffer from the condition of being addressable, by which she meant, I
      believe, there is no avoiding the word-filled sticks and stones of others. Our emotional
      openness, she added, is borne, in both its meanings, by our addressability. Language navigates
      this.” Claudia Rankine, Citizen: An American Lyric, London: Penguin Books, 2015, p. 49.
 4.  micha cárdenas, “Trans of Color Poetics: Stitching Bodies, Concepts, and Algorithms,” Scholar
    and Feminist Online, “Traversing Technologies” 13.3–14.1, 2016, sfonline.barnard.edu.
5. Sarah Kember and Joanna Zylinska, Life after New Media: Mediation as a Vital Process,
    Cambridge, MA: MIT University Press, 2012, pp. 88–89.
6. Ibid., p. 89.
7. micha cárdenas, “Trans of Color Poetics: Stitching Bodies, Concepts, and Algorithms,” Scholar
    and Feminist Online, “Traversing Technologies” 13.3–14.1, 2016, sfonline.barnard.edu.
8. Ibid.
9. Sable Elyse Smith, “Ecstatic Resilience,” New York: Recess Art, 2016, available at
    recessart.org/wp-content/uploads/EsctaticResilience.pdf.
10. “The Violence of Naming and Necessity: Reading Through Porous Bodies in manuel arturo
    abreu’s transtrender,” AQNB, January 30, 2017, aqnb.com.


06 – Glitch Encrypts
1.   Tamar Clarke-Brown, “Adrift in the Chroma Key Blues: A Chat with Sondra Perry on Black
     Radicality and Things That Are Yet to Happen in Typhoon coming on,” AQNB, May 1, 2018,
     aqnb.com.
2.   Timothy Morton, Hyperobjects: Philosophy and Ecology after the End of the World,
     Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2014.
3.   Henri Lefebvre, The Production of Space, translated by Donald Nicholson-Smith, Cambridge,
     MA: Blackwell, 1991, p. 194.
4.   Jessica Pressman, “Circling Back: Electronic Literature and Material Feminism,” in Routledge
     Handbook of Contemporary Feminism edited by Tasha G. Oren and Andrea L. Press, New York:
     Routledge, 2019, p. 237.
5.   “I FEEL MOST COLORED WHEN I AM THROWN AGAINST A SHARP WHITE
     BACKGROUND I FEEL MOST COLORED WHEN I AM THROWN AGAINST A SHARP
     WHITE BACKGROUND …” and so on.
6.   Serpentine Galleries, London, Sondra Perry: Typhoon coming on, 2018, serpentinegalleries.org.
7.   Ibid.


07 – Glitch Is Anti-Body
1.   Jean-Luc Nancy, “Corpus” in Jean-Luc Nancy, Corpus, translated by Richard Rand, New York:
     Fordham University Press, 2008, p. 7.
2.   Ibid.
3.   Ibid.
4.   Lynn Hershman Leeson, “Some Thoughts on the Data Body” (1994) in Context Providers:
     Conditions of Meaning in Media Arts, edited by M. Paul Lovejoy and V. C. Vesna, Chicago:
     University of Chicago Press, 2011.
5.   Amelia Abraham, “Photographing Black, Female, HIV Positive Power,” Refinery29, December
     30, 2016, refinery29.com.
6.   Hugh Ryan, “Power in the Crisis: Kia LaBeija’s Radical Art as a 25-Year-Old, HIV-Positive
     Woman of Color,” Vice, June 6, 2015, vice.com.
7.   Amelia Abraham, “Photographing Black, Female, HIV Positive Power,” Refinery29, December
     30, 2016, refinery29.com.
8.   Alex Fialho, “Kia LaBeija,” Artforum, January 2018, artforum.com.
 9. Ibid.
10. Ibid.
11. Jasmin Hernandez, “In Conversation with Kia Labeija: Using Positivity to Trigger Awareness,
    Acceptance and Activism for HIV/AIDS,” Gallery Gurls, December 21, 2015, gallerygurls.net.


08 – Glitch Is Skin
1.   Andrea Liu, “‘Queer’ as Refusal and Disidentificatory Act at the Yale School of Art,” Blonde
     Art Books, December 20, 2017, blondeartbooks.com.
2.   Gaby Cepeda, “Artist Profile: Shawné Michaelain Holloway,” Rhizome, September 24, 2015,
     rhizome.org.
3.   Jessica Pressler, “How an Aspiring ‘It’ Girl Tricked New York’s Party People—and Its Banks,”
     The Cut, May 29, 2018, thecut.com.
4.   Gaby Cepeda, “Artist Profile: Shawné Michaelain Holloway,” Rhizome, September 24, 2015,
     rhizome.org.
5.   Term invited by artist Gordon Matta-Clark in the 1970s to describe his interventions made on
     physical buildings around New York City. In its most basic form, anarchitecture means “against
     architecture” and extended to other forms, such as poetry and music, as a means of refusing
     traditional or classicised standards.
6.   Jack Halberstam, “Unbuilding Gender: Trans* Anarchitectures In and Beyond the Work of
     Gordon Matta-Clark,” Places, October 1, 2018, placesjournal.org.
7.   Paul B. Preciado, Countersexual Manifesto: Subverting Gender Identities, New York: Columbia
     University Press, 2018, p. 36.
8.   Ibid, 37.


09 – Glitch Is Virus
1.   Jack Halberstam, “‘The Wild Beyond,’” in The Undercommons: Fugitive Planning and Black
     Study, edited by Stefano Harney and Fred Moten, New York: Minor Compositions, 2013, p. 6.
2.   Stefano Harney and Fred Moten, The Undercommons: Fugitive Planning and Black Study, New
     York: Minor Compositions, 2013, p. 152.
3.   American Artist, “Black Gooey Universe,” Unbag, 2018, unbag.net.
4.   Ibid.
5.   Artist Bio, americanartist.us.
6.   Saidiya V. Hartman, Scenes of Subjection: Terror, Slavery, and Self-Making in Nineteenth-
     Century America, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997, p. 17.


10 – Glitch Mobilizes
1.   Russell Goldman, “Here’s a List of 58 Gender Options for Facebook Users,” ABC News,
     February 13, 2014, abcnews.go.com.
2.   Caspar Heinemann, “Magic Work: Queerness as Remystification,” 2014, available at
     docs.google.com/document/d/1-d1RpWJ2nR4iN2BKEwfHdQFgdPqKW-a8q7O-1ZAiNltU.
3.   Kimberly Drew, “Towards a New Digital Landscape,” Sightlines, May 11, 2015, walkerart.org.
4.   Alexander R. Galloway, The Interface Effect, Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 2012, p. 140.
5.   Sherry Turkle, Alone Together: Why We Expect More from Technology and Less from Each
     Other, New York: Basic Books, 2011.
 6.  Kimberly Drew, “Towards a New Digital Landscape,” Sightlines, May 11, 2015, walkerart.org.
7.  Shaadi Devereaux, “Why These Tweets Are Called My Back,” The New Inquiry, December 19,
    2014, thenewinquiry.com.
8. Ibid.
9. “Zoë Paul: La Perma-Perla Kraal Emporium @ Spike Island,” The White Pube, May 13, 2018,
    thewhitepube.co.uk.
10. Elizabeth Méndez Berry and Chi-hui Yang, “Opinion: The Dominance of the White Male
    Critic,” The New York Times, July 5, 2019, nytimes.com.
11. “What We Do,” POWRPLNT, powrplnt.org.
12. “BUFU : BY US FOR US,” bufubyusforus.com.


11 – Glitch Is Remix
1.    Thinking here of Maya Angelou’s 1994 poem “Still I Rise.”
2.    Alex King, “Feel like a Cyber Slave? Meet Tabita Rezaire, Healer of Souls,” Huck, February 1,
      2018, huckmag.com.
3.    Emily Siner, “What’s A ‘Glitch,’ Anyway?: A Brief Linguistic History,” NPR, October 24,
      2013, npr.org.
4.    Simone C. Niquille, Sam Wolk, and Jeff Witscher, “The Fragility of Life,” Possible Bodies,
      July, 22 2017, possible-bodies.constantvzw.org.
5.    Simone C. Niquille, Sam Wolk, and Jeff Witscher, “The Fragility of Life,” Possible Bodies, July
      22, 2017, possible-bodies.constantvzw.org.
6.    Peta Malins, “Machinic Assemblages: Deleuze, Guattari, and an Ethico-Aesthetics of Drug
      Use,” Janus Head 7.1, 2004, p. 86.
7.    Simone C. Niquille, Sam Wolk, and Jeff Witscher, “The Fragility of Life,” Possible Bodies,
      July, 22 2017, possible-bodies.constantvzw.org.
8.    Associated Press, “George Zimmerman Judge Ponders Request To Use Animated Recreation,”
      Guardian, July 9, 2013, theguardian.com.
9.    Erin Donaghue, “George Zimmerman Trial: Defense Can’t Introduce Animation of Fight as
      Evidence, Judge Rules,” CBS News, July 10, 2013, cbsnews.com.
10.   Zach Blas, Facial Weaponization Suite, 2011–14, zachblas.info/works/facial-weaponization-
      suite.
11.   Ibid.
12.   American Artist, A Refusal, 2015–16, americanartist.us/a-refusal.
13.   Florence Okoye, “Decolonising Bots: Revelation and Revolution through the Glitch,” Het
      Nieuwe Instituut, October 27, 2017, botclub.hetnieuweinstituut.nl.
 