 Lifehouse
OceanofPDF.com
  OceanofPDF.com
                                     First published by Verso 2024
                                      © Adam Greenfield 2024

                                         All rights reserved
                  The moral rights of the author and translator have been asserted
                                        1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2

  Every effort has been made to contact copyright holders and to obtain permission for the use of
 copyright material. The publisher apologizes for any errors or omissions and would be grateful for
  notification of corrections that should be incorporated in future reprints or editions of this book.

                                               Verso
                              UK: 6 Meard Street, London W1F 0EG
                           US: 388 Atlantic Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11217
                                          versobooks.com

                               Verso is the imprint of New Left Books

                                  ISBN-13: 978-1-78873-835-4
                              ISBN-13: 978-1-78873-836-1 (UK EBK)
                              ISBN-13: 978-1-78873-837-8 (US EBK)

                        British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
                A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library

                      Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Names: Greenfield, Adam, author.
Title: Lifehouse : taking care of ourselves in a world on fire / Adam Greenfield.
Description: London ; New York : Verso, 2024. | Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2024002434 (print) | LCCN 2024002435 (ebook) | ISBN 9781788738354 (trade
    paperback) | ISBN 9781788738378 (US ebook) | ISBN 9781788738361 (UK ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Community organization. | Social participation. | Disaster relief—Citizen
    participation.
Classification: LCC HM766 .G744 2024 (print) | LCC HM766 (ebook) | DDC 361.8—
    dc23/eng/20240307
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2024002434
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2024002435
 Typeset in Sabon by MJ & N Gavan, Truro, Cornwall
Printed and bound by CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon CR0 4YY


                              OceanofPDF.com
            For N.

I found a reason to keep living
Oh, and the reason, dear, is you

    OceanofPDF.com
 And Polo said: “The inferno of the living is not something that will be; if there is one, it is
what is already here, the inferno where we live every day, that we form by being together.
There are two ways to escape suffering it. The first is easy for many: accept the inferno and
become such a part of it that you can no longer see it. The second is risky and demands
constant vigilance and apprehension: seek and learn to recognize who and what, in the midst
of the inferno, are not inferno, then make them endure, give them space.”
                                                         —Italo Calvino, Invisible Cities, 1972

Let’s start with the end of the world, why don’t we? Get it over with and move on to more
interesting things.
                                                    —N. K. Jemisin, The Fifth Season, 2015

                                   OceanofPDF.com
                         Contents


Introduction
1 The Long Emergency
2 Mutual Care
3 Collective Power
4 Beyond Hope
Conclusion

Acknowledgments
Notes
Index

                       OceanofPDF.com
                              Introduction


We were out of town when Superstorm Sandy made landfall on New York
City, my partner and I, and had trouble catching a flight home. What I recall
most vividly about the event itself was the disorientation of seeing a
broadcast on CNN of the familiar intersection in front of our building,
flooded waist-high. The traffic signals were swinging wildly on their mast
arms overhead, in what an excited voiceover described as sustained winds
of forty miles an hour or more.
    A montage of increasingly surreal footage followed: the tide overtopping
a seawall somewhere out in the Rockaways, torrential floodwaters surging
into the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel, then a construction crane snapped in two
by the wind, dangling seventy-five stories above Midtown. And finally that
unforgettable image of Lower Manhattan, the whole bottom third of the
island gone dark after a transformer explosion at the Con Ed electric
substation on East Fourteenth Street.
    This was plainly no ordinary hurricane. Even before its surge hit New
York City, Sandy was already strikingly unusual. The lead winds of a late-
season storm, among the largest Atlantic hurricanes on record, had begun to
fuse with an existing continental cold front, producing something vastly
larger and weirder than either. The combined system would go on to loiter
over the northeastern United States for days, stretching ordinary
expectations of a weather event to the breaking point, and in doing so
defining an entirely new category of “superstorm.”
    But it was the storm surge, when it came, that literally redrew the maps.
Measured at its peak at the Battery at a previously unimaginable 13.88 feet
 (4.2m)—or some seven feet (2.1m) above flood stage—it was this surge, far
more than the rain or the wind, that caused the most severe and lasting
damage.1 As the brackish water streamed inland, it flooded into subway
tunnels, utility vaults, basements and hundreds of thousands of other
belowground spaces. The Hudson and East Rivers overspilled their banks,
as did smaller waterways like the heavily polluted Gowanus Canal. Low-
lying areas of New York City, from Manhattan’s Financial District to the
beach communities of outer Queens, suddenly found themselves submerged
beneath a filthy, freezing tide.
    It was more than any of the planners, architects or civil engineers
responsible for the city’s form had ever anticipated, and in the end it was
more than the infrastructures they devised could withstand. Failure
cascaded through a tight mesh of systems critical to the life of the city that,
on any ordinary day, ran quietly in the background. Power, fuel,
transportation and communication networks all went down, despite the
backups and failovers that had been so carefully designed into them. In the
worst-hit neighborhoods, they stayed down for weeks.
    In New York City alone, tens of thousands of households found
themselves without light, heat or potable water. Elderly people and others
with limited mobility were trapped on high floors in their thousands,
marooned atop twenty- and thirty-story buildings whose elevator service
was not restored for a week or more. Entire housing projects were left to
fend for themselves, the maintenance crews responsible for their upkeep
and repair stranded offsite by the collapse of the regional transportation
network. Attempts to restore service struggled against acute and immediate
fuel shortages, amid lengthening lines and spreading mayhem at gas
stations. And, in true insult-to-injury style, there was barely time for anyone
to internalize any of this before a vicious early cold snap settled onto the
area.
    By the time my partner and I made our way back to New York, it was
already clear that Sandy would turn out to be one of those events that
rewrites the way we understand the world we live in. Like the “500-year”
floods or wildfires that now seem to strike every few months, the
appearance of this storm suggested that the atmosphere had undergone a
transition to a volatile new state, in which weather events of a magnitude
once thought impossible were plainly now on the table, and those that had
been considered exceptional would become routine. It was one of those
moments of ruthless clarity: a meteorological disturbance so massive that it
defied classification, difficult to attribute with any credibility to anything
but human action, had landed on the very capital of Empire. And in a matter
of hours, it had laid waste to all the intertwined systems that kept it
functioning.
   Maybe it’s simply that all of this happened to a place as
comprehensively mediated (and as endlessly, baroquely self-mythologizing)
as New York City. But at least for those of us who found ourselves living
through its aftereffects, Superstorm Sandy felt like some kind of rupture or
punctuation in history—the advent of a new era, in which the contours of
everyday life everywhere on Earth would fundamentally be determined by
the consequences of anthropogenic global heating. It will never be possible
to point to a given day on the calendar and say, “Yes, that’s when
everything started to change,” and in any event I expect that moment would
be different for each one of us. If you were forced to choose a single event,
though, a single nodal point at which one set of assumptions about how the
future might unfold was replaced wholesale by another, you could do a
whole lot worse than this one.

Most of the ways in which Sandy reset our expectations about the world we
live in were scary, and hard to accept—but not all of them. If there was one
bright light that kept burning amid the devastation, it was that there was in
 New York an organization able to stand up a logistical network and begin
relief and recovery operations almost immediately. This organization had
two distribution hubs set up before the last of Sandy’s trailing winds had
cleared the tristate area. It funneled an enormous volume of donated goods
and supplies out to the hardest-hit areas of the city. It furnished crew after
crew of volunteers willing to take on the difficult, dirty and occasionally
dangerous job of site clearance. And it took on responsibility for providing
thousands of displaced, traumatized New Yorkers with shelter, warmth,
sustenance and fellowship.
    The organization I’m talking about wasn’t FEMA—the Federal
Emergency Management Agency formally chartered by the United States
government to respond to large-scale disasters, whether “natural” or
manmade—and it wasn’t the National Guard. Nor was it the Red Cross, the
superficially benign philanthropy blandly familiar to generations of
Americans for its role in distributing blankets and food parcels in the wake
of crisis. In fact, it was neither a government agency nor a charitable effort
of any kind. It was a spontaneous, self-organized initiative assembled in
real time by veterans of the previous year’s Occupy Wall Street movement,
and consciously guided by the anarchist ideals and values of that
movement. It was called “Occupy Sandy.”
    Occupy Sandy was simply the easiest, fastest and most effective way for
an ordinary, unaffiliated New Yorker to get involved with the relief effort in
the hours and days following the superstorm’s landfall, whatever their
political convictions.2 That I am aware of, it was the only organization that
had meaningful and productive things for people without specialized skills
to do in the city’s moment of maximum need—the only one with the
capacity to absorb the massive incoming flows of volunteers, supplies and
financial contributions, and the network to direct those materials and
energies to the places where they could do the most good.
     Some numbers will begin to suggest the magnitude of the things these
unpaid amateurs accomplished together, on an improvisational basis,
without anything in the way of leadership, institutional infrastructure,
existing financial resources or prior planning. Within a week of the peak
storm surge, Occupy Sandy had 700 core members working out of two
repurposed churches in the Brooklyn neighborhoods of Clinton Hill and
Sunset Park, and was serving approximately 20,000 meals a day across a
far-flung constellation of thirty or more local “recovery centers” stretching
from Red Hook to New Dorp.
    By the end of November 2012, the initiative could marshal some
$700,000 worth of supplies and equipment, and ultimately collected more
than $1.3 million in donations intended to support its efforts.3 All told,
some 60,000 volunteers were eventually involved in this bottom-up relief
effort in one way or another—roughly four times the number fielded by the
American Red Cross—bringing with them insights and perspectives from
all walks and strata of New York City life.4
    I was one of them. And for the first time in my life, I was in a position to
do something about the consequences of global heating.

It’s that doing something that I want to spend the rest of this book exploring
—both the commitment to local, self-organized action itself, and everything
it opens up for us, in a time when so much else about our lives feels like it
is shutting down.
    Superstorm Sandy, of course, was just one event in the larger pattern of
events that we generally think of as “the climate crisis,” defined by the
heating our long dependency on fossil fuels has visited upon the planet’s
atmosphere, and all the hurricanes, wildfires, droughts and other
catastrophic consequences that now follow from it.
    One of the most prominent features of this crisis is that we generally feel
helpless to do anything about it. This isn’t because we don’t know what
 causes the atmosphere to warm. The causality is straightforward: the
upward march of temperature results from three centuries in which our
species powered its expansive activities by burning the “fossil”
hydrocarbon fuels of oil, gas and coal, slowly saturating the atmosphere
with the carbon dioxide that absorbs so much of the sun’s heat.
   Nor is there any ambiguity about what it would take to slow or reverse
the heating—and therefore, eventually, subdue the roiling volatility that
now threatens so much of everything we care for. The prospects for that
depend vitally on eliminating the combustion of such fuels, which even
now account for an overwhelming proportion of everything that powers the
global economy—in 2022, an estimated 81 percent of all energy consumed
on Earth.5
   The trouble is that choices concerning energy strategy are made by
institutions that are inaccessible to the ordinary person, and which are, in
any event, very heavily incentivized to keep on doing just as they have
done. Unless you yourself, personally, are a large shareholder of an energy
company, or the autocratic ruler of a fossil fuel–producing country, your
ability to effect any meaningful change in how the global economy is
powered is virtually nonexistent. Until the parties who do have the power
decide otherwise, then, the mining, the drilling, the pumping and the
burning will continue unabated—and with them the unrelenting
accumulation of carbon in the atmosphere, the heating and the terrible
consequences for all human and nonhuman life.
   This is the point at which our sense of helplessness really starts to feel
overwhelming, because none of the mechanisms for change that are
available to us feel like they’re up to the task of addressing these
increasingly distressing circumstances.
   In liberal democracies, electoral representation is the dominant, and only
formal, theory of change on the table. But can we vote someone into office
for whom robust action on the climate is an overriding priority? We would
 have to find someone like that, first of all. They’d have to win election.
We’d have to hold them to whatever commitments they made on the
campaign trail, against the influence of extractive industries that are
boundlessly wealthier and better resourced than we are. And then we would
have to trust that a large enough number of voters around the country had
managed to do the same in their own constituencies, such that the caucus
for change is the dominant force in the legislature.
   As improbable as all of this sounds, it’s the only game in town. And so
many of us still troop off to the voting booth every few years and cast our
ballots for those candidates we think will advance our concerns in the halls
of power. For the most part, that’s where the matter remains: the ambit of
public action many people are willing to take is confined to what happens
on Election Day, whatever misgivings they or anyone else may harbor
about its effectiveness or consequence.
   For many of us, of course, registering our concern for what is being done
to the climate as an indirect signal every few years feels ludicrously
inadequate to the scale and urgency of the crisis. But what’s left to us
consists largely of our own choices. So we give up the car and take the bus
instead, or ride a bike to the market. We cut red meat from our diet, reuse
our shopping bags and are diligent about sorting the packaging for
recycling. Maybe we go so far as to give up flying, or we forgo having
children ourselves. And all the while we do the things we think will give
voice to our rising sense of unease. We march and we sign petitions, we
make displays of our worthiness and unity and number and commitment in
the hope of influencing those who make the laws.
   When these things begin to feel irrelevant or pointless, we block
highways. If we’re feeling particularly brave, we chain ourselves to the
doors of the closest oil-company headquarters. But none of that seems to
move the needle, either—not on legislation, not on policy, not on any of the
decisions made by those whose decisions actually matter. No matter what
 we do, the figure for atmospheric ppm carbon dioxide ticks ever higher. It
often feels like all we can do is look on in horror as the line on the graph
continues its relentless upward sawtoothing, bursting through every
successive threshold at which we’ve been told livable conditions might still
be preserved on the planet.
    We scan the news, and it’s full of dust storms and receding glaciers,
fracturing ice sheets and catastrophic floods. Or someone’s shared video of
a runaway wildfire to our neighborhood chat group—we glance at our
phone and see trees older than America consumed by flame and the skies a
hundred miles away gone an uncanny orange with the smoke of their dying.
And then we walk out the door into a world where people are still placidly
driving their cars, commuting to work, taking vacations, having kids,
buying stuff. What we feel in moments like this is more than disorientation.
It’s something closer to reality shear.
    The findings accumulate, the careful lawyerly precision of interim
reports and white papers gives way to more urgent and emotive language.
The gentle drizzle we’re used to more and more often comes on instead
with the suddenness and violence of the monsoon. The bodies of refugees
fleeing the devastation continue to wash up on the shore. One day we find
the supermarket shelves empty of the things that have been there in such
abundance our whole lives. And we wonder why nobody seems to be doing
something about any of it.
    And so we hope. We hope, variously, that carbon offsets, cap-and-trade
schemes and all the other market-friendly paraphernalia of soft mitigation
work as we have been promised they will. That our elected representatives
turn out to be wise enough in the ways of legislature to get a Green New
Deal with teeth enacted. That the unaccountable transnational elites who
really call the shots will eventually insist on decisive, coordinated action to
protect the climate, for reasons of raw self-interest if for no other. That a
party of the poor and downtrodden will rise in righteous glory, to end the
 age of oligarchic plunder and impunity and set the world to rights. That
there’s a garage somewhere, inside of which a genius tinkerer is even now
perfecting the technology that will siphon carbon dioxide from the air and
sequester it safely somewhere it can’t threaten us again. Maybe even that an
artificial sentience is gestating, in the anonymous racks of some distant
research center, that will somehow be able to seize control of the economy
entire, and in that way rescue us from all our errors and mistakes.
    What I think we badly need to get our heads around is that all of these
varieties of hope are killing us, and everyone and everything we care about.
Whatever energy we might invest in the conventional mechanisms of
change, they are plainly failing to prevent the burning of fossil fuels at
scale. But worse, every hour we dedicate to them is an hour we haven’t
spent in material preparation for the conditions we will live with for the rest
of our days on Earth. Our trust in these processes is getting in the way of
our dedicating time and energy to the efforts that might actually work to
cushion ourselves and our communities from everything coming our way.
    If we want to survive the hard times to come together, we need to stop
investing our faith and energy in institutions that are demonstrably failing
us. We need to admit that we’ve reached a moment at which we can no
longer afford to wait for some external process to save us, whether
mechanism, movement or deus ex machina.
    What we need, in other words, is to get beyond hope. We’ve got to stop
waiting for someone else to do something and start doing for ourselves. And
not simply in a way that reproduces all the values and structures that led us
into our current predicament, but in a way that places concerns for care,
dignity and the achievement of justice at the heart of everything we
undertake together.
    Guided by everything I learned from watching the way Occupy Sandy
worked, as well as the experiences of parallel movements across the past six
decades, this book is about how we might accomplish that.
 In the end, my involvement with Occupy Sandy was comparably shallow.
All told, it amounted to perhaps two weeks of shifts at the 520 Clinton
Avenue distribution hub; participation in a few of the general assemblies at
which the community reported back to itself what it had learned and
decided on courses of future action; and an unforgettable Christmas Eve
huddled on a freezing church porch that still smelled of a recent
firebombing attempt, singing carols and old Wobbly songs with the other
volunteers there that night.6 What I saw during these few hundred hours,
though, did as much to transform my sense of what ordinary, untrained
people could achieve together as anything else I’ve ever experienced.
    For my entire adult life, I had been told that the principles of self-
organization I believed in were childish, impractical, utopian fantasies that
might work tolerably well in small groups of people who already held
similar political commitments, but couldn’t possibly do so “at scale,”
among significant numbers of citizens. And yet here was the most concrete
proof possible that these same, ostensibly impractical principles could
successfully be used to coordinate a highly complex and occasionally life-
critical effort, consistently and for a number of months, across the largest
and most demographically diverse metropolitan area in North America. If
anybody doubted that self-organized, nonhierarchical mutual aid projects
could respond to catastrophe every bit as effectively as official disaster-
relief agencies—if not, in many cases, markedly more so—their questions
ought to have been resolved by Occupy Sandy.
    That ordinary New Yorkers could organize themselves to achieve
something this complicated and difficult, under immense pressure, put flesh
on the bones of my fundamental belief in undirected human capacity. That
they could do so with the most limited means, in the face of opposition that
ranged from patronizing skepticism to outright arson, said something
impressive about their ability to make sound collective decisions, despite
the pressure. And for this kind of order to arise spontaneously, in the early
 aftermath of the most significant natural disaster in the city’s living
memory, strikes me as nothing short of astounding. I doubt there are 60,000
convinced anarchists in New York City. There may not even be a tenth that
number. But there are 60,000 who did anarchy, all through the storm and
the months that followed, and did so brilliantly. And perhaps this offers us a
more general template for ways in which we might organize our
communities so that they shelter more of us from more of the hard times
ahead.
   But what if organizing ourselves in this way also helps to repair other,
more chronic insults to our well-being—the overwhelming sense of
powerlessness we so often contend with, the dread of the future we barely
manage to tamp down, even the damage inflicted upon us by the ordinary
disasters of everyday life? What if the experience of coming to the aid of
our community affirms us in ways we might not have dared to ask for, or
even imagined possible?
   In her 2009 book A Paradise Built in Hell, the writer Rebecca Solnit
discusses just this aspect of efforts that arise in the aftermath of disaster.7
She writes movingly of the joy one can take, even in the midst of
catastrophe, from inhabiting for the first time a civic self, a self rooted in
the provision of communal care—one that seems infinitely larger and more
capacious than those narrower selves that are invoked by work, family life,
consumerism, therapy culture or identity politics. And she goes on to quote
the American sociologist Charles Fritz to the effect that the “widespread
sharing of danger, loss and deprivation produces … solidarity among the
survivors, which overcomes social isolation, provides a channel for intimate
communication and expression, and a major source of physical and
emotional support and reassurance.”8
   This isn’t some sociological theory of the wouldn’t-it-be-lovely-to-think-
so variety but a consistent empirical observation. Consider what John P.
Clark related about his experience of the Common Ground mutual aid effort
 that arose in New Orleans following 2005’s Hurricane Katrina: “Volunteers
and survivors often described the experience of a break with conventional
reality, and the emergence of a new time and space of possibility.”9
    The sense of an opening that Clark reports chimes in every detail with
what the artist and activist Cassie Thornton found in her visits to the
“solidarity clinics” of austerity-stricken Greece in January 2017: “I met a
group of middle-aged women who cited ‘the crisis’ as the birth of their new
lives as radicalized people within activist communities, people who had
found a purpose, who were now more than just workers and consumers.
They felt powerful, connected and interdependent for the first time.”10
    People who participated in these efforts consistently experienced the
feeling of interdependence as healing, at both the individual and communal
levels. “People’s differences went by the wayside,” said one Occupy
volunteer, who spent three months working in the hardest-hit areas of the
Rockaways. This same volunteer went on to note the curious fact that the
opportunity to contribute to the relief effort was itself part of the relief it
furnished: “Helping others became a major coping mechanism for many
people. It’s much better to have them empowered rather than having these
people stand in a line to beg for aid.”11
    Perhaps most poignant of all is the stark contrast between the sense of
empowerment Solnit, Clark, Thornton and this unnamed Occupy volunteer
all mention and the pursuits that are supposed to produce meaning and
value in the rest of our lives. When Clark says that in the provision of
mutual aid, “[o]ne could experience one’s own activity as intrinsically
valuable,” the strong implication is that the things we ordinarily do—that
we have to do, in order to keep a roof over our families’ heads, and food on
the table—are not experienced that way.12
    The crux of this isn’t simply, as Charles Fritz was given to pointing out,
that “the everyday, ongoing life of the society” is its own kind of quiet
disaster. It’s that the way our society is currently organized affords us very
 few opportunities to step outside the identities we’ve so carefully shored up,
and simply show up for the people who need what we have to offer. It was
just such an opportunity that Occupy Sandy extended. If you’ve ever given
blood, maybe you’ll recognize these aspects of the way it felt to work at
520 Clinton: that it mattered, that there was no detectable downside to it
and that whatever good came of it had not a thing to do with who I thought
I was, who the world perceived me to be or how I preferred to present
myself.
   And in this, there is a clue as to what form our response should take
when the excursion from normalcy lasts not just the weeks or months it
might take to rebuild after a storm, but forever. You may have noticed that
certain words crop up again and again in participants’ accounts of mutual
aid efforts. They are the exact same things I experienced in the course of my
own involvement with Occupy Sandy: Purpose. Power. Possibility.
   That these are the qualities that stand out in personal narratives of
mutual aid work, to the point that people thought they were worth
mentioning, suggests just how much we suffer from the pointlessness of the
work most of us are ordinarily required to do, as well as the broader
passivity and isolation to which our usual roles in life have consigned us.
But the same accounts also suggest that something profound seems to
happen in the moments after some catastrophe has disrupted the ordinary
flow of life, in which we stop waiting for rescue and commit ourselves to
collective, reparative action. The choices we make in these moments
evidently have the power to bind up other, seemingly unrelated wounds.
They may even open onto entirely new ways of being in the world.
   To me the implications of this extend far beyond either “mutual aid” or
“disaster relief,” in the very strictest sense of those terms, and invite us to
think expansively about what such efforts might mean when unfolded to
their fullest extent, in a world where so many of the old certainties no
longer apply.
     What I’m proposing is that the most productive way of addressing each
of the intertwined crises that confront us—the fundamental, planetary one
of climate-system collapse, yes, but also the dread and the powerlessness
and even the inordinate difficulty we so often seem to have now, in
communicating across the genuine differences that cleave us—consists in
our application of one and the same strategy.
    And happily, this strategy also happens to be the one most immediately
accessible to us. It lies in organizing ourselves to take care of one another,
without waiting for anybody to issue that care to us as generic subjects, sell
it to us as customers or offer it to us as passive recipients of a charity
bestowed from above. In other words: finally doing something about the
straits we’re in, directly and in our own neighborhoods, in ways that call
upon all the resources and capacities the roles we play in everyday life have
no need of and place no value upon. Who knows but that we may finally
find selves that we recognize, even here in the most difficult and
challenging hours of our lives.

This is what I want us to hold on to, as we move further into the time of
storms together. In the rest of this book, we’ll learn how to develop this set
of ideas and put them to work.
    We will confront the complex and cascading conditions of our moment
head on, to better understand what they actually ask of us. We will learn to
understand how the second- and third-order consequences of global heating
give rise to a Long Emergency—a breach in the ordinary that
simultaneously challenges the structures of power we’re familiar with,
endangers most everything we hold dear and furnishes us with a rare
opportunity to build something more in line with our deepest values.
    By considering the Black Panther “survival programs” of the 1970s, the
solidarity clinics of austerity-stricken Greece and Occupy Sandy itself,
we’ll explore how people under various kinds of extreme pressure
 organized for their own continued existence, when everything else fell
down around them. From them we’ll learn how we might tend to our own
needs for sustainment, safety and mutual care in the face of the Emergency,
especially when the state has failed us (or even, as is so often the case,
when it actively moves to thwart us).
   We’ll turn to the thought of the idiosyncratic American “social
ecologist” Murray Bookchin, as well as examples from municipalist Spain
and autonomous Rojava, to learn how we might build and apply collective
power—a counterpower to the forces of grief and loss at work everywhere
around us. We’ll glean vital insight into what works and what doesn’t work,
what tactics we ought to embrace and which ones we might be better off
choosing to avoid.
   And finally, we will bring together everything we have learned. We’ll
discover how mutual care and collective power reinforce each other, in the
places of refuge that I call Lifehouses. We’ll explore how we might set up a
whole network of such sites, in which we can nurture the capacities of the
communities we belong to, offer respite to all those driven before the storm
and get started on the long, difficult work of repair. We will see how
building the Lifehouse both gives us a practical means of enduring the Long
Emergency and prefigures the methods of decarbonized cooperation and
exchange that our lives will necessarily be founded on in the post-
Emergency world that follows.
   But none of that can fall into place until we finally steel ourselves to take
those first few steps beyond whatever hope for the future we still cherish
and at long last commit ourselves to do something about it.
   Whatever you choose to do, though—whatever any of us choose to do,
together—we should understand from the outset that it won’t be enough.
Nobody can prevent all the extinctions and losses, ruptures and severings
that are now bound to take place: not any of us as individuals, or even all of
us in concert. We’ve left it too late, the damage is too deep, the destabilizing
 process too far advanced. We won’t be able to forestall any but the least part
of the sorrows to come, even if we give everything we have to the effort.
But what we can still do, perhaps, is join ourselves with the others around
us and together make spaces in which more of what we cherish is able to
endure. To make life and possibility, where there is otherwise only grief.
   Nobody can do that for us. We have to do it for ourselves. This book is
about what happens when we let go of hope, stop waiting and start doing.

                             OceanofPDF.com
                                        1
                      The Long Emergency



Shortly before 5 p.m. on Tuesday, July 19, 2022, the temperature reading at
the Royal Air Force base in the Lincolnshire town of Coningsby hit 104°F
(40°C), setting an all-time record in a United Kingdom that was then
enduring the second successive day of unprecedented heat.
    Across Great Britain, train service came to a virtual standstill, as rails
buckled, overhead power lines came down and trackside electrical fires
compromised the safe operation of those mainline routes that were still
running. Highways and airport runways that had been engineered for an era
of lower operating temperatures rippled and cracked. Two of the capital’s
largest hospitals were forced to cancel operations and reroute critically ill
patients to other facilities, after the air-conditioning units cooling their data
centers failed and their IT systems collapsed. A long arc of wildfires left
smoke hanging over much of the country, from North Yorkshire down to
Essex; the London Fire Brigade declared a major incident after having
attended some 1,146 call-outs on July 19 alone, making it far and away
their busiest day since the Luftwaffe bombings of the Second World War.
    Once the situation had stabilized over the course of the following week,
the true cost became clear. Official sources estimated that a thousand
Britons had lost their lives in the swelter, their deaths attributable to no
other cause than the heat—a higher number of deaths from this cause, over
 the two-day period of elevated temperatures, than would ordinarily be
expected in an entire year.
    For many residents of the British Isles, this was the moment at which
everything finally came into focus. The atmospheric heating they had been
warned about across forty years of climate research and increasingly urgent
rhetoric had become a concrete, uncomfortably physical fact of life. As
billions of others around the world had done before them, they were now
forced to adapt to circumstances that suddenly seemed unfamiliar and
hostile. And all it took to bring this new reality home, and to demonstrate
the acute vulnerability of the infrastructural systems their lives depended
on, was a forty-eight-hour jolt of extreme temperature.
    In the aftermath of that single two-day period, what became clear was
that the immediately injurious effects of the heat itself were not the whole
story. Bad as they were, those effects were in many cases compounded by
shortfalls of planning and investment, maintenance and care. Their impact
was ultimately absorbed by public services, infrastructures, a social fabric
and individual bodies already weakened by the combined effects of
pandemic-driven neglect and longer-term austerity. Officials didn’t even
bother denying it—one admitted it would take “decades” to proof the
country’s road and rail infrastructure against the heat, while another chided
the British public that it “must learn to live with extreme events.”1
    If 104°F is now inside the bounds of possibility for a July day in Britain,
though, you really do begin to wonder what might constitute the next
extreme, and just what it is that we “must learn to live with.” Because
there’s worse yet to come—for all of us, everywhere on Earth, no matter
what any of us choose to do now as individuals, families, communities or
societies.
    The issue we face is not simply that legislatures and private interests
worldwide continue to make decisions that are inconsistent with a
survivable future, or that even the most hesitant, incremental, market-
 friendly efforts to preserve a livable climate are routinely thwarted. It’s that
even if all the endlessly ramified operations of the global economy could
somehow immediately, instantly and painlessly be rendered carbon-neutral,
some further increment of planetary heating is bound to happen, simply as a
result of the fossil-fuel consumption that has already taken place. There
remains some legitimate question as to just how much heating will occur,
over what time frame and with what impact on the delicately equilibrated
systems that sustain all Earthly life. But enough oil has already been
pumped to the surface, enough coal has already been burned, enough of
their carbon has already been liberated to tip the atmosphere into a new and
violently hostile state of being.
    So bear in mind, as you skim the morning headlines, that everything we
have already experienced is just a foretaste. This is what the planetary
system looks like, and how it behaves, when the carbon dioxide reading
measures 424 parts per million, when the average amount of global
warming since the beginning of the industrial era has barely crept past a
single degree Celsius.2
    Once the increase tilts past 1.5°C, we are told that “tree die-offs, drying
peatlands, thawing permafrost and other self-reinforcing feedback loops
[will] release additional carbon emissions, amplifying the warming
further.”3 This is the point at which the transformation of Earth’s
atmosphere becomes an autocatalytic, self-sustaining process, spiraling
“beyond the ability of humanity to influence it.”4 The climate will find a
new equilibrium at some point, but no human now alive can say with any
confidence where that might be. Whether we or our institutions are prepared
for it in any way that matters, we have stepped into a new planetary epoch
together.5
    What is of interest here isn’t so much the coming of the heat, in itself. I
think most of us accept by now that anthropogenic global heating is a real
thing, and that a radically different climate will continue to condition
 experience across the entire life span of anyone now alive. What we’ll
primarily be at pains to respond to are the follow-on, second- and third-
order effects of the heat and especially the ways in which these cascade,
interlock and amplify one another to create a fundamentally new and
extremely challenging set of conditions for human life on Earth. In the
dryly technocratic language favored by the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC), these conditions arise out of the interaction of
“[m]ultiple climatic and non-climatic risk drivers … resulting in
compounding overall risk and risks cascading across sectors and regions.”6
And we have to imagine all of that intersecting with, and intensifying, the
existing patterns of deprivation and injustice we already struggle with. This
is what constitutes the baseline condition we need to plan for.
   Even now, I don’t think either the depth or the complexity of the trouble
we’re in are particularly well understood. The wager here is not that billions
of human beings will experience the deleterious effects of heat directly and
for themselves. That is overdetermined: as we have seen, it will happen
regardless of any action we may take. The wager concerns what happens in
the aftermath. The specific assertion I am making is that the combined
direct and indirect consequences of the heating that is already entrained by
our past behavior, no matter what we do now, will in fairly short order
exceed the capacity of our social, technical, political and economic systems
—in other words, what many of us would think of as planetary civilization
—to contain them. And that as a result, the greater part of that civilization’s
familiar ways of ordering everyday reality, whether enacted through
mechanisms of state or market, will not survive.
   I’m not expressing any opinion, mind you, as to whether any of that
should survive—whether it might yet be reformed, repaired or made just, or
whether it has earned the benefit of the doubt in any of these respects. I’m
simply saying that it will not, not in any form that we recognize. And if by
“short order” I mean “at some point in the next ten to fifteen years,” that’s
 probably optimistic. This is our world now. These are the skies under which
we will live out the rest of our days. Welcome to the Long Emergency.

The Long Emergency is my name for the period we’ve entered together, set
off by climatic instability, but ultimately far larger than that alone. It
consists of an extended excursion from everything we recognize as normal,
of as yet unknown duration and resolution, during which many of the
systems and structures that currently shape our lives will be flung to pieces
by the force of events. For as long as it lasts, we will be compelled to take
on a much greater share of the responsibility of caring for ourselves than
most of us are accustomed to, as individuals and communities both.
    Even now, in its earlier stages, we can see just how that great undoing
will unsettle the world as we know it. Three interlinked circumstances, in
particular, spell havoc for any attempt at maintaining the institutional status
quo: that a band of the Earth where a billion or more human beings now
live may soon be uninhabitable through much of the year; that a
considerable percentage of them are likely to flee in desperate search of
conditions more hospitable to life; and that no society on the planet is
remotely prepared to handle the consequences of that many people being on
the move.7 At the tail end of four decades of disinvestment in public
services, especially, the challenges of organizing a safe, dignified and just
existence for everyone displaced by the heat and its sequelae will tax our
systems to the breaking point. Whatever respite or refuge is to be found we
will have to fashion for ourselves, largely using the means we already have
at hand.
    I imagine that if you’re reading this book, you don’t particularly need to
be convinced of this, any of it. But it’s one thing to understand something
like this intellectually and quite another to accept it emotionally. This
uncompromising set of facts will compel us to adopt new ways of doing
things, at every scale. It will transform the most fundamental arrangements
 of our lives: the structures of power and the institutions that mediate it. The
ways in which we organize the fulfillment of our bodily, psychic and social
needs. The shape of families and communities. Our methods of organizing
the built environment and of moving through the world. Where and how the
food we eat and the things we use are produced. Conventions of conduct,
comportment, equipment and dress. Even the people we understand
ourselves to be, and present to the others around us.
   And while our ability to steer any of this will most often be limited,
where we are able do so, we may find that we have unprecedented scope to
reimagine the fundamental terms of our engagement with one another. This
is what we’ll need to hold fast to, amid all the anguish, loss and grief of a
world progressively unweaving itself: the idea that this state of Emergency
offers us an opening and a chance to try ways of organizing life in common
that are different from everything that has brought us to the place where we
stand now.

There are those who consider the prospect of an Emergency world and see,
somehow, a near future largely determined by the continuing resilience of
late-capitalist normalcy, holding its own against all the converging factors
that threaten it, and capable still of bringing new territories and aspects of
life under its dominion. Others see the blood-drenched, all-against-all
nihility of The Road.8 Personally, I don’t think either one of these scenarios
furnishes us with an especially helpful guide to the space of possibilities we
now inhabit, or the room it affords us for maneuver. But there is a way in
which we might approach understanding everything that is at stake and
getting at least an initial idea of where big heat is taking us all, and that is to
consider our previous collective experience of sustained emergency: the
suspension of most all of the norms of everyday conduct that followed the
outbreak of COVID-19.
     The pandemic tutored us in the intricacies of the planetary supply chain,
reintroducing consumers in the global North to experiences of material
scarcity we probably thought our societies had transcended permanently.
The elaborate logistical systems that underpin the fulfillment of our needs,
and that ordinarily work so well that we tend to forget they even exist, had
finally failed to deliver what was wanted exactly where and when it was
wanted—if not quite for the first time in living memory, then at least since
the increasingly distant childhood of those who grew up in the years of
wartime rationing. In the worst weeks of lockdown, we found ourselves
bartering for bread flour and toilet paper, or buying them by the pallet-load
because industrial quantities were the only ones left available, and then
sharing out the excess among friends and neighbors.
    The globe grew bigger again, as the contrails stopped cross-hatching the
sky. Our lifeworlds contracted to the ambit of a square mile or so, and, for a
little while, our relationships with the other people in that square mile
became the central fact of existence.
    All through this time, millions sheltering under strict lockdown relied on
neighborhood mutual aid groups for their groceries—in fact, for deliveries
of everything necessary to maintain and reproduce our capacity to function
as human beings, whether that meant baby formula or methadone, dropped
off by masked and gloved volunteers who rang the doorbell and then
retreated to a wary distance. We learned to depend more on one another, for
everything from check-in calls on vulnerable neighbors to household
repairs, and less on systems of state or market.
    For the overwhelming majority, this turn to one another was not made
out of any prior ideological commitment to anarchism, or localism, or the
virtues of self-reliance, but because there simply was no alternative. We
took care of one another in all the ways we could, and when some crisis
exceeded our ability to manage it using the resources we had at hand, for
the most part it simply went untended to.
     In many ways, the official response to COVID not merely did not help
us look after one another but actively exacerbated our inability to do so. As
even the convinced antistatists among us must acknowledge, state action
was critical in organizing both the astoundingly rapid development and the
widespread distribution of effective vaccines. But throughout the early
phase of the pandemic, government on both sides of the Atlantic remained
in the hands of almost uniquely incompetent managers, the greatest part of
whose incompetence lay in allowing questions of public health to become
unduly politicized. Far from summoning us to any sense of common
purpose, public policy therefore aggravated the social fault lines that had
developed and were allowed to fester all through the years of neoliberal
complacency, often badly compromising our ability to care for ourselves
and one another.
    There was an initial, instinctual flush of high seriousness and
spontaneous mutual concern: this was the period of balcony arias in Italy
and weekly doorstep applause for the National Health Service in the UK.
But as the crisis wore on, to all appearances interminably, the popular mood
soured. Dark conspiracy theories swirled, suppressing vaccine uptake just
when near-universal adoption was needed most. In time, lockdown came to
be marked by an amplification of the ugly qualities and characteristics that
so often color the everyday late-capitalist lifeworld: solipsism and self-
absorption, mutual wariness and hostility, most of all a preemptive irritation
with the demands of others. And this was inevitably reflected in the type
and magnitude of risk we assumed whenever we moved in public, with
some fraction of those around us loudly refusing to mask up, or even
threatening or physically assaulting those who did.
    Amid all this, we learned that disruption is not merely an event that
lands in one place and at one time, but something that cascades and
ricochets, nonlinearly and in unpredictable ways. All through 2021, anyone
who wanted to buy a PS5 or an iPad to ease the boredom of long days in
 lockdown had to contend with the knock-on effects of an achingly drawn-
out drought that hobbled Taiwan’s water-intensive semiconductor industry,
at the very same moment microprocessor factories in Texas were unable to
make up the shortfall due to their own, storm-related blackouts.9 Just about
anything with a chip in it was back-ordered for months. And then the
container ship Ever Given came to grief in a sandstorm, midway through
the Suez Canal, blocking for six days the passage of some 16.9 million
metric tons of cargo, and complicating matters still further. By the end of
the year, weeks’ worth of the American consumer supply wound up stacked
in holding patterns in the roads off Long Beach.
    Sometimes it was the measures undertaken to forestall the virus itself
that complicated our efforts at collective self-care. The members of a
Buddhist volunteer group trying to source combat tourniquets for the
Ukrainian relief effort, in the early weeks of the Russian invasion, found
themselves hampered by the fact that almost all production of such
tourniquets takes place in China, in cities that were then subject to the
strictest COVID lockdowns observed anywhere. They could go on Alibaba
and click “buy now” on as many cases of tourniquets as they pleased, but
there was simply no way to physically get shipments out of Shenzhen. What
might have been straightforward, even trivial, under ordinary circumstances
became impossible under the emergent conditions of the pandemic. In the
brittle, interlinked, hyperextended and thoroughly unforgiving world we
have built, each successive crisis prevented a ready response to the next.
    Sometimes, in the way of these things, when an official response did
arrive, it had a certain quality of misemphasis, overcorrection or overshoot.
Faced with economies in post-lockdown freefall, governments around the
world took short-term measures to sustain business activity that turned out
to be counterproductive in some important way, even demonstrably hostile
to the scaled protection of human life. The summer 2020 “Eat Out to Help
Out” policy in the United Kingdom is a prime example. The scheme, which
 offered potential diners a 50 percent subsidy for restaurant meals in the
weeks immediately following the relaxation of the first national lockdown,
threw the hospitality industry a temporary £850 million lifeline and was at
the time regarded (by its architects, at least) as a success. But the resulting
surge of indoor dining came some four months before a vaccine became
available, at a time when coronavirus was still spreading uncontrolled and
uncontained. Eat Out to Help Out is now known to have generated some
70,000 COVID-19 cases in the weeks that followed—or between 8 percent
and 17 percent of all newly detected infections, leading to a cascade of
onward cases and some unknown but clearly nontrivial number of deaths.10
What we learned from this, if we were paying attention, is that
simpleminded interventions in poorly understood, complex and complexly
interacting systems aren’t particularly likely to realize whatever benefits
were anticipated, and may indeed leave us saddled with worse, to the very
point of death.
    And, of course, people did die, in their millions. Some were world-
famous, many were known only to their families, quite a few of them
seemed to occupy that space in between—the kind of people who subtly
knit a neighborhood together, even if you only knew them from the bus
stop, or because they ran the local shoe-repair shop. Whichever category
they belonged to, you knew when the virus had taken someone in the area:
their passage would be marked by the telltale of an ambulance gliding
silently through the side streets, running blue lights but no siren, a faint but
unsettling medieval air hanging over the whole thing. It was when this
started to happen more than once a day that we truly learned what it meant
to live in a time of plague.
    This speaks to one final way in which our collective experience of
COVID illuminates the stakes of the epoch now underway. It has to do with
the toll taken upon those of us who survived by the grief, dread and
unrelieved anxiety of the pandemic years. Despite the astounding human
 capacity for restoration and repair, despite the ways in which some lucky
few among us might even have been able to harness the circumstances of
lockdown to their advantage, we are each of us less than we were before.
Some of us were, no doubt, able to strengthen our local networks and ties
with our neighbors, and our confidence in our own capability along with
them. But I imagine that most of us will be hard-pressed to say that we are
better able to take on significant new challenges than we were in what it is
now clear were the last weeks of the dying old order, in the ember days of
late 2019. Whatever world it is that we now confront together, we face it
harrowed by the emergencies we have already endured.
    So: prolonged and cascading disruptions to the systems that undergird
the material abundance we are used to. The retreat or outright failure of
whatever state provision we might previously have been able to call upon.
An array of public policies, postures and measures meant to impose some
degree of continuity on a suddenly turbulent world, many of which swiftly
come to seem bizarre and misguided, and which in any event fail to work in
the way intended. Attempts at repair that do at least as much harm as good;
entanglements in which one measure of mitigation or relief forestalls others
that are just as urgent and just as necessary. A generalized contraction of the
world, and the concomitant foreclosure of possibility. A train of shocks
coming over the horizon one after the other, each new one appearing before
we have quite managed to deal with the last, and each complicating all the
rest. And all of this buffered only by the commitment, compassion,
organizational nous and lifegiving selflessness of the ones around us, and
whatever capacities for resistance we are able to develop and nurture in
ourselves.
    If these were the facets of our experience of COVID, they will also be
the defining elements of our encounter with the time of heating. The
pandemic was, then, two things at once: simultaneously the most vivid
preview of how our societies will respond to future catastrophes of similarly
 global scale, and the first in an inexorable series of such events, each of
which subtly erodes our capacity to respond to the next.

Contemplating what we endured during the pandemic and lockdown ought
to give us a better understanding of what to expect from the Long
Emergency as it unfolds. But our experience of the COVID years can only
be, at best, a very approximate guide to some of the other conditions we
now face, especially where those specifically arise from the circumstances
of heat. What might actually be useful would be to lay out the basic
parameters of life on a suddenly and sharply hotter planet, paying particular
attention to the ways in which these intersect with the constraints and
uneven geographies inscribed on the globe by the way production and
consumption have been organized for the past half-century or so. If we are
to devise meaningful strategies for collective survival, we will need to come
to grips with each one of these separate elements of the interlocking crisis
—as well as what they all imply when taken together as a whole.
    We start with the sheer unanswerable fact of the heat itself.
    Some idea of what sustained exposure to heat does to the human body
can be gleaned from David Wallace-Wells, who considers the matter in his
2019 survey of conditions on The Uninhabitable Earth.11 Wallace-Wells’s
particular contribution to the popular climate literature is a concern for the
so-called “wet-bulb temperature,” an index combining heat and humidity
readings. At wet-bulb temperatures above 95°F (35°C), he tells us, the
human body cannot cool itself by sweating, no matter how much water one
drinks. Outdoor labor or activity of any sort will be rapidly and reliably
fatal to anyone exposed.
    He goes on to observe that there is already a broad swath of latitudes in
which the wet-bulb temperature exceeds this point throughout much of the
year, that most of the places affected are those least likely to have robust
municipal cooling facilities or other means of alleviating the heat, and that
 both the land area and the number of days a year in which these conditions
obtain are rapidly expanding.12 A more recent study, however, suggests that
the human body loses its capacity for self-regulation at wet-bulb
temperatures much lower than was thought to be the case when Wallace-
Wells published.13 Wet-bulb readings of around 87°F (31°C) are now
considered to be the upper limit for survivability—the threshold past which
continued exposure reliably entrains organ failure and death, even for the
youngest and healthiest. Since far more of Earth’s surface can be expected
to experience conditions in this range over the summers to come, the clear
implication is that the zone that will effectively become uninhabitable is
considerably larger than even Wallace-Wells had supposed.
    There are legitimate reasons to push back against this narrative,
including the idea that increased awareness of the danger among those most
vulnerable to conditions of high heat and humidity has itself reduced the
risk they contend with.14 By the same token, though, no amount of
awareness can compensate for the facts of our physical embodiment, or the
structural factors that limit people’s ability to determine when, where and
for how long they work, constrain their access to air conditioning and
otherwise restrict how much control they have over their exposure to the
heat. The latitudes in greatest peril may never be literally uninhabitable in
the way that, say, the surface of Mars is. But conditions that approach the
upper bounds of survivability unquestionably make the struggle to provide
for oneself and one’s family that much more difficult, day by day ratcheting
up the incentive to seek a better life somewhere else.
    Even in regions where humidity, and therefore the wet-bulb temperature,
does not present a hazard, heat can threaten life in ways few had imagined
before they started showing up in the statistics of morbidity and mortality.
For example, the past few summers have seen a steady increase in the
number of people across the American Southwest admitted to hospital burn
units, having suffered instant second-degree burns from contact with
 sidewalk or street surfaces superheated to over 170°F (76.7°C).15
Unsurprisingly, the number of hospital admissions tracks the rise in
temperatures associated with hotter summers.16 A 2019 study found that the
risk of pavement burns in areas of direct sunlight begins around the 95°F
mark, but “increases exponentially as ambient temperatures rise” into the
range that is now routine—a sobering thought, considering that daytime
temperatures in Phoenix, Arizona, hit 110°F (43.3°C) or more every day
between June 30 and July 30, 2023.17 In cases where surface contact is
sustained for more than a minute or two—as it easily can be for accident
victims, elderly people who have fallen to the ground and are unable to
immediately right themselves, or opioid users who have nodded out—
victims generally suffer full-thickness, third-degree burns over the entire
skin area involved. In the hottest places, these burns join more obvious risks
to life from sunburn, dehydration, heat exhaustion and heat stroke as factors
that already constrain outdoor activity during daylight hours, at least for
those who are able to exert control over their working conditions.18 And
this is hardly a marginal concern: Phoenix is the fifth-largest city in
America.
    Beyond these immediate threats to the functioning of our bodies, none of
the hazards presented to us by heating is more fundamental than that it
endangers the growth of agricultural crops on which all human well-being
ultimately depends. More than 40 percent of the daily calories currently
consumed by humanity each day are derived from just three staple crops:
rice, wheat and maize. Of these, a single one, rice, is the predominant
source of energy in the diets of more than 2 billion people around the world
and may constitute 90 percent or more of daily caloric intake among the
poor of South and Southeast Asia.19
    Rice is well adapted to the monsoon conditions of this part of the world,
both major subspecies having been domesticated here. But it is vulnerable
to heat that strikes at the wrong time in its growth cycle: its ability to grow
 is limited by the number and intensity of “killing degree days” to which
seedlings are exposed, and crop yield falls sharply as temperatures surpass
the threshold of cellular damage. Whatever rice does survive to be
harvested, further, will be less nourishing, with the grain’s levels of protein,
iron, zinc and multiple B-complex vitamins all suffering from high
atmospheric concentrations of CO2.20
   What is true of rice is true of the other staple crops, as well. In any given
area under cultivation, some plants will wither and succumb to the heat-
driven desiccation of their vital organs, while others will not propagate
adequately due to equally heat-driven failures of pollination. All are
imperiled by the drought, wildfire and bacterial and fungal blights projected
to occur more often, and with greater severity, on a significantly hotter
planet. Shortfalls in production may be ameliorated, to some extent, by
expanding the territorial range across which staple crops are grown, or by
cultivating them at higher altitude; it is even just possible that high ambient
levels of atmospheric CO2 could increase average yields in well-situated
biomes. But unless robustly heat-tolerant varieties of the crops much of
humanity currently derives the better part of its nourishment from can be
developed, the grim prospect of sustained, population-wide hunger, even
famine, cannot be eliminated.21
   And then there are the physical effects of unprecedented heat on the
places we live. If we have already seen what a mere two days of extreme
temperature do to a polity and a population unprepared for it, consider that
by 2050, people living in Beijing, Delhi, Kuala Lumpur, Singapore and
dozens of other cities analyzed in one 2019 study will experience “a
climatic regime that does not currently exist on the planet.”22 Even this
rather hair-raising estimate is based on the IPCC’s Representative
Concentration Pathway 4.5, an “optimistic” scenario in which carbon
emissions are stabilized after mid-century and average global heating is
 held somewhere between 1.4 and 1.8°C.23 Whether either is likely to be
contained within those bounds is left as an exercise for the reader.
    When I argue that many places on Earth that are currently densely
settled will become virtually impossible for human beings to dwell in
safely, this is the finding I have in mind. As much as the habitability of such
places will be constrained via the direct impact of heat, it’s not hard to
imagine that the closely associated second-order effects will be very nearly
as consequential, extending as they will to insurmountable drought, the
salinization of aquifers, seawater rise, or such a rise coupled with
subsidence of the ground on which the city is built, as in Jakarta.24
    I’m not suggesting that these conurbations will ever become entirely
depopulated. There will always be communities of people who prefer to
make a go of it in the wreckage, somehow, because they quite reasonably
fail to perceive the makings of a better life anywhere else; because the
anonymity and relative lack of oversight they experience in the abandoned
city afford them opportunities not otherwise available; or simply because it
is their home and they will not desert it. But proofing all of the urban
environments most vulnerable against the newly volatile conditions will
require an enormous, ongoing financial investment, literally running into
trillions of US dollars.25 Where that investment is no longer considered
worthwhile or can no longer be sustained, the electric power, water, gas and
sewerage infrastructures that support high-density habitation will swiftly
fall into disrepair. And in turn, wherever they do, it will become extremely
difficult to sustain communities of any significant size. (At some point,
depending particularly on whether or not they can reliably be supplied with
sufficient quantities of drinking water, Phoenix, along with Los Angeles,
Las Vegas and the other cities of the American desert Southwest, may well
number among them.)
    A further tranche of cities, while not subject to quite the same conditions
of existential risk, will be under continual threat from tropical storms:
 hurricanes in the Atlantic and northeast Pacific, typhoons in the northwest
Pacific and cyclones in the south Pacific and Indian Oceans. We know that
these storms will both be increasingly frequent and—thanks to the sharper
energy differentials of warmer, wetter air—increasingly violent. The
Category 4 hurricane Harvey, for example, which made landfall just south
of Houston in late August 2017, shed 15 percent more rainfall than
comparably sized storms of the pre-warming era.26 Harvey inflicted $125
billion in damage, making it second only to Katrina as the costliest storm on
record—and it was only one of sixteen separate billion-dollar weather
events in the United States that year.27 Houston’s experience of Harvey
suggests that the magnitude of damage inflicted on the built and social
fabric of a place by the wind speeds, rainfall totals and storm surges
associated with Category 4 and 5 storms can be shouldered once, possibly
twice, though not easily. Asking any human community to do so once or
twice per decade, however, is unthinkable. That level of insult to the
systems and infrastructures that support the maintenance of collective life
simply cannot be sustained.
    We will be reminded, over and over, that the relevant factors governing
the fate of such cities are economic every bit as much as they are
geophysical. The tipping point for coastal and low-lying conurbations will
be that at which reinsurance firms withdraw their protection, capital
investment in the form of real estate effectively becomes uninsurable, and
development-loan and mortgage providers abscond from the scene. The
calculus in such cases is one of “asset exposure,” measured in increments of
“capital per inhabitant,” and the downside risk they face when they assess
the most likely climate scenarios in these terms is already making insurance
providers noticeably skittish.28
    Just how skittish is suggested by the large American insurer State Farm’s
May 2023 announcement that in response to “rapidly growing catastrophe
exposure,” it would no longer write homeowner policies in California—not
 merely in flood or wildfire zones, that is, but everywhere in the entire
state.29 We can be certain that State Farm will not be the last insurer to do
so, and that their decision is merely the harbinger of a more thoroughgoing
retreat of this sort.
    On the far side of the risk curve, the auguries for any further investment
in a city are not especially good, and some relatively dramatic dispersal of
the population cannot be far off, however improbable it may seem now. The
C40 Cities climate initiative speaks frankly of a “managed retreat” from
coastal zones, arguing that “[m]ovement away from the coastline will be
unavoidable in some places,” and that doing so intentionally and
proactively “will have significantly lower social and economic impacts than
forced, reactive retreat after coastal flooding events.”30 Relocating everyone
imperiled by rising oceans is not the project of a few months, or even a few
years: in 2018, twenty-one of the world’s thirty-three megacities of 10
million or more inhabitants were situated on coasts.31 Roughly 600 million
of us live fewer than ten meters above average sea level.

Whether cities of the threatened latitudes become physically uninhabitable
or their future prospects merely judged to be a bad investment risk, the
predictable consequence will be a significant intensification of the flight
toward the temperate zones of the Earth that has already begun.32
   Unsurprisingly, the language around this issue is vexed. Experts tell us
that the term most commonly used to describe people in flight from
ecosystemic collapse, “climate refugee,” is misleading on both legal and
scientific grounds, so let us simply think of them as being “displaced.”
What all parties agree on is that their experience of displacement will take
multiple forms.
   Most of us, when trying to imagine what people go through in the course
of such journeys, are likely to picture dust-whipped desert holding camps,
perilously overloaded Zodiacs on the Channel, or desperate lunges across
 the Mediterranean in whatever spavined Libyan fishing boat can be pressed
into service.33 But the reality is that a healthy proportion of such
displacements will be internal, such as the waves of outmigration that
depopulated panhandle Texas and Oklahoma during the Dust Bowl years of
the 1930s. Whether showing up in the form of RVs in Walmart parking lots
and FEMA trailers dotted across the American landscape, families doubled
or tripled up in inadequate housing, or the millions who wander from city to
Chinese city without the all-important hukou that confers the right of
settlement in any of them, the dislocation will be visible just about
everywhere in the inland regions of the habitable zone.34 As we move
deeper into the Long Emergency, both city and countryside will
increasingly come to be marked by scenes of mass dispossession,
involuntary mobility and the inevitable social frictions that arise in their
wake.
    What happens at the boundaries between states will be more brutal still.
Border crossings on land will increasingly become flashpoints for conflict,
with the worst violence most likely to break out at the junctures between
polities that appear to offer sharply asymmetrical life chances to the
displaced—as, say, along the Rio Grande dividing Ciudad Juárez,
Chihuahua, from El Paso, Texas; at the Pazarkule gate on the Turkish-Greek
frontier; or at the Spanish North African exclaves of Ceuta and Melilla.35
    Even where such stark contrasts do not exist, it will become routine and
unremarkable for states of the relatively clement latitudes to assert their
sovereignty in the way the United States already does, in the form of
fortified and heavily militarized frontiers, ludicrously thickened border
conditions and rigorously enforced biometric access regimes.36
    The abject cruelty of exclusions at land borders is, if anything,
overmatched by those that take place on the high seas. Here state posture
increasingly combines attempts to repel migrant vessels that approach
territorial waters with the harassment, interdiction or detention of the
 humanitarian activists trying to help them survive the crossing.37 Such
operations often result in massive loss of life, as during the June 2023
incident in which the Greek coast guard actively prevented the rescue of
hundreds of migrants trapped on the Adriana, a Libyan fishing trawler
about to capsize in the Ionian Sea.38
    And for those who do manage to slip through the weave, legally or
otherwise, the coldest of welcomes. As the Long Emergency wears on, the
tendency will be for states to institute and hunker down behind all the
policies and provisions that together make up a “hostile environment” for
immigrants of all sorts.39 Internally, states that perceive themselves to be
under pressure from mass migration will do everything they can to make
everyday life miserable for the newly arrived.
    This will broadly mean an intensification and sharpening of those
measures that already exist: routine immigration patrols, grim detention
facilities for those scheduled for deportation and mandatory document
checks at every point where people avail themselves of everyday services
like housing, banking, education and healthcare. With increasing frequency,
private employers and landlords will be deputized to make this sort of
inspection—directed not merely to refuse service to anyone who cannot
furnish the necessary credentials, but to report them to the authorities on the
spot.
    And more and more often, we’ll find ordinary people enlisted to perform
“borderwork”: the informal and enduring ways communities have of letting
newcomers know when they are not welcome, ranging from subtle slights
to the most blatant, overt forms of othering.40
    The picture that is rapidly coming into focus is one of a world without
refuge, hospitality or fellow feeling, in which even those who are
themselves only a generation or two removed from flight do everything
they can to prevent the same welcome being offered to others. What is
certain, however, is that all of the people displaced in the waves of collapse
 and abandonment will need to find homes somewhere. Through its sheer
magnitude, the human flow involved will overwhelm any and all measures
taken to counteract it. No polity on Earth will be able to completely seal
itself off, whatever cruelty it chooses to enact at its borders.
    Both transborder and internal migrant flows will continue to be swollen
by large numbers of people fleeing armed conflict, which we now know is
made more likely by heating.41 A 2014 study considering thirty-two years
of data from sub-Saharan Africa found reasonable grounds to draw a
“strong causal” relationship between temperature at the higher end of the
expected range and violence against civilians, in particular.42 The authors of
a systematic review published the following year were willing to assert the
link between climate and conflict rather more strongly, and with global
effect.43 They were even prepared to put numbers on it: in reviewing fifty-
five quantitative studies of interpersonal (i.e., “assault and murder”) and
intergroup conflict (“riots and war”) conducted between 1986 and 2015,
their meta-analysis showed that each rise of one standard deviation in a
given location’s temperature “is associated with an average 2.1 percent net
increase in the rate of interpersonal conflict and a 11.3 percent increase in
the rate of intergroup conflict.” They then dryly noted that, according to an
emissions scenario “which is now thought to be conservative,” “[a]lmost all
inhabited locations are projected to warm by at least [two standard
deviations], with the largest increases exceeding [four] in tropical regions.”
What this suggests above all is just how futile it is to distinguish between
those fleeing hostile climatic conditions and other kinds of refugees, as if
there’s a material difference between fleeing from the prospect of death in a
food riot and that of death from heat stroke.
    Demands for the restriction of movement will be resisted, of course—
most effectively not by displaced people or their advocates, but by a
business community that has long depended for its profit margins on the
unimpeded flow of underpaid and acutely vulnerable immigrant labor. This
 is particularly so in sectors like poultry processing or agriculture, where the
convenience, variety and plenty we enjoy have largely been achieved on the
backs of an immigrant workforce that has long been treated as disposable.
    And perhaps the needs of business will mean that some route to relative
safety can be preserved, here and there, for at least a small portion of the
displaced population, though at the cost of unspeakable working conditions.
Otherwise—unless internal migrants become desperate enough to take on
the non-unionized, low-pay, high-turnover work on which the everyday
bounty depends—the closure of borders will drive acute shortages across
every economy that has come to rely on the tacit cruelty of a two-tier labor
system.44 The grotesque irony is that any safe route whatsoever that is made
available to displaced migrants may depend on the patronage of forces
foundationally committed to their exploitation.
    What we must try to comprehend and plan for, somehow, is a world in
which hundreds of millions have been set to flight. In the very long term, I
think we’ll collectively come to understand this titanic, century-spanning
process of resettlement as the planet’s human population simply adapting en
masse, and as best it can, to its violent new conditions of tenure. But in the
meantime, the outlook is considerably darker. Consider the repercussions of
the Mediterranean migration crisis over the past decade and a half, with
knock-on effects extending to the as-yet uncontained right-populist surge
across Europe;45 remind yourself that the number of human beings involved
in that migration reached into the millions, at most—and then try to imagine
what will greet a population on the move that is not one but two orders of
magnitude greater.
    The vast upheavals of people during the Second World War and the
Partition of India are the only remotely comparable events in recorded
human experience, and the ripple effects from those are still driving history
the better part of a century later. Everything we know about such wrenching
dislocations tells us that abuse, pogrom and attempts at more or less
 comprehensive “cleansing” are sure to follow, wherever a distinct and
identifiable body of people arrives in a place disinclined to welcome them
in any particular number. And if history is any guide, some of these will be
aimed at populations previously thought to be well integrated, or even fully
assimilated.

Sharp limits on the movement of people will be accompanied by increasing
friction in getting goods from one place to another, in an undoing of the
process painstakingly enacted during the era of globalization.
    Globalization was, in part, a titanic, decades-long, and largely successful
effort to figure the world as a smooth space, where neatly containerized
cargoes of all sorts could flow seamlessly between continents through the
secured “gateways” and “corridors” of international logistics.46 During
these years, production was increasingly offshored from its traditional sites
in the industrial heartlands of the global North to locales offering more
relaxed regulatory regimes, fewer taxes and lower wages, in a headlong
race to the bottom. Shenzhen was transformed from sleepy Pearl River
Delta market town to manufacturing titan and metropolis of 12 million.
Impoverished countries like Bangladesh, Vietnam and the Philippines
reinvented themselves as powerhouses of global textile production. And
warehouses, retail shops and homes beyond number filled up with the low-
cost, relatively high-quality things they churned out.
    But as you may have noticed, there is a considerable degree of overlap
between the tropical locales that benefited most from this offshoring and the
places on Earth most imperiled by direct heat, cyclonic storms and sea-level
rise. Globalization will be thrown into reverse as tropical cities are
subsumed by these threats, a greater share of manufacturing capacity is
reserved for desperate local need and the conduits that for so long ducted
capital, matter and energy between hemispheres are severed with an almost
audible snap.
     In this process of involuntary deglobalization, geography will have its
revenge. Especially if emissions-intensive air freight falls into increasing
disrepute, if not legal jeopardy, on ecological grounds, seaborne cargo will
have to shoulder a greater part of the burden of moving things around the
world. But ships plying their way between continents are forced to thread
certain potentially unreliable bottlenecks—the Panama and Suez Canals,
most obviously, but also the Strait of Hormuz, the waters off the Horn of
Africa and the treacherous Malacca Strait, rich with gleefully redistributive
pirates.47
    This will increase the difficulty involved in simply getting goods from
one place to another, in turn compromising the “just-in-time” logistics on
which so much modern production depends. It will become enormously
more burdensome, and in some cases may no longer be cost-effective at all,
to assemble components drawn from across a hemisphere at a site of final
integration before shipping them to a retailer or end user on the other side
of the ocean. A greater portion of the complex artifacts people do make and
use will therefore, of necessity, be produced closer to the point of actual
need, or done without entirely.
    Of all sectors of the economy, though, those that are dedicated to the
provision of food and other perishable goods are most acutely vulnerable to
increased difficulty in getting things from one place to another. If food
production is likely to be sharply limited at source—as we’ve seen, both by
the direct effects of heat on crops and by shortages of the necessary
agricultural labor—it is equally so that what does get produced may not
traverse borders quite as easily as it had in the past.
    The July 2023 collapse of the Black Sea Grain Initiative suggests some
of the reasons why.48 Intended to protect shipments of the Ukrainian wheat,
corn and sunflower oil much of Africa depends on, the compact was
sensitively dependent on Russian assessments of strategic advantage, or
even whim. When those assessments shifted, Russia reimposed the
 blockade on Ukrainian shipping it had maintained since the outbreak of
war, and with tens of millions of tons once again piling up in silos, grain
elevators and warehouses, Ukraine was compelled to try moving grain
overland.49 But the volume of grain that can be moved via truck or train is
inconsequential compared to the capacity of an oceangoing bulk-carrier
fleet, and the circuitous routing required of overland journeys means even
that small amount moves much more slowly than it had before. The
immediate result of the agreement’s collapse was price instability on grain
markets worldwide and food insecurity for hundreds of millions living half
a planet away.
    It’s true that these are special circumstances, arising amid a conflict that,
for once, has not a thing to do with global heating. But as we’ve seen, the
risk of conflict increases sharply in a hotter world, and the same wartime
factors that now hobble Ukrainian grain shipments—contested waters,
mined sea-lanes, missile strikes on civilian vessels—stand to endanger any
shipment moving across the face of an angrier globe, just as they had in
world wars past.50
    None of this makes the already quite considerable challenges of feeding
ourselves over the years to come any easier. For the indefinite future the
picture is likely to be one of curtailed availability, irregular distribution,
range reduction, the increased spoilage of perishables, higher costs and
limited stock of what is available, acutely threatening the all-but-
inconceivable plenty, variety and on-demand access most of us have
experienced for most of our lives.51
    And what is true of food is also true for medicines and medical devices.
You may remember how difficult it was to source N95 masks in the US or
the UK during the early phase of the COVID pandemic—again, this was
because the facilities capable of manufacturing nonwoven material at the
necessary scale had largely been offshored to China. Chastened by this
experience, both countries have more recently made noises about
 redeveloping a robust measure of domestic biopharmaceutical
manufacturing capacity, with an eye toward ensuring that all the contents of
the standard pharmacopeia can be produced at scale locally.
    But while there is certainly a gathering intuition that this might be a wise
thing to do, and it even meshes with the kind of protectionism espoused by
populist parties everywhere, it has yet to be fully accomplished anywhere. It
may never be. As a result, antibiotics, hormones, contact lenses, insulin
pumps and a very wide range of other medical and pharmaceutical goods
critical to the maintenance of life are still for the most part produced at the
far end of a globally ramified supply matrix.52 Given the increasing
complexity of long-distance transport, we can’t bank on uninterrupted
access to these vital supplies, either.
    There are two further aspects of life in the years ahead we need to
consider, without which no picture of an Emergency world is quite
complete. The first is that exposure to all of the conditions we’ve discussed
clearly affects some bodies more than others. If the raw conditions of life on
a hotter planet fold back against each of us differently, then so, too, do the
second-order effects of the heat, from an increased collective propensity for
violence to interruptions of the food supply. It is in this sense that the Long
Emergency will produce at scale a condition the disability scholar Jasbir
Puar thinks of as “debility”: a series of psychophysiological maimings and
disfigurements of capacity that are unevenly inflicted across the
population.53
    For some of us this will show up as a persistent unavailability of the
medicines or prosthetics we depend on; for others it might mean the insults
to memory, executive function and cognitive capacity that are broadly
entrained by continuous, unameliorated, long-term exposure to stress. For
far too many, it will involve the slow depredations of threshold
malnutrition. We ourselves will be weakened by our passage through the
 times ahead, in the most intimate, bodily ways, and the most vulnerable
among us most of all.
    The second is that our ability to respond to all of the conditions we face
is complicated by the fact that we have entrusted so very much of the way
we organize the world, as individuals and institutions both, to a finicky,
fragile, high-maintenance technology of cloud-based services. Most all the
networked services we depend on, for everything from entertainment to
wayfinding to payment at the point of sale, are hosted in highly energy-
intensive data centers and connected to the user and one another via a
perilously vulnerable meshwork of routers, microwave transmitters and
fiber-optic cables. None of these have generally been designed to account
for operating temperatures that are now considered “extreme” and will soon
become far more frequent.54
    Though important parts of this extended armature have been engineered
with redundancy and failover firmly in mind, we have lazily come to regard
something as an always-on, always-there utility that is in fact deeply
contingent. At any given moment, important components of it are evidently
only a few hot hours away from failure.
    Here, then, is everything suggested by those two days of a British July in
full flower: a hotter world is, eventually, a hungrier world, a sicker world, a
more violent world, a smaller and a more crowded world. In all of these
dimensions, things may occasionally get better for a little while, here or
there. But the frictions will never ease. The sort of disruptions, difficulties
and outages that we’re just now learning to anticipate and expect: these
things do not represent a glitch in the system of the world. They are the best
currently available state of that system, functioning as smoothly as it is able
to at the moment, given the constraints on it, and likely as smoothly as it
ever will again.
 There is, of course, an institution in our lives that is supposed to manage
risk, protect us from threats to life and provide for the common good. What
of the state in the Long Emergency?
    In a growing number of places on Earth, the state has already failed,
collapsing inward in not so much a managed as an unplanned and headlong
retreat from public provision. We see what this process looks like once it
has run to completion in countries like Yemen, Somalia, Haiti or, most
recently, Venezuela: the state has vanished utterly as a force in people’s
lives. Its ability to guarantee reliable (or any) access to essential services
has evaporated. For most of the population, everyday life has become a
desperate scramble to secure the basic necessities of survival.
    Those with cash to spare are, of course, always free to purchase
whatever safety the market affords them. The Guardian columnist Nesrine
Malik describes some of the measures resorted to by better-off residents of
the Sudanese capital, Khartoum:
  There are electric generator providers who will sell you a wide range of devices to keep your
  lights on when the power goes out. There are sellers of water pumps to tease out the water
  from the mains, and another set of contractors to build you giant water containers to store that
  water when even the pumps don’t work anymore … Policing is patchy and unreliable, so you
  can pay someone to guard your home in the night.55

Everyone who can afford to shores up the threadbare remnants of state
provision in this way. Everyone who can’t is left to fend for themselves.
    It’s admittedly somewhat surreal to apply the lessons of everyday
Sudanese life to, say, the United States, an economy fully 150 times as
large. Given the way governments in the global North are already visibly
struggling with the basics, though, we can be forgiven for wondering if
some more thorough undoing isn’t what awaits us in the years to come.
Even short of outright collapse, ordinary democratic polities with fully
developed economies now often feel as though they are approaching some
threshold past which they will no longer have the effective capacity to
 deliver political goods—and this is true even now, in the early stages of
something that will clearly tax that capacity to the maximum.56
    More of us now know what it is to struggle with unreliable
infrastructure, to wait helplessly for degraded public services or to make
shift for ourselves when they never do arrive. And while some might see a
certain karmic justice in this, in all the slow violence of empire now come
boomeranging back onto the imperial core, in any society it is always the
powerless who suffer first and most acutely from the retraction of public
provision.
    The Marxist geographers David Harvey and Ruth Wilson Gilmore both
think of the process involved in this retraction as “organized
abandonment.”57 Organized abandonment falls unevenly on the land, but if
you live in a place that has been deserted in this way, you know it. You can
feel it. The long hollowing-out of public investment is a palpable thing,
directly accessible to the senses. It’s the dogshit, trash and broken glass that
accumulate on sidewalks that are no longer swept clean on a regular basis.
The long line of ambulances stacked up in front of the emergency
department of each hospital. The wait for a bus that used to arrive every few
minutes and may now come twice an hour, if it shows up at all. It is the
practical inability to access services that are formally yours by right, and the
automated “helplines” or long and intentionally dispiriting waits on hold
you encounter when you do try to schedule them. It is the shuttering of
firehouses and libraries, the intentional discontinuation of street lighting
and roadway maintenance—of everything, in fact, that signals a decent
common existence. And all of it done intentionally, for the benefit of a
vanishingly small (and not infrequently offshore) shareholder class. If this
is the condition of neoliberal governance now, I can’t imagine how anyone
thinks it will suddenly improve once it comes under so much more pressure
from so many new directions.
     But as Gilmore develops the idea, particularly, organized abandonment
is much more than simply a passive process of retreat and disinvestment.
There is an active side to it, as well, and it is brought to bear on the bodies
of those marked as other. Places that have been stripped of their public
goods in this way are at the same time purposively made over into “planned
concentrations or sinks … of hazardous materials and destructive
practices,” to which marginalized, racialized and criminalized populations
are relegated.
    Gilmore is specifically speaking to Black experience in the United
States, and there remain aspects of her framing that are unique to that
experience. But analytically, it’s not hard to see resonances and parallels
with the ways in which organized abandonment works elsewhere and for
other bodies, including all those in flight from newly uninhabitable
conditions. Whatever life they knew before, those who have been
transformed into “people on the move” by the fact of their displacement
will find that they immediately become subject to much the same array of
measures that are applied to other despised populations. Their very
existence will be defined as extralegal. They will be intimately policed,
perpetually surveilled, consigned to sacrifice zones and exposed to all the
hazards that live there, with consequences that are more than occasionally
lethal.58
    So while it’s tempting to argue that most states of the global North are
bound to contract to whatever core military, security, police and judicial
functions are required to protect private property, this isn’t quite correct. To
say that the state will go away is firstly to presume that it was ever there as
anything but an actively malign force in people’s lives. After some four and
a half decades of conscious disinvestment, however, this simply isn’t the
case, especially for the poor and racialized communities that are invariably
exposed to its worst effects.
     What Gilmore helps us understand is the curious mixture of passive and
active in the state’s posture toward those pushed to the margins, and the
ways in which it so often simultaneously undermines and overmines their
struggle to lead a decent existence. Many, perhaps even most of us, live in
communities whose capacity for care has in some way been eroded by the
withdrawal of public investment. Some of us, though, live in communities
where that capacity has consciously and intentionally been shredded.
    Here we’re finally in a position to understand the true depths of the
trouble we’re in. The crisis of our moment consists not of a breakdown of
the global climate system, and all the storms and floods and fires and
plagues it gives rise to, as terrifying as those things might be. It doesn’t
even consist of the irreversible proliferation of such events, or their
cascading downstream consequences. It consists in the fact that all of that
lands not on healthy, robust societies, but on ones whose capacities for care
have been thoroughly and intentionally eroded.
    These circumstances are multiplicative: what a well-cared-for population
might have shrugged off, or taken in course, poses sharply greater risks for
bodies that have been debilitated by their passage through a process of
organized abandonment.59 Our ability to take care of ourselves and one
another has been undermined, not enhanced, by the structures of state that
are nominally there to secure our collective well-being.
    Zoom out, and the picture that comes into focus is of a globe quilted
with places in which the long process of targeted disinvestment has frayed
away the social fabric to the point that it’s come undone; places that have
been written off by insurers and formally forsaken as sites of human
settlement; and places in which a duly-constituted government no longer
has the capacity to underwrite public order, even if it wanted to.60 Though
we have come to it by such terribly different routes, those of us who live in
any of these places now find ourselves in much the same situation: alone,
unsure what to do and unable to look to the state for meaningful assistance
 with the conditions that threaten our well-being. We simply cannot count on
it to be there for us in the moment that it matters most.
    If nothing else, this ought to be radically clarifying. To me, the relevant
question we face isn’t whether the state can or should furnish everyone with
at least the rudimentary makings of a decent and dignified life, but
something far more concrete: whether it is likely to in this time and place.
Here Harvey states what should be obvious: “[I]f the state withdraws from
[the provision of public goods] then there is only one possible response,
which is for populations to self-organize to provide their own commons.”61
    This is the insight on which everything turns. As the circumstances of
the Long Emergency pick up pace and blend into one permanent condition
of omnicrisis, it’s time for us to think about building something else.

Are things really that dramatic, though—that far gone? Is it really our lot to
stand by and watch as big heat wreaks chaos on the institutional
architecture of the world? Aren’t there any policy directions or
technological developments at hand that might yet prove consequential in
the struggle to maintain a survivable climate, and therefore the social
arrangements we’re accustomed to?
    For reasons I’ll explain, I do not believe that there are. There will of
course be attempts to prevent further heating, most of them diligent, clever
and sincere—but they will very likely fail, as will attempts to mitigate the
heating that does take place. I’m making three separate assumptions here:
that a so-called “green energy transition” will not take place in time to
prevent the most consequential drivers of change from happening; that
reparative “geoengineering” will not be attempted at the necessary scale or,
if attempted, will not work as intended; and that in the time available to us,
we will not invent some other technology capable of siphoning carbon from
the atmosphere at the necessary scale, and rescuing ourselves that way.62
     Let’s start with the notion that a green energy transition will not happen
in time to shelter us from the impacts of big heat. In the near term, it’s a
safe bet that incumbent actors will continue to prioritize the lowering of
energy prices, accumulation of domestic political capital or strategic energy
access considerations over what is necessary to stabilize the atmosphere.
For evidence of this, we need look no further than the Democratic Republic
of Congo’s May 2022 announcement that it would auction off its peatlands
and old-growth rainforests for oil drilling, Germany’s return the following
month to coal-fired energy generation, Prime Minister Rishi Sunak’s
declaration that it would be “economically illiterate” to wean the UK off of
oil and gas, or the fact that China and India continue to approve new coal-
fired power plants, even amid a season of record-shattering heat that shed
tremendous suffering on both countries.63 The price of solar power keeps
dropping, yes, and the fact that it and other renewable sources are
responsible for an ever-greater percentage of the annual planetary energy
budget may well be excellent news for the long term. But decisions like
those recently made by India, China, Germany, the UK and the DRC are
clearly inconsistent with the pressing need to halt emissions. So while it’s
certainly possible that humanity may successfully complete a transition to
renewable sources of energy over the next several decades—and therefore,
eventually, the decarbonization of the atmosphere, and a slow subsidence of
the heating—it’s not currently in the cards. And in any event, no such thing
can take place swiftly enough to prevent global average temperatures from
proceeding past the point of safety because, again, they have already done
so.
    If we can’t act quickly enough to prevent dangerous concentrations of
heat-absorbing carbon dioxide (and the still-more-problematic but less-
attended-to methane) from building up in the atmosphere, the next line of
defense would be to prevent the sun from warming the atmosphere in the
first place. This is, in fact, the goal of the various geoengineering
 techniques gathered under the rubric of “solar radiation management,” the
most developed of which conceptually is something called stratospheric
aerosol injection.64 This is based on a natural phenomenon that has been
noted at least since the “year without a summer” that followed the 1815
eruption of Mount Tambora in present-day Indonesia, the largest volcanic
event observed in recorded history: sulfur dioxide lofted into the
stratosphere by the blast aerosolized and circulated worldwide, continuing
to filter sunlight for months, and cooling average global temperatures by
around half a degree Celsius.65 As a strategy for countering global heating,
stratospheric aerosol injection turns on the notion that what happened
accidentally at Tambora can be achieved intentionally, programmatically
and for as long as proves necessary.
    Enthusiasts generally wave a hand at the complexities involved in
stratospheric aerosol injection, but they are profound. In her book on
geoengineering, the science journalist Elizabeth Kolbert tells us that
achieving anything like the necessary coverage would require fleets of
aerosol bombers continuously strafing the upper atmosphere with
particulates.66 Not merely does the necessary fleet not yet exist, neither
does an aircraft that can carry the required twenty-ton payload to an
operating altitude of 60,000 feet—nor, for that matter, does the technology
to power such an aircraft’s engines and keep it continuously aloft without
dumping yet more carbon into the atmosphere. All of that would need to be
funded, designed, developed and deployed before heating was reduced by
so much as a hundredth of a degree. And even then, unless some other
process was drawing carbon down in the meantime, the cooling effect
would only last as long as the injection sorties were maintained.
    But even this isn’t the best argument against geoengineering attempts of
this sort. The real trouble is that, despite all the computational power we
throw into building models of heat exchange between the planet’s
atmosphere and its oceans, we still don’t understand the complexities of this
 interaction very well. It’s all too easy to see how some well-intentioned but
ham-fisted intervention in this entangled system might disrupt
climatological patterns that condition literally billions of human lives—the
ocean current known as the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation,
for example, which both regulates the climate across much of the Northern
Hemisphere and circulates nutrients that sustain sea life, or the equally life-
giving monsoon rains of South Asia.67 The Tambora eruption, after all, did
just this, resulting in an estimated 105,000 deaths from the direct
consequences alone.68 But advocates appear remarkably cavalier about such
prospects: according to a project director for something called the Solar
Radiation Management Governance Initiative, “We live in a world where
deliberately dimming the fucking sun might be less risky than not doing
it.”69 (If you are anything like me, you quail at the thought of how much
work the word “might” is doing in that sentence.)
    Assuming, then, that geoengineering based on solar radiation
management does not turn out to work safely or well, a remaining
possibility for lowering the heat resides in the technology of direct air
capture, or DAC.70 Here the picture is somewhat more encouraging. To
begin with, we know DAC actually works. Each the size of a shipping
container, DAC units can be deployed anywhere, and the amount of carbon
that a given installation extracts from the atmosphere can in principle be
more or less finely tuned, allowing for small-scale tests that don’t run the
risk of short-circuiting the monsoon or turning the entire sky white as a side
effect. But here again, there are limitations: whatever carbon dioxide is
absorbed from the air will still need to be sequestered in some way, the
DAC process is itself hugely energy-intensive, and the technology has so
far only been deployed in pilot programs of limited extent and ambition.
While DAC shows significantly more promise—and beyond that, feels in
every way wiser and more measured—than stratospheric aerosol injection,
spinning it up to any scale at which it might make a difference will take
 years. Even in the best-case scenario of DAC deployment, we would still be
in for many years of historically anomalous temperatures and all the
extreme weather events and third-order effects that follow on from them.
   And that really is the bottom line in any of these discussions. We are
already committed to decades of severe storms, wildfires, droughts and
floods, no matter what technology is developed, no matter what policies are
enacted, and no matter what any state, transnational or corporate
governance body decides to do now. At this point, no force on Earth can
prevent the breakdown from progressing. The process that has already
begun will run its course, conditioning the shape of possibility on this
planet until long after we are gone from the scene. It will be the central
determining factor in virtually all human endeavors for centuries to come
and will only finally resolve itself many, many years from now, when the
climate system has achieved its new stable state, and whatever human
population remains has either learned to live within that balance or is
unable to disturb it to any salient degree.71

The idea I’ve tried to flesh out here—that the society we live in is on the
edge of a catastrophic transition to a new order of being, catalyzed by
widespread ecosystemic breakdown—is not an especially novel one. The
basic contours of this scenario have been explored, with lesser or greater
sophistication, in literally hundreds of essays and books, dating back as far
as the 1960s—and, indeed, society’s manifest failure to fail over all this
time has lent most of these titles an undeniable Chicken Little quality.72
What this entire body of literature has proven unable to explain is
something most people no doubt find utterly unremarkable: that high-
complexity societies organized around the conventional Westphalian state
and the globalized market continue to thrive, a quarter of the way through
the twenty-first century, despite the mounting pressures on them.
     The writer and climate activist Andreas Malm has taken would-be
catastrophists to task for their failure to connect the dots in this regard.
What is lacking in their just-so stories of societal collapse, he argues, is an
account of “how environmental stress factors [are] translated into
hardship” for a society’s “dominant classes.”73 That is: How are disruptive
climatic conditions—which may well be debilitating or even fatal for
individual bodies—mediated to the dominating structures and institutions of
society, such that their ability to continue arranging the world for their own
benefit becomes and remains degraded? By extension, how will the heat
somehow prove incommensurate with the continuity of all the political,
territorial, technical and economic arrangements that together make up our
familiar world? How, above all, is an institution as enduring and well
defended as the state supposed to recede from our lives so thoroughly, when
confronted by heavy weather, that we are forced to shift for ourselves?
    These are excellent questions, and I’ve tried to suggest some of the
mechanisms that are likely to be involved in our case. But a richer and
perhaps more satisfying answer lies in a brief essay called “How Complex
Systems Fail,” self-published in 1998 by an anesthesiologist named Richard
Cook.74
    By “complex systems,” Cook means the intricate, multilayered processes
of technical orchestration that are everywhere in modern life, from
operating theaters to air-traffic control centers to nuclear power plants, but
the same principles can be extended to an economy or a society without
doing them too much conceptual damage. Cook tells us a few things about
the working of such systems: that they are inherently hazardous and involve
multiple points of risk. But they are also well defended against the risk of
failure, furnished with abundant safety features and multiple layers of
redundancy.
    Cook observes that, whatever safety mechanisms they may have been
equipped with, what all such systems have in common is that they are kept
 within safe operating margins via the continuous adjustments of human
operators. This seems commonsensical enough. But what he argues next is
somewhat startling: these adjustments are invariably in the nature of a
“gamble.” Whatever decision is at hand, it will always be a bet made about
the future in the presence of imperfect information.
    Most of the time—in fact, virtually all of the time, by definition—the
gamble pays off. The system reacts in the way its operators expect it to: the
nuclear reactor continues to run smoothly, the satellite reaches a stable
orbit, the tumor is excised and the patient successfully revived.
Paradoxically, though, trouble arises when operators have insufficient
experience of failure. Lulled by their unbroken record of success in keeping
it going, they can’t sense when the system they’ve been entrusted with is
close to the edge of its performance envelope, and miss or don’t recognize
the signs that it is closing in on failure. They make a gamble that the system
will continue to operate normally, as all their previous experience has
counseled them to expect that it will, and they allocate their resources
accordingly. And then change comes arcing in from some unforeseen
quarter: the gamble is lost, and everything comes undone all at once.
    In his essay, Cook says one other interesting thing about complex
systems, which is that it is quite possible for them to “run in degraded
mode” for extended periods. That is, they are so well defended by their
many layers of backups that they can accumulate damage for many years
before hitting the point of absolute breakdown. They simply go on working,
without either their operators or anyone else necessarily realizing the extent
to which everything under the hood has corroded away to nothing.
    The most obvious example of this in societal terms is the Soviet Union,
which continued to maintain a certain façade of robustness even after the
fall of the Berlin Wall in November 1989, and indeed right up to the point
of its dissolution on Christmas 1991. Not merely did the USSR manage to
hide its advanced state of decrepitude from all but the canniest external
 observers, whether sympathetic or hostile; it even managed to prevent its
own decision-makers from perceiving the truth of their situation.75 The
lesson for us seems obvious: even those arrangements of the world that
seem imperturbable may simply be tottering along “in degraded mode,”
way out past their margins of safety, and vulnerable at any time to the final
insult that will bring them all crashing down.
   I don’t want to discount capitalism’s astonishing tenacity, or dismiss that
darkly impressive ability it seems to have of reframing disaster as growth
opportunity and discovering new markets even amid the rubble. There are
plenty of bright people who believe, or have anyway managed to convince
themselves, that the systems undergirding everyday life in the late-capitalist
period are more than resilient enough to carry the day, even given the new
constellation of climatological threats they face.76 Nor would it necessarily
be wise to bet against them, however desperate, self-deluded or willfully
unseeing their arguments might seem.
   For well over a century now, its critics have continuously
underestimated capitalism’s sheer vitality: its genius for adaptation, its
propensity to generate entirely new lifeways requiring entirely new material
supports, its capacity to develop intensively when extension was no longer
a viable option. The engine, somehow, keeps turning, despite the analytical
predictions (and frequently enough the heartfelt desires and lifelong efforts)
of those who have prophesied its failure. It may well somehow continue to
do so, even amid the most disruptive scenarios considered here.
   I also don’t want to suggest that the process of destabilization I describe
will necessarily unfold in quite the same way in every place on Earth.
Given the present reality of uneven development, it will likely be possible
to maintain some pastiche of the late-capitalist lifeworld we recognize in
many places—at least with great effort, and exclusively for the most highly
favored—and it is even possible that these won’t simply amount to a series
of buffered enclaves, fortified redoubts and the secured corridors between
 them. For those lucky few able to avail themselves of these sheltered
environments, and blithe enough not to care about the fate suffered by
anyone else, not a single topic I raise for consideration in the rest of this
book is likely to be in any way germane.
    But for the rest of us, the normality to which we’ve become so
accustomed over the past forty years is already dwindling in the rear-view
mirror. Nor will there be, as the cliché has it, a “new normal” we might
clamber up onto and cling to for dear life. If an emergency, an emergent
situation, is a sudden and unexpected excursion from the accepted bounds
of the normal—an exceptional case in which the ordinary rules and
procedures are temporarily suspended—what we now confront is an
excursion that has become permanent.
    And so we find ourselves contemplating the end of the systems that have
defined the ordinary through all our lives, that have framed and given
grounding context to everything we’ve ever experienced. There’s a line of
thought that putting things this starkly is bound to be counterproductive, if
not actively reactionary in consequence.77 On this theory, predictions of any
particularly widespread social breakdown in the wake of ecosystemic
collapse are slipshod analysis: sloppy thought that unduly universalizes and
naturalizes something that was done by specific, identifiable historic actors,
and for which they should be held accountable. Worse still, from this point
of view, is that discussions of breakdown are supposed to subtly commend
rugged-individualist responses, and therefore erode the bases for solidarity
and the mass collective action that are seen as necessary to a just survival.
    One of the strongest criticisms levied against framing our situation in
such uncompromising terms, though, isn’t directed toward any putative
weakness of analysis, or of the political choices that result. It’s that doing so
can easily be psychologically overwhelming. The argument is that being
hammered by the unrelenting facts produces a kind of lassitude in people, a
blackened quietism that couples fundamental acceptance of the facts with
 an overcoming and total sense of one’s own powerlessness. Or worse yet—
since things are already so bad that nothing we do could possibly matter—a
careless, profligate abandon.
    And here I’m considerably more sympathetic. But as I see things, there
are two strong counters to this argument, one of which is ethical and the
other pragmatic. The ethical aspect is straightforward: it’s a matter of basic
respect, as well as a bedrock principle of informed consent, that each of us
be furnished with an account of our situation and the options available to us
that is as complete and accurate as possible. As importantly, though, we
need to grasp what our circumstances consist of, what they imply and how
they amplify one another, if we’re ever to figure out how to navigate this
harsh new world together.
    There will be shock and rage and overpowering grief in this—as there
should be. I doubt many of us will be able to contemplate the true contours
of the world we now inherit without being undone, at least for a little while,
by the things we feel in response. If we sit with these feelings for long
enough to let them subside, though, we may find ourselves ready to face up
to what they are really asking of us. Not only that: we may come to realize
that there are others who’ve been on the same journey and are every bit as
ready for that encounter as we are. What lies before each of us now is to
find those others. It’s only by confronting the new terms of our tenure on
the planet, however stark or bleak or frankly unnerving they may be, that
together we can begin to do something about them.

                             OceanofPDF.com
                                      2
                             Mutual Care



It is one of the worst bodily sensations you will ever experience: that
clammy, cold-sweat certainty of knowing you’re alone, at a moment in
which you desperately need the help of others. When the support structures
you expect to rely upon have fallen away, or were never there in the first
place, you arrive with terrible clarity at the understanding that this is it.
There’s no one you can call. Or there’s no one on the other end of the line to
answer. Maybe the line itself is dead. In any of these cases, though, the
result is the same: no help is forthcoming.
    The awful isolation of these moments is something you experience at the
somatic level as much as the intellectual or emotional. Every fiber of your
being rebels: surely, surely it’s not supposed to be this way—not here, not in
the twenty-first century.
    There is a way of refusing to let that isolation stand as the unquestioned
law of life, or to acquiesce to the privatization of the terror and grief that
accompany it. We call that refusal “mutual aid.” The activists Kelly Hayes
and Mariame Kaba cite a definition of mutual aid offered by Seattle’s Big
Door Brigade, and I can’t improve on it: “When people get together to meet
each other’s basic survival needs with a shared understanding that the
systems we live under are not going to meet our needs and we can do it
together right now!”1
     The commitment to mutual aid doesn’t emerge from any kind of prior
theory, in other words, simply from the recognition that when the
institutions to which we’ve entrusted our care fail us, the only thing
standing between us and the darkness is our own capacity for collective,
self-organized action. Mutual aid is simply how people without resources
have always arranged the means of their own survival: cooperatively,
outside the structures of market or state, using whatever tools they had
ready to hand. This is the sense in which the anarchist philosopher Peter
Kropotkin first used the term, in his enduringly lively 1902 classic Mutual
Aid: A Factor of Evolution.2 Holding that the capacity for cooperation is a
trait far older than humanity itself, which has been conserved across deep
time for the enhanced likelihood of survival it confers on populations,
Kropotkin insists that it is a possibility that remains available to us, even
now, and that it might continue to sustain human communities through their
darkest hours.
    But mutual aid isn’t quite as simple as cooperation toward the shared
goal of survival in a time of emergency. Nor is it quite coextensive with the
set of practices political scientists rather clunkily describe as the “non-state
provision of social welfare,” though it is that in schematic.3 In its modern
sense, the term primarily refers to those citizen-driven emergency relief
efforts that both stem from and reproduce a distinct set of values, most
central among which is horizontality.
    In this context, horizontality is much more than an organizational
structure. It is the refusal to impose, observe or respect any sort of power
relation between the person who is extending help and the person who
requires it. This is the fundamental quality that distinguishes mutual aid
from other models of voluntary, nonstate service provision, like charity.
Where charity insists on a show of gratitude from the recipient—or at least
tacitly expects them to nurture a sense of obligation that must someday be
discharged—mutual aid rejects the savior/saved dynamic entirely.4
    This is not the only thing that sets the practice of mutual aid apart from
charity. Mutual aid starts from the recognition that exposure to risk falls
unequally across the population, and aims at nothing less than transforming
the circumstances that produced that inequality in the first place.5 It aims, in
other words, at liberation.
                                       *
If Kropotkin had seen collective, cooperative practices under-girding the
everyday life of communities just about everywhere, for most of us those
habits have long since been overwritten by systems of state and market. In
modern times the instinct toward cooperation only seems to reappear in
times of the most acute peril, when all of that falls away. The terrible gift
we’re offered in these moments is a chance to practice all those capacities
for self-organization that are so badly under-developed in our ordinary late-
capitalist lives. This was the story of the Common Ground Collective, a
mutual aid group established in the Algiers district of New Orleans
following the August 2005 landfall of Hurricane Katrina.6
    New Orleans is a particularly low-lying city, protected from the higher
surrounding waters of Lake Pontchartrain and the Mississippi River only by
an elaborate system of levees. These levees failed at six points during
Katrina, inundating 80 percent of the city and damaging a full 70 percent of
its occupied housing units.7 Just about the entire population of Orleans
Parish was displaced.8
    The hurricane’s direct and indirect effects were particularly lethal for the
city’s poor and majority-Black neighborhoods, where they were
compounded further by the lack of any meaningful official response to
speak of.9 As the days dragged on without any effective relief effort being
mounted, the stories that filtered out of the region took on a frankly
apocalyptic tenor: bodies lying unrecovered in the street being devoured by
rats, or patients stranded in a flooded hospital being euthanized (at least
 seventeen reported) when it became clear that they could or would not be
evacuated.10
    Galvanized by the anguished recognition that “help was not coming,”
Common Ground was founded by “three friends sitting around a kitchen
table, with only a cell phone, $50, and their own energy, imagination, and
compassion to work with.”11 The effort eventually grew to some 28,000
volunteers, an especially impressive level of commitment when you
consider that in 2005, the population of New Orleans proper was only about
sixteen times that number.
    Common Ground’s founders Malik Rahim, scott crow and Sharon
Johnson were clear about what their initiative would offer: “Solidarity not
Charity.” The effort was “the first movement to visibly mobilise grassroots
disaster relief with radical social and ecological principles in the US,” and it
was explicitly organized “to provide relief, aid and support to underserved
[and] marginalized communities” on a Kropotkinian, horizontalist model.12
    Rahim, crow and Johnson knew what it meant for people to be
marginalized and underserved: Algiers, where they founded Common
Ground, has a median household income lower than 99.5 percent of
American census tracts.13 But where people living in places like this were
all too often treated as Katrina’s “faceless or helpless victims,” when they
were even seen at all, Common Ground insisted that they be acknowledged
“as active participants in the struggle to make their lives better.”14
    Taking their inspiration from the Spanish anarchism of the Civil War
years, the Black Panthers and the Zapatistas—Rahim himself had actually
been a Panther—the three founders wrote down a set of values that would
guide their effort, among which were autonomy, anticapitalism,
cooperation, solidarity and the commitment to direct action. Common
Ground would maintain a properly wary distance from the state, which had
done so little for the people of New Orleans, and organize itself from
among the people of the communities hit hardest. It would ask no payment
 for its services and at the same time reject the patronizing model of charity
that, subtly or otherwise, conditioned the aid work of conventional
organizations. Above all it would do something about the catastrophe that
had befallen residents of the city’s poorest neighborhoods, rather than wait
passively for the help from above that was never destined to come.
   Starting from a single “distribution center”—a makeshift tent set up in
Rahim’s driveway, lashed together from PVC pipes and nylon tarps—
Common Ground volunteers started sharing out food parcels they’d trucked
in from Texas themselves. They set up a rudimentary clinic, whose
volunteer medics rode through the streets on bicycles, asking locals if they
needed anything in the way of help and offering first aid to those who had
been injured in the storm or its aftermath.
   The network expanded, over the next several months growing to include
multiple distribution hubs and medical clinics, a women’s center and a
community kitchen. Common Ground crews fanned out through the
neighborhoods, pulling down houses that had been rendered uninhabitable
by the rains and toxic floodwaters, gutting, tarping and doing mold
abatement on the ones they could save, and training volunteers to handle
these specialized tasks safely. Yet other initiatives spoke to the wider needs
of a community under pressure, from a local newspaper and radio station to
“a biodiesel [fuel] program, computer classes, childcare co-ops, legal
assistance, eviction defense, prisoner support, after-school and summer
programs, anti-racism training, and wetlands restoration work.”15
   None of this went unopposed. Some of the backlash came from the very
people you might imagine might contest an autonomous effort at self-
determination organized by the residents of poor and Black neighborhoods:
Common Ground’s volunteers faced down physical threats not merely from
the armed white vigilantes roaming Algiers Point, Central City and the
French Quarter in their pickup trucks, but also from the National Guard that
had ostensibly been deployed to the region to help. But other challenges
 came from less predictable quarters. The French ultraleftists known as the
Invisible Committee remark, in apparent sympathy with the charge, that
“Common Ground has been criticized … for the fact that its activities were
geared towards a return to normality—that is, to the normal functioning of
things.”16
   But I don’t think this is at all fair. Just as the Black Panthers and the
Zapatistas had left traces for the founders of Common Ground to pick up,
interpret and make their own, Common Ground laid down tracks for the
ones who followed, building not so much a network across space as one
across time. In navigating by the cues left by the ones who had gone before
them, they inscribed the trail more deeply and signposted it for all those
who would follow in the years to come. And among those who did pick up
the traces was a group of Occupy Wall Street veterans who organized
themselves to counter the effects of Superstorm Sandy. They called
themselves Occupy Sandy.

If the full circumstances of Sandy’s apocalyptic descent onto New York
City were difficult for anyone on the ground to grasp in real time, they will
be virtually impossible for me to convey to you now, even given the benefit
of time and distance. Like all such events, the storm and its aftermath
appeared in our lives as a hyperobject, too large and ill defined at its edges
for anyone to see clearly.
    What did become evident, as the storm surge receded, was that in many
places the devastation was little less than total. Whole communities had
been reduced to sodden splinters all along the city’s coastal frontage, from
Edgemere and Arverne in the Rockaways to Midland Beach on Staten
Island. In Breezy Point, Queens, at the far western end of the Rockaway
Peninsula, an entire neighborhood burned down to nothing when rising
seawater first sparked electrical wiring into flame, then prevented
firefighters from reaching the scene of the blaze.17
     In one part of town after another, what had been the stuff of people’s
lives mere days before now clogged the gutters in abject heaps of
undifferentiable material, wedged in tangles of rusted rebar. Many of the
buildings that did survive the storm’s immediate onslaught were too
dangerous for people to venture into unprotected—with 17 percent of the
city’s land area flooded, tens of thousands of structures had been soaked to
chest height in sea salt and sewage, or the toxic waters of the flooded
Gowanus Canal, and were now being subsumed by rapidly spreading
colonies of mold.18
    All told, Sandy caused an estimated $19 billion in immediate damage
and lost economic activity.19 Roughly 69,000 housing units were damaged
in the five boroughs of New York City alone, and at least 300 destroyed
entirely, rendering as many as 40,000 people temporarily homeless.20 Forty-
four New Yorkers lost their lives to the storm’s direct effects.
    Even neighborhoods that weren’t hit directly by flooding or fire
absorbed a body blow. With power out through much of the city, with water
mains, emergency services and regular food deliveries in broad swaths of
Brooklyn and Queens disrupted for weeks, life for millions teetered on the
cusp between challenging and perilous. And amid all the chaos, what
became obvious was that New York City had never been designed to absorb
this kind of impact, at any level: not in terms of its architecture, not in terms
of its physical or institutional infrastructure.
    On any ordinary day, these infrastructural systems sustained the life of
the city so quietly and with such unremarkable efficiency that they receded
from collective awareness. In their failure, everyone who relied on them
was reminded that “ordinary” is an achievement. The consequences of
infrastructural collapse were plainly visible everywhere you went in the
days and weeks after Sandy, made manifest in the form of raw human need.
    There were and are agencies that are chartered specifically to assist in
the wake of such disasters, primarily by organizing emergency shelter,
 sustainment and financial assistance for all those who find themselves
displaced. In New York City, the public-sector response to Sandy was
chiefly coordinated by Region 2 of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, or FEMA, and that of the charitable or philanthropic sector by the
American Red Cross. But these are lumbering, dinosaurian entities, whose
very nature and organizational structure makes them incapable of reacting
to events at the speed of calamity itself.
    “What we’re hearing, even from FEMA and the Red Cross themselves,
is that because they’re such large operations, it takes them weeks just to get
set up,” said Rev. Michael Sniffen, rector of an Episcopal church in
Brooklyn, a few days after the storm had receded. “You know: FEMA
comes and knocks on someone’s door and says, ‘OK, we’ve done an
assessment, you’ll hear from us in ten days.’ But for folks who are living
without power, without water, without food, ten days is too long to wait.”21
    This was an infrastructural failure of a different sort, and it was
particularly terrifying given the plummeting temperatures that settled onto
the region in the first days of November. With no heat, no light, no food, no
water that was safe to drink and no help in the offing, millions living across
the tristate area now found themselves up against the unthinkable. There is
a very real sense in which they owe their survival to the efforts of the
thousands of their neighbors who organized themselves under the banner of
Occupy Sandy.

It is overwhelmingly likely that we would not have anything like an Occupy
Sandy to discuss now, whether by that name or any other, had it not been
for the original Occupy Wall Street encampment in Zuccotti Park the
previous fall.
    The legacy of OWS was evident in the incredible speed at which the
relief effort took shape: it was because of the social connections, and the
trust for one another, that activists had forged in the course of those ecstatic
 and difficult weeks in the park that they were able to stand up the sprawling
network of sites and activities so very quickly.22 It was evident in the
immediate sophistication of the logistical systems they organized at each of
those sites, which owed something to the pop-up infrastructure of the
makeshift society formed over the fifty-nine days and nights in Zuccotti.23
And it was most evident of all in the set of values that guided the relief
effort—which should surprise no one, given that they were the selfsame
values, held by a group that included many of the same people.24
    These ideas, techniques, connections and beliefs—much of what made
Occupy Wall Street what it was, in other words—had lain dormant for the
better part of a year, slumbering beneath the surface of everyday New York
City life. They remained available as a set of latent and unrealized
potentials, there to be picked up, dusted off and brought to life again when
the conditions were right.25 This is what accounts for the circumstance that
so mystified official observers at the time: how a non-organization that to
all appearances had come from nowhere was able to field hundreds of
motivated volunteers within the first days after landfall and sustain high-
intensity recovery operations from their sudden network of warehouses and
distribution hubs.
    One of these hubs was set up in the Episcopal church where Sniffen was
rector: the Church of St. Luke and St. Matthew at 520 Clinton Avenue, on
the border between Clinton Hill and Prospect Heights. My partner and I
showed up there on the afternoon of the fourth day following the storm. At
that point, neither of us had any particular experience, skill or competence
in disaster relief and recovery work; if that came at all, it came later. All we
knew was that we wanted to help and had been summarily rebuffed by the
first two organizations we’d initially tried to volunteer with.26
    We could have followed the crisply designed yellow directional signs
that someone had hung up, pointing the way to 520 from the Clinton-
Washington C train stop at the corner. But there was no need to: there was a
 long column of delivery trucks backed up in front of the church, the best
signpost anybody could ask for. We found the church halfway down the
block, set back from the sidewalk behind a low chain-link fence.
   Someone had zip-tied a homemade banner onto the fence that read
“OCCUPY SANDY: Mutual Aid Not Charity,” in conscious or unconscious
echo of the slogan that had rallied Common Ground during Katrina. The
banner told us, from these very first moments, that here was something very
different from the Red Cross that had turned us away so curtly. (Lest
anyone miss the point, the first letter in “aid” was replaced with the
universal circle-A symbol of anarchy.)
   Two or three volunteers sat at a folding table set up alongside the fence,
walking a nearly continuous stream of arrivals through the process of
registering themselves. They were extraordinarily efficient: we didn’t have
a chance to open our mouths before someone responsible for intake had
greeted us, thanked us for coming, handed us materials to make name
badges with and showed us what to do to get signed up. We filled out a brief
questionnaire—contact information, useful skills, languages spoken—and
then waited for a group of ten or so to accumulate, at which point we were
given a short lecture explaining the values we would be expected to uphold
as volunteers. And that was it. We were part of Occupy Sandy.

Let’s return for a moment to that banner, and what it implied.
   In her book on the aftermath of disaster, Rebecca Solnit suggests that we
can best understand what happened in New York that October as a
hybridization of two preexisting currents in the city’s public life.27 What
emerged fused the spontaneous, largely apolitical self-help efforts that
sprung up in the wake of the September 11 attacks to Occupy Wall Street,
which was of course intensely politicized. And there’s a strong argument to
be made that it was the anarchist sensibility suffusing the latter that
accounted for Occupy Sandy’s remarkable effectiveness.
     In other words, what made Occupy Sandy work was precisely the fact
that it was Occupy Sandy. The effort was explicitly founded in a particular
set of commitments, which were articulated in its every space and evident at
its every stage.28 Though they had unquestionably been distilled through the
experience, the perspectives and the language of the Zuccotti Park
occupation, at core they were much the same set of values that scott crow
had described as driving Common Ground’s work in New Orleans six years
previously: autonomy from the state, solidarity with the marginalized,
horizontality in organization and decision-making, and directness of action.
    As we’ll see, these were all qualities that helped the relief effort achieve
what it did, concretely and materially, but they weren’t pursued for the sake
of that alone. They were deployed toward a larger end. As 520 site
coordinator Samantha Corbin told the documentary filmmaker Josh Fox,
“Aside from simply being antiracist, antisexist, antihomophobic, anticlassist
… we believe that in the work that we do, we have to be actively
undermining those structures that separate us, and keep some people down
and elevate others.”29 That belief determined not merely what was done by
Occupy Sandy (OS) but how it was done. The best way to really grasp what
I mean by this is to see what it looked like in action.
    Once our little group had moved inside the church, we found that its
nave had been converted into an impromptu warehouse, complete with
areas to receive incoming relief supplies, store them until needed and then
stage them for delivery. A human chain ten or fifteen people long was
handing boxes in from the street, steadily moving them off the trucks and
into a holding area distinctly smelling of damp cardboard, where each one
was opened and checked. Donated supplies filled the pews all the way
down to the sanctuary, carefully sorted by row: winter coats and hand
warmers here, soap and tampons there.
    A member of the intake team explained the various sections OS was
organized into, listing all of the many things that needed doing—we could
 prepare hot meals in the church kitchen if we wanted, or help with
coordinating transportation, or even get trained to do direct relief or
demolition work out at the field sites, if we felt up to it. All of this sounded
equally necessary, interesting and urgent, but I could see for myself that the
two volunteers handling incoming packages were struggling to sort them
into the pews fast enough to keep them from piling up at the entrance. So
that’s what I got stuck into, and for the most part that’s what I wound up
spending the balance of my time at 520 doing.
   I quickly learned that, however rustic this logistics hub might have
seemed to casual inspection, it was a sophisticated operation. Once I got
used to the system, it rarely took me any more than a few minutes to put
together a care package custom-tailored to the needs of someone out in one
of the ravaged coastal communities. This wasn’t simply a matter of some
shrewd sorting protocol, either. In a particularly clever hack, activists
hijacked Amazon’s wedding-registry functionality as a way to funnel
donations; by visiting the gift registry notionally set up for “the wedding of
Sandy and Sandy,” supporters from around the world were able to purchase
whatever was needed most urgently, from cleaning supplies to bottled water
to blister-packs of batteries. (This, of course, was the ultimate source of the
long tailback of trucks we’d encountered when we first arrived at 520,
which would continue to clog narrow Clinton Avenue for weeks thereafter.)
When people who’d been displaced, or were holding out in whatever
remained of their family home, told volunteers in the field what they
needed, that information was fed directly into the wedding registry. It often
enough meant that they were able to get just what they’d asked for.
   That they were asked about their needs at all, though, speaks to the
contrast between the way OS did disaster relief and how a hierarchical,
command-and-control organization like the National Guard set about doing
things. When the National Guard set up their distribution sites for blankets
or food or fuel, they would generally broadcast over the radio the times and
 places these supplies would be available. The supplies themselves were
free, but anyone who needed them would have to make their way across
town to claim them—and this was highly challenging, to say the least, on a
sprawling terrain of flooded streets where public transit was effectively
nonexistent and fuel shortages were beginning to bite. And what if your
radio had shorted out in the flood, or its batteries were dead, or you didn’t
have one in the first place? How were you even supposed to know these
facilities were available to you?
    The Red Cross wasn’t much better, judging from a “scene of clumsily
administered relief” a journalist witnessed in Midland Beach, two weeks
after Sandy: “At the nearest intersection, a Red Cross van announced, via
megaphone, ‘hot soup!’ to no one in particular … The truck left not long
after arriving. It fed no one.”30
    This is entirely consistent with scenes others witnessed, as well as things
I saw for myself when I came across Red Cross teams on my way to or
from 520.31 The distinct impression I was left with was one of salaried staff
listlessly executing a plan that had been thought up in some windowless
operations center dozens of miles away, with neither input from nor any real
consideration for the communities who were supposed to benefit from this
largesse. Fairly or not, it was also commonly understood among OS
volunteers that Red Cross workers in particular were unwilling to venture
up the dark stairwells of the high-rise public housing projects where so
many of our fellow New Yorkers were stranded.
    By contrast, Occupy Sandy’s volunteers actively fanned out across the
worst-hit neighborhoods. Like Common Ground’s bike-mounted medics,
they went door-to-door and household-to-household in Red Hook and the
Rockaways, checking in with everyone they encountered. They went into
the housing projects and up to the darkened floors, keeping faith with the
places, and the people, other relief workers evidently found so daunting.
And rather than presuming that those they came across were victims in need
 of rescue—and offering them generic aid packages in response, as a Red
Cross outreach worker might—the members of OS field teams treated them
as peers and equals, the ones who knew better than anyone else what their
actual needs consisted of.32 Each interaction between a volunteer and
someone affected by the storm therefore started not with an assumption, an
assessment or a judgment, but with a question: “How are you doing?”
    No attempt was ever made by Occupy Sandy to sort bodies into those
that were deserving of care and those that were not, the way other relief
organizations did. Nobody involved with the effort would ever ask for proof
of address, a Social Security number or any of the other documentation
required by government agencies like FEMA before they’d furnish aid.
Nobody made you fill out paperwork just to prove that you were who you
said you were. OS volunteers offered assistance to anyone who asked,
whatever their immigration status, whichever side of the law they were
compelled to operate on.
    There was a fundamental respect for people’s autonomy in all of this, not
to mention their dignity. It was one of the qualities that most sharply
differentiated Occupy Sandy from the Red Cross or the National Guard, and
it emerged directly from the principled distinction between mutual aid and
charity. But the way OS went about doing things was also hugely time- and
labor-intensive. In pragmatic terms, it wouldn’t have been possible had the
effort not had enormous numbers of volunteers to draw on. The fact that it
did had something to do with a quality I think of as “invitationality.”
    My partner and I had experienced this quality from our very first
moments on the sidewalk in front of 520 Clinton. Where the other efforts
we had tried to volunteer with in those first days after the storm were
indifferent, or even faintly hostile, Occupy Sandy literally and actively
welcomed us, and I’ve never forgotten it. I don’t think the power of a
greeting like that can be overstated, as a way of piercing the routine
 isolation of late-capitalist lives and kindling the first flickers of something
that might in time become a sense of belonging.
   But this wasn’t the only way the invitational quality was expressed. It
was there in the informal way we were encouraged to identify ourselves as
new volunteers and would remain known to one another throughout the
entire period of our involvement: as first names only, scrawled in Sharpie
across a piece of masking tape slapped to our chests. And it was there in the
orientation briefing we were given, where it was made clear that while
bigotry of any sort would never be tolerated, anyone who could agree to
treat the people around them with dignity and respect would always be
welcome and appreciated in the effort.
   Other ways in which the sense of invitationality manifested itself were
less explicit than that, and more a matter of the shared ethos that saturated
and sustained the whole effort. Part of this was simply that anyone could
make a meaningful contribution just by showing up, whatever their ability
or level of commitment. Nobody who volunteered for Occupy Sandy was
ever assigned to a role or task—who, after all, had the authority to assign
anyone anything? Newcomers were encouraged, instead, to find a role
organically, to “plug themselves in” to whatever seemed like it needed
doing most, just as I’d found my way to organizing donations in the pews.33
With so much going on, people never seemed to have much of a problem
finding something to do that was a good fit for their capabilities and
predilections.
   This wasn’t necessarily a matter of any ideological commit-ment—it
was surely down to OS being an informal, ad hoc initiative, with neither the
inclination nor the capacity to inflict bureaucratic procedure on anyone. But
it meant that the relief effort was to a very great degree genuinely self-
organized, and it kept the barriers to entry low. As a result, the operation
made places for all sorts of people—some of whom had clearly never
before interacted so closely, over so long a stretch of time, with people as
 different from them as the ones they met in Occupy. Its invitationality
helped OS field the numbers necessary to pull off labor-intensive strategies
like door-to-door canvassing.
    These were all ways in which the values animating the effort were
expressed concretely. There was one final way in which those values were
expressed, which is that everyone who showed up for Occupy Sandy had a
voice in the way it was run. Just as Occupy Wall Street had before it, OS
made its decisions collectively, democratically and by consensus. Concerns
were aired and courses of action hashed out in regular general assemblies
that lasted anywhere up to several hours, and anyone who participated was
welcome to speak, to raise items to the agenda and to block the adoption of
measures they felt they could not support.
    I saw real efforts made to convene as much of the community as possible
in these gatherings, and they continued to be held through the entire time I
was involved in Occupy Sandy. But while I believe that the commitment to
purely horizontal, consensus-based decision-making was something
sincerely held by most OS volunteers, as the effort expanded it became
functionally difficult to honor in full.
    By late November, despite an agenda that made space for reports from a
wide range of local activities and working groups, my feeling is that the
people participating in the general assemblies had mostly abandoned any
pretense that they gave voice to everyone who was involved in the effort in
any way. By that point, “Occupy Sandy” was tens of thousands of bodies
working at dozens of sites strewn across three states. It was simply too large
and diffuse to fit in a single room, and possibly too diverse to allow
everyone who did gather there to reach full consensus on all the matters
before them.

Was this anarchy in action, then? Well, as the proudly libertarian writer
Colin Ward always maintained, ordinary people are doing anarchy all the
 time, without ever identifying as anarchists, or even necessarily approving
of “anarchism.”34 And as we’ve seen, this was true of Occupy Sandy as
well.
    But that it worked, and was broadly seen to work, gave the lie to the
snide critique so often levied at anarchist ideas, in Ward’s time and our own.
Nobody could credibly accuse Occupy Sandy of being childish, or
impractical, or utopian. If anything, just the opposite was true. The
imperative of treating those who suffered from the storm as peers
fundamentally deserving of dignity may have been founded in a political
stance, but it led directly to a practical result, a far tighter coupling between
what they needed and what the relief effort was able to offer them. The
commitment to horizontal, leader less organization meant that relief teams
in the field could respond to emergent situations as they saw fit and deploy
their resources in whatever way seemed most appropriate. Autonomy meant
that the effort was able to reach the most vulnerable New Yorkers, those
who had a great deal to fear from becoming visible to agents of the state, or
simply lacked the formal tokens of twenty-first-century citizenship. In each
of these cases, the principles that guided Occupy Sandy were tested against
some of the most trying and stressful conditions experienced in the living
memory of New York City, and in each they proved their worth many times
over. Occupy Sandy delivered the goods, and it did so in ways no
hierarchical body could match.
    And it does bear repeating that a relief effort founded in the ethos of
mutual aid simply worked better than any of the conventional alternatives.
In the wake of the storm, a broad institutional consensus emerged that
Occupy Sandy had outperformed official disaster-response organizations
like FEMA and the Red Cross, even on their own terms. In mainstream-
media coverage, in government circles, there was astonishment at the claim
that OS achieved what it did on a total budget amounting to “a mere $1.34
million—roughly 1 percent of the entire Red Cross payroll and less than the
 sum of three Red Cross executives’ salaries in 2012.”35 Figures like these
led to the curious specter of New York City’s Special Initiative for
Rebuilding and Recovery and the US Department of Homeland Security
studying this horizontally organized, avowedly anti-statist effort to see how
it might be co-opted.36
    But in the end, such direct comparisons miss the point. They are to
reduce OS to a study in operational efficiency. Its real value was that it did
what it did in a way that upheld people, affirmed their ability to provide for
one another under the most difficult circumstances and maybe even shifted
their understanding of the world they lived in. In other words, it was
liberatory.
    The activist Dean Spade proposes four criteria for evaluating the success
of a mutual aid effort on this question:
  Does it provide material relief? Does it leave out an especially marginalized part of the
  affected group (e.g., people with criminal records, people without immigration status)? Does
  it legitimize or expand a system [resistant left movements] are trying to dismantle? Does it
  mobilize people, especially those most directly impacted, for ongoing struggle?37

Occupy Sandy unambiguously succeeded on at least three of these four
counts.
    There is no question whatsoever that it furnished communities and
individuals both with significant material assistance. It turned nobody away,
as either volunteer or recipient of aid, who was willing to treat the others
around them with a threshold minimum of respect, and made places for
people irrespective of their citizenship credentials. It profoundly, and
lastingly, undermined many of the claims to competence that are routinely
made on the part of actors like FEMA and the Red Cross, at least so far as
the New York region is concerned.
    The only remaining question is whether OS encouraged the people who
encountered it, whether as participant, recipient or onlooker, to undertake
further acts of liberatory self-provision. On this question, the evidence can
 only be described as “mixed.” While concerted mutual aid efforts did arise
in neighborhoods throughout New York City during the time of COVID,
and some of them did indeed involve veterans of Occupy Sandy, no broader
or more sustained infrastructure of self-organized care has appeared there in
the years since the storm.
   I think it’s nevertheless fair to understand OS as a stepping stone toward
liberation, as much for the way it transformed subjectivity and the sense of
the possible as anything else.
   This wasn’t anybody’s job. Nobody was paid for the grueling hours they
put in. Occupy Sandy offered tens of thousands of New Yorkers a rare
opportunity to exercise their skills and talents in the service of their
community—to do something about the terrible thing which had befallen
them and their neighbors—and this was its own considerable reward. There
were other rewards, too. Without anyone telling them what to do or how to
do it, everyone involved in Occupy Sandy had a chance to grow into their
autonomy, and their power, in a way that little if anything about their
previous lives might have prepared them for.
   For me, the chance to for once do something of actual utility—even if it
was no more than shifting boxes—stood in the starkest contrast with my
working life in the weeks and months before the storm, amid the empty
play of symbols that characterizes so much of twenty-first-century
existence. The chance to break out of the siloed identities and stilted
routines that kept us from ever getting to know one another as anything
other than strangers on the street corner was extraordinary. To do all that in
service of a larger vision of a community where people cared for one
another was unforgettable. The great secret of Occupy Sandy is that being
part of it felt wonderful.
   It registered in the psychic life of the city, as well. Even in a metropolis
of 8.5 million, a headcount of 62,000 was enough for the effort to establish
a tangible presence on the streets. For a little while, the yellow occupy
 sandy mutual aid patch safety-pinned to someone’s sleeve or backpack was
a common sight around town, and on one level it worked just like any other
brand encountered on the sidewalks and subway stairs of New York City: as
a declaration of affinity, affiliation, belonging. But part of what that patch
meant, too, was that none of us would ever again have to wait in hope for
someone to come rescue us, even in the face of events so terrible they
challenged the ability of the city itself to function. If there was rescue to be
had at all, it would be because we’d organized it ourselves.

For all my enthusiastic embrace of the practice, mutual aid is not a panacea.
Whatever context it arises in, this way of doing things is not without its
limitations and drawbacks.
    As we’ve seen, in mutual aid efforts the boundaries between caregiver
and recipient are, by definition and intent, less sharply drawn than they are
in other forms of provision. It derives much of its value from this refusal to
make cleavages between the helper and the helped, and for that matter, it
may not always be clear just who is acting in which role. To participate in
mutual aid projects is necessarily to accept the interdependence of
intertwined lives. But especially in smaller communities, this can open the
way to a multiplicity of worries—intrusiveness, violations of privacy,
judgment, even the withholding of care, which can in turn be used as a
cudgel and a means of control. People who are denied care in this way,
whether because they are controversial within the community or merely
unpopular, often have no real way of doing anything about it.
    Unlike the services furnished by a state, as well, nobody has any
statutory right to mutual aid. There is no such thing as a minimum level of
service, no guarantee of the completeness or competency or even basic
adequacy of what you might be offered.38 And again, barring the rare
circumstance in which one has been agreed upon beforehand and explicitly
articulated, there is no formal accountability process or means of redress
 when things do go wrong. You might conceivably go after the Red Cross or
the Coast Guard in court, should they somehow fail you in the course of a
rescue attempt, and you might even recover something. It’s hard to imagine
any such thing coming to pass where a self-trained, horizontally organized,
entirely voluntary effort is concerned.
    And finally, there is the line of critique often levied against mutual aid
efforts by those who think of themselves as occupying the revolutionary
left: that mutual aid is little different than any of the other institutions of
bourgeois voluntarism. That it drains away or mutes the flashpoints of
popular rage that might become insurgent. That it shores up a capitalist
order that is in its death throes and should be allowed to fail.
    I think it’s fair to say that mutual aid efforts sometimes generate (or
preserve) value that is thereafter folded right back into circuits of capital
accumulation, or that their presence in a community can prepare it for later
capture by market actors. But, again: the argument is not that mutual aid is
perfect, or even that it is the best among all possible ways of doing things.
The argument is that it is what we have when things go sideways—and a set
of practices we can build on, as the crisis in our lives turns from acute to
permanent.

We know mutual aid works, at scale and under pressure. But as we lean into
the long years of permacrisis, it might pay to think a little bit about just
what it is that mutual aid efforts are set up to furnish—what they’re good at,
and where they necessarily fall short.
   What is actually at risk in catastrophic events has to do with the basic
Maslovian facts of our embodiment, and the needs imposed upon us by the
nature of metabolism. These needs are simple, consisting first of all of
hydration, nourishment, shelter and clothing. We need to be clean and able
to rest, in an environment sustained within a fairly narrow range of
temperatures and conditions. And we need some measure of protection from
 physical hazards like fire, electrocution or carbon-monoxide inhalation, as
well as the bacterial, viral or fungal vectors of disease. Absent any of these,
no human body will survive for much longer than a few days.
   On any ordinary day, the fulfillment of our bodily needs is sustained by
the most elaborate infrastructures—so elaborate, indeed, that a good portion
of the institutions of state ever developed have been consecrated to their
management. But when some catastrophic event takes place, some or all of
the infrastructures we count upon fail. That’s what catastrophe is: the power
goes down, and with it the lights and the refrigeration (and the air-
conditioning, if you’re lucky enough to have any). The water from the taps
smells wrong and doesn’t feel safe to drink. The groceries you were
counting on to make the week’s meals with, the formula for the baby, the
medicine you need for your diabetes—none of that ever made it out of the
warehouse, it all sits rotting by the pallet-load on a rainswept loading dock,
miles out of reach.
   This is the central set of issues that mutual aid efforts take it upon
themselves to address, at least once the most acute threats to life have been
dealt with. Whether Common Ground, Occupy Sandy, the Centros de
Apoyo Mutuo set up in Puerto Rico after Hurricane María or the nameless
groups without number that popped up all over during the pandemic, what
these groups all constituted was a parallel, ad hoc delivery infrastructure,
conceived of, managed and experienced in very different ways than those
which undergird our lives “on any ordinary day.”39
   But as ingenious as these efforts may have been, as products of the
event, they were never designed to be sustained. We can talk about “aid”
when need is acute, but when need becomes intractable over the long haul,
we have to think in terms of something else. If self-organized processes
were effective in distributing aid under these circumstances, in the
aftermath of crisis events, might we also productively use these same
techniques to reorganize broader swaths of our lives? And especially, might
 they help us fend for ourselves, collectively, over the longer term, in
situations where the state is indifferent, hostile or simply absent? The
concept we need to mobilize, if we want to bridge these situations, is care.
    In English, “care” is one of those words that folds in a great many
shades of overlapping meaning. It is, among other things, the mobilization
of attention—the dedication of some portion of our cognitive resources to
noticing another. But more than that, what we care about matters to us. We
become personally invested in its fate and thereafter commit our own
energy and effort to ensuring its continuance, as best we can. I think of care,
then, as acts of nurturance, maintenance and repair, undertaken in the
presence of an affective commitment.40
    These acts of care are required continuously. Whenever and wherever we
have endured as some recognizable “we,” it was because some among us—
the overwhelming majority of whom were women whose names are lost to
history—did the draining, thankless, utterly necessary work of making sure
we would still be there the next day. This work is feminized and therefore
implicitly devalued. It’s all but never celebrated in any of the stories we tell
ourselves, and only very rarely compensated in any proportion to its actual
importance to our lives. But carework is the labor that knits the world
together.
    To say that carework has been systematically undervalued, even in the
progressive tradition, is not merely an understatement but even something
of a category error. If you accept the Marxian distinction between
“productive” and “unproductive” labor, care is by definition literally
unproductive activity. Similarly, where Hannah Arendt opposes the “work”
that produces durable objects of use to the “labor” that gives rise to
intangibles or consumables, care falls decisively in the latter category.41
Anyone who has ever spent much of their day washing or cooking or
cleaning—and does all of it in the full awareness that it will have to be done
 all over again the next day, and the one after that, in unending series—
might be inclined to agree.
    But none of the work that either Arendt or Marx reckons as productive
becomes possible without the daily replenishment and restoration of the
laboring body.42 And as Silvia Federici has it, these “day-to-day activities
by means of which we produce our existence” are simultaneously sites at
which “we can develop our capacity to cooperate and not only resist our
dehumanization but learn to reconstruct the world.”43
    Here Federici seems to be getting at the very quality that 520 Clinton
site coordinator Samantha Corbin had seen in Occupy Sandy’s ability to
“actively undermine those structures that separate us.” If carework is, or can
be, a way of remaking the world, though, it is prevented from doing so
when the people undertaking it are individualized, shattered, severed from
one another and alone. Its politically transformational qualities only begin
to appear when care is consciously thought of as a matter of collective self-
provision, outside the obligations of the family, the impersonal structures of
state and market or the vertical relations implied by charity. This is the
sense in which we now grasp care.
    It is no longer merely the means of individual bodily survival. It is the
means by which we sustain ourselves, as communities of people working
together toward our common liberation. As a tactic for those intent on
resisting oppression in the near term, Hayes and Kaba call this “care-driven
organizing.”44 As a way of tending to our needs over the longer term,
especially when other modes of provision have fallen away, it is, as I see it,
a practice of mutual care. And it points toward the habits of collective self-
provision we will need to learn (or relearn) if we propose to survive the
rigors of the Long Emergency together.
    The point of framing things in this way is to address two qualities that
existing mutual aid efforts only begin to gesture at: the multiple dimensions
of bodily and psychic need, and the extension of those needs over time.
 Taken together, these demands suggest that mutual care will work best
when organized as an integrated solidarity network of interlocking efforts—
each one targeted toward one discrete facet of care-work, like nutrition,
education or medicine, each supporting all the others. This is the sort of
structure we’ll need to call upon when the emergency in our lives becomes
permanent and the institutions and services we ordinarily rely upon to
sustain us fall away.
    Who better to learn from, then, than a group of people for whom life was
always an emergency, who responded to their conditions by organizing just
such a network of collective self-provision? The first steps on the way
toward mutual care were taken by the Black Panther Party for Self-Defense
(BPP) in the Bay Area of the late 1960s.

Such ideas have never been more fully developed than they were in the
panoply of “survival programs” organized by the Black Panthers between
their launch of the Breakfast for Children program in early 1969 and the
shuttering of the last such initiative, the Oakland Community Learning
Center, in 1982.45
    What the Panthers organized to defend themselves against was, in a
word, racism, though the word scarcely seems adequate until we consult
Ruth Wilson Gilmore’s definition: “the state-sanctioned or extralegal
production and exploitation of group-differentiated vulnerability to
premature death.”46 Some of the ways in which this vulnerability appears
are independent of class or income, notably a risk of harassment and assault
at the hands of the police so acute that Black parents have always had to
have “the talk” with their children as soon as they were of an age to leave
the house on their own. But all of its manifestations have invariably fallen
most heavily on those who are both Black and poor, and this was so even in
the Bay Area of the 1960s, in the midst of a society then approaching the
historical peak of its power and affluence.
     For poor Black people in the Oakland of 1966, “vulnerability to
premature death” took a fearsome number of forms; the foreclosure of
educational, training and employment opportunities. The institutional denial
of credit. Woefully substandard housing. In the medical professions, a
general indifference to conditions that disproportionately or predominantly
afflicted those of African descent, like hypertension or sickle-cell anemia, a
painful and potentially fatal blood disorder. Malnutrition or outright hunger.
And, of course, the likelihood of beatdowns, jailing or worse, any time
someone was unlucky enough to cross paths with the police.
    The spectacle of entire communities bearing up under this kind of
malign neglect ultimately proved so incompatible with American self-
regard that it led to action, and that action took the form of an expansive
program of state provision. The America into which the Panthers emerged
in 1966 was not one undergoing state failure or a process of managed
retreat. Quite the opposite, in fact: during the Lyndon B. Johnson
administration, between 1964 and 1968, the United States formally
committed itself to nothing less than an all-out War on Poverty. In concrete
terms, this consisted of a range of targeted activities administered by an
independent federal agency called the Office of Economic Opportunity,
including the Job Corps vocational training initiative; an early-childhood
education, health and nutrition program called Head Start; the college-
preparation scheme Upward Bound; Volunteers in Service to America, or
VISTA; and the ambitious, controversial Community Action Programs.
    Technocratic though it surely was in conception, the War on Poverty
represented a massive expansion of the care services available to the many
millions left behind by the postwar economic surge. Many of its initiatives
were specifically intended to address the needs and problems of what was
then called “the ghetto.” And by the standards of the day, it was relatively
well funded, more than tripling government expenditure on issues of
 poverty and amounting to some 15 percent of the entire federal budget by
the time it was rolled back under the Nixon administration.47
    There were glimmers of something far more radical in the War on
Poverty, as well. In their original conception, the Community Action
Programs were the closest any official policy of state ever came to
involving the American people in their own self-determination—by
comparison with anything devised in the years since, especially, they can
seem like something drawn up in Cuba, or Chavista Venezuela.48 The
authors of the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964 famously envisioned that
these local initiatives were to be “developed, conducted, and administered
with the maximum feasible participation of residents of the areas and
members of the groups served.”49
    Perhaps inevitably, though, this was a commitment destined to be
honored more in the breach than in any observance.50 Practically in the
same breath that he affirmed “the necessity of including the poor in all our
activities,” Office of Economic Opportunity director Sargent Shriver
clarified what this really meant: “We have no intention, of course, of letting
any one group, even the poor themselves, ‘run the jobs’ or ‘run the
programs.’ ”51
    And just as bad as the seeping paternalism was the sense that the scheme
as a whole amounted to a titanic misdirection. As a contemporary observer,
the activist urban planner Robert Goodman, described it, “maximum
feasible participation” amounted to little more than “allowing the poor to
administer their own state of dependency”: they “could direct their own
welfare programs, have their own lawyers, their own planners and
architects, so long as the economic structure remained intact—so long as
the basic distribution of wealth, and hence real power, remained
constant.”52 This left most Americans who were both poor and Black more
or less right where they’d started: unseen, underserved, under-resourced and
perpetually at risk.
    The gulf between the War on Poverty’s promise and its reality was
something keenly felt by two young Oakland residents named Bobby Seale
and Huey P. Newton, who developed their critique at close range, during
their work at a Community Action Program called the North Oakland
Neighborhood Anti-Poverty Center in the summer of 1966. Over the course
of their involvement with the Center, Seale and Newton had seen how
government action consistently failed the very people it was supposed to
uphold, how state agencies used the pretext of “community outreach” to
intensify their surveillance of Black lives.
   Now they laid out the contours of something very different. Setting out
from a blank sheet of paper, Newton distilled the principles of Black self-
determination he and Seale had absorbed from their readings of Malcolm X
and Frantz Fanon into a concise list of positions and demands. This was the
Ten-Point Platform and Program, the founding charter of the Black Panther
Party for Self-Defense.
   Newton designed the party’s platform to appeal to Black Americans by
restating the raw facts of their situation “in some basic instructive thing that
[ordinary people] can understand, instead of a bunch of esoteric bullshit.”53
The Ten-Point Program was, accordingly, divided into two sections called
“What We Want” and “What We Believe,” with a point-for-point correlation
between each specific policy demanded in the former and one of the articles
of belief outlined in the latter.
   There was an insurmountable contradiction in the program from the
jump, in that it simultaneously demanded that the United States government
furnish Black people with decent housing, healthcare and employment
(points 2, 4 and 6) and called for the overthrow of that same government
(point 10). But it nevertheless gave voice to a conclusion that was becoming
increasingly hard to avoid: that if no real relief from their troubles was
forthcoming, despite all the Head Starts and VISTAs a wealthy society
 could dream up, Black people would just have to set about organizing that
relief for themselves.
    The earliest Panther activities were dedicated to patrolling the police.
Taking advantage of what were then generous provisions in the California
state legal code for the open carrying of firearms, armed Panthers shadowed
the Oakland PD on their sorties through the ghetto, observing their
interactions with residents at close hand and ensuring that any arrests they
made remained strictly within the letter of the law.54
    This phase of activity culminated in a May 1967 protest on the steps of
the California state capitol building in Sacramento, during which Seale read
a statement decrying the proposed Mulford Act, “legislation aimed at
keeping the Black people disarmed and powerless at the very same time
that racist police agencies throughout the country are intensifying the terror,
brutality, murder and repression of Black people.”55 (In a front page story,
the Sacramento Bee duly reported this scrupulously legal demonstration as
the “invasion” of the capitol by an “armed Negro band.”56)
    Despite Seale’s efforts, the California Legislature swiftly passed the
Mulford Act—ironically enough, on an “urgency” provision driven by the
protest itself—and it was signed into law by Governor Ronald Reagan two
days later, putting a permanent end to the Panthers’ armed patrols in
California.
    By now, however, the Panthers’ inability to prevent the passage of the
Mulford Act almost seemed beside the point. The audacity of their tactics,
and the media attention they garnered, electrified Black radicals across
America. Wildcat groups calling themselves “Black Panthers” began to
spring up all over the country, just about anywhere there was a significant
Black population. Unwilling to countenance the reputational hazard this
presented—or perhaps more to the point, the dilution of their authority—in
spring 1968 the party leadership began officially chartering these chapters.
Local groups were required to swear allegiance to the central committee in
 Oakland, formally adhere to the Ten-Point Program and send anyone who
wished to become a branch officer to headquarters for a six-week course of
political education.
    The list of official chapters eventually grew to thirteen, with affiliated
organizations operating in at least sixty-one cities in twenty-six states and
the District of Columbia, vastly multiplying the party’s reach, influence and
ability to inspire.57
    But the Panthers’ increasingly high profile also shed the most
unwelcome kind of attention on Huey Newton personally. In the early hours
of October 28, 1967, while looking for a parking space on Seventh Street in
West Oakland, Newton was ordered to the curb by OPD officer John Frey.
Realizing immediately that the driver he had pulled over was none other
than “the great, great Huey P. Newton,” Frey ordered Newton out of the car
and proceeded to frisk him in a manner that Newton found “degrading,”
“disgusting” and humiliating.58
    The details of the altercation that followed remain murky still, despite
multiple trials, but what has never been in any doubt is that shots were
fired, wounding both Frey and Newton as well as a second OPD officer at
the scene; Frey, hit four times, died of his injuries.59 In September of the
next year, Newton was convicted of voluntary manslaughter for the killing
of Frey and was sentenced to two to fifteen years in the California Men’s
Colony at San Luis Obispo. He remained imprisoned until the overturning
of his conviction in May 1970, removing him from direct influence over the
party’s activities, but furnishing it with a “living martyr”—and, in “Free
Huey,” giving the new left of the period one of its most potent rallying
cries.60

Contesting the police violence Black people were exposed to on a daily
basis may have put the Panthers on the map, but it was far from the only
aspect of their challenge to white supremacy, and arguably not the most
 effective or consequential.61 That accolade belongs instead to a wide-
ranging set of community-based care efforts the Panthers devised from the
middle of 1969 on, designed to forestall “vulnerability to premature death”
in all its many forms. These were the famous “survival programs”: a
dizzying array of twenty or more distinct initiatives offered to the Black and
poor communities of the Bay Area free of charge and, at least in part,
eventually rolled out across BPP branches nationwide.
    The turn toward the survival programs originally stemmed from a sharp
internal dispute between the revolutionary strategies advocated by different
factions among the Panther leadership. On one side was Minister of
Information Eldridge Cleaver, famously a fiery proponent of the armed
struggle. This was undoubtedly in sync with the temper of the times, with
hard-left factions worldwide—the Weather Underground, the nascent
Baader-Meinhof, Italy’s Red Brigades, the Irish Republican Army and the
Japanese Red Army—committing themselves to insurrectionary violence.
But Newton took up the opposite position: against the overwhelming reality
of US power, he considered any embrace of the armed struggle a recipe for
revolutionary suicide.
    There was a very great deal of justice to Newton’s perspective. The
Panthers operated under the heaviest sort of government surveillance and
repression throughout their entire existence, at first involving local police
departments in the Bay Area but, as their notoriety grew, swiftly expanding
to include the entire federal law-enforcement apparatus. Their early
successes made them a central concern of the nationwide, covert and
thoroughly illegal effort the Federal Bureau of Investigation embarked upon
in August 1967, at the personal instruction of Director J. Edgar Hoover: the
“Black Nationalist Hate Groups” strand of the bureau’s longstanding
domestic Counter-intelligence Program, better known as COINTELPRO.62
    This was intended “to disrupt, discredit and destroy” not merely
upwellings of emergent Black consciousness in America but Black activists
 themselves, reputationally and bodily.63 It was brutally effective.
COINTELPRO’s direct effects extended to the outright murders of Panthers
Fred Hampton and Mark Clark by Chicago police in December 1969, but
almost as destructive was the bureau’s relentless whisper campaign of
poison-pen letters and ginned-up kompromat, and the internal fissures and
suspicions it gave rise to.64 Knowing what we now do about
COINTELPRO, and the lengths Hoover was willing to go to in order to
destroy even the mildest advocacy for Black self-determination, there can
be little doubt that any party committing itself to the strategy advocated by
Cleaver would in one way or another have been extinguished to its last
member.
    Newton was no less a revolutionary than Cleaver, but he did recognize
something that Cleaver evidently could not: that, in the Marxist-Leninist
terms the party leadership was always fond of using, the historical
conditions of Black America at the end of the 1960s were not yet ripe for
the seizure of power from the oppressor. “[A]s revolutionaries we must
recognize the difference between what the people can do and what they will
do,” he explained. “They can do anything they desire to do, but they will
only take those actions which are consistent with their level of
consciousness and their understanding of the situation.”65
    And what prevented poor Black Americans from developing a
revolutionary perspective, in Newton’s analysis, was the abjection and
violence of the conditions they contended with in daily life. Anyone
interested in seeing them claim their due role as the subjects of history
would therefore have to sustain them in body and mind, until they had
achieved a level of consciousness at which revolution would appear
organically and of its own accord. This was the genesis of Free Breakfast
for Children, the People’s Free Food Program and all the many other ways
in which the Panthers proposed to care for the people. “All these programs
satisfy the deep needs of the community but they are not solutions to our
 problems. That is why we call them survival programs, meaning survival
pending revolution.”66
    Cleaver, for his part, had dismissed the notion of working toward the
revolution by caring for the people as “sissy.”67 However pungently
expressed his feelings may have been, though, they became moot in the fall
of 1968, when he chose exile in Algeria over the prospect of returning to
prison. With Cleaver out of the frame and Newton still behind bars, Seale,
“a staunch advocate of community programs,” assumed responsibility for
setting the party’s agenda.68 Under his leadership, emphasis shifted
decisively toward the survival programs, where it would remain for the
balance of the party’s time as an effective political organization.69
    After several months of planning and recruitment, the first Free
Breakfast for School Children program opened in January 1969 at St.
Augustine’s Episcopal Church in West Oakland.70 It was an immediate
success and swiftly led to the formulation of other care initiatives along still
more ambitious lines. By 1972, the party was offering an extensive list of
survival programs, including
  the People’s Free Food Program, the Intercommunal Youth Institute, the Legal Aid
  Educational Program, the Free Busing to Prisons Program, the Free Commissary for Prisoners
  Program, the People’s Free Shoe Program, the People’s Free Clothing Program, the People’s
  Free Medical Research Health Clinic, the People’s Sickle Cell Anemia Research Foundation,
  the People’s Free Ambulance Service, the People’s Free Dental Program, the People’s Free
  Optometry Program, the People’s Free Plumbing and Maintenance Program, and the
  Community Cooperative Housing Program.71

Some of these were clearly “programs” in name only, consisting in a service
that was only ever offered on a very limited basis, but others were
maintained for years and ultimately went on to impact the lives of
millions.72 In the light of Gilmore’s definition, especially, we can see these
programs more clearly for what they were: lifesystems in a world designed
to produce death.
    At the level of daily sustenance, the People’s Free Food Program
furnished recipients with “an ongoing supply of food to meet their daily
needs.”73 Each participant in the program was furnished with standardized
bags of staple items such as “eggs, canned fruits and vegetables, chickens,
milk, potatoes, rice, bread [and] cereal,” with a “minimum of a week’s
supply of food” included in every bag. Whenever conditions permitted, this
was extended to “[p]eriodic mass distributions of food to reach a larger
segment of the community than can be serviced from the ongoing supply.”
What people got through the Free Food Program was both more generous
and more closely tailored to their expressed desires than any package of
support any government program of the time was able to offer.
   The People’s Free Medical Clinics were dedicated to longer-term
maintenance of the body, addressing the demand for “completely free
healthcare for all Black and oppressed people” made in Point 6 of the Ten-
Point Program.74 Eventually extending to thirteen cities, these were often
rudimentary affairs, set up in trailers or abandoned storefronts; in Boston,
the clinic ran on electricity tapped illegally from a nearby lamppost.75 But
most were nevertheless able to offer a respectable range of primary-care
services, from basic wound care and blood-pressure testing to nutrition
advice, childhood vaccinations and prenatal screenings.76 Equally
important, the care offered at the clinics upheld the dignity of the people
they served, in ways that contrasted sharply with the alternatingly
neglectful, dismissive, patronizing or authoritarian treatment poor Black
patients especially were used to receiving from public hospitals.
   The clinics placed a strong emphasis on preventative healthcare, doing
everything they could to address the totality of the circumstances that
produced sickness. This attention to the underlying social and structural
causes of disease required an intimate (and labor-intensive) degree of
involvement in patients’ lives, in a way that would be unthinkable for
mainstream medicine, then or now. “We’d go in, and there would be an
 elderly person in some apartment who needed, really needed, to see a
doctor but they were afraid to go to the doctor,” recalls Harlem Panther
Cleo Silvers.77 “[In] almost every apartment, there was somebody who had
some kind of illness that needed to be treated right away. But the only way
to find that out was to go and do the door-to-door work and find out what’s
really going on in the community.” This unusually direct access also gave
clinic workers the opportunity to offer their patients advice about housing
issues or legal services that were available to them.78
    Where the People’s Free Medical Clinics corresponded with Point 6 of
the Ten-Point Program, the Intercommunal Youth Institute spoke to the
demand for free education expressed in Point 5. Later renamed the Oakland
Community Learning Center, this was the longest-lasting of all the Panther
survival programs, and it served as the model for the “liberation schools”
the party established elsewhere.79 Set up to offer education for the children
of BPP members, the Learning Center indicted the broader failures of a
public school system “which has systematically produced individuals
totally incapable of thinking in an analytical way.”80
    The Panthers therefore worked with national education experts to
develop a curriculum for the Learning Center that was based on the
acquisition and application of critical-thinking skills, and developing these
skills among its students was always its primary mission. But the center
also served as something of a nexus between the various survival programs.
Director Ericka Huggins explained how families benefited from these
synergies:
  A number of new programs have developed just from having the school here. We find out, for
  instance, that a mother needs certain things, otherwise she won’t be able to get her child to
  school. So, we have a welfare rights referral system. There’s a senior citizens program
  functioning here. Quite often, the grandparents and older guardians of the children are
  involved.81

Again, as with the clinics, there is a holism to this approach, founded in the
recognition that no child who is hungry, sick or compelled to take on the
 burden of caring for the others in their household will ever be likely to
reach their full intellectual potential.
   Though never developed anywhere as extensively as they were in
Oakland, for a time the party attempted to roll out the survival programs
across Panther chapters nationwide. Soon after chartering them in 1968, the
party’s central committee ordered the regional chapters to commit
themselves to the policy, “including, minimally, a Free Breakfast for
Children program”; in April 1970, each chapter was additionally required to
launch a People’s Free Medical Clinic of its own.82 Some went further still:
the Winston-Salem branch operated a highly successful ambulance service,
while the Dallas chapter offered “pest control programs, citizen police
patrols, a liberation school, and a tenant information center.”83
   Whatever the hopes and energies invested in these local initiatives,
however, they were not destined to be sustained for very long. In 1971,
Panther leadership made the decision to consolidate around their base. The
Panther chapters in major cities like Boston, Detroit, Houston, Philadelphia
and Seattle were shut down, alongside all of the smaller ones.84 The most
dedicated volunteers at each branch were relocated to headquarters in
Oakland. The party’s days as a national organizing force were over.

With the shuttering of the Oakland Community Learning Center in 1982,
one of the most extensive experiments with care-driven organizing ever
attempted came to its formal conclusion. The Black Panther survival
programs were administered fitfully, over a brief existence. They covered a
mere handful of cities and directly involved, at most, hundreds of thousands
of people in a nation of 200 million. And even so, the Panthers had to draw
on much of the Black revolutionary population of North America to do it.
But for all that, they were so audacious in their conception that we are still
reading, thinking and talking about them half a century later.
     The performance of these programs can’t really be evaluated
independently of COINTELPRO, because there never was any
“independently of COINTELPRO.” The survival programs, like every other
initiative undertaken by the Black Panther Party throughout its existence,
suffered tremendously from the FBI’s decades-long campaign of
harassment, rumor-mongering, subversion, defamation and sabotage, which
has to be regarded as the central factor conditioning their success or failure.
But let’s see if we can nevertheless draw out some insights about what did
and did not work about the Panther effort to “serve the people, body and
soul.”
    The survival programs were undermined by a degree of ambition that,
while no doubt justified by need, nevertheless amounted to a perilous
overreach. There was, if not quite a one-to-one correlation, then certainly a
broad correspondence between the Johnson-era War on Poverty programs
and their BPP equivalents. But without anything like the resources of the
state to draw upon, it’s hard to see how the latter ever could have done
anything but fall short of the scale, comprehensiveness and universality
required by any real program of community care.
    This was clear at the time, as well. No less a sage than Bob Avakian, not
yet chairman of the Revolutionary Communist Party, USA, could observe
in 1972 that Breakfast for Children was “a rather ridiculous attempt to
apply literally the standard Maoist ‘serve the people’ strategy … the notion
that the Panthers could compete with the Welfare Department or the Baptist
Church in feeding the ghetto poor is simply ludicrous.”85
    Avakian certainly had his own, self-serving reasons for talking the
Panthers down, but he wasn’t wrong to question how, or whether, the
programs could be sustained. Over the party’s history, the net monthly
income of $40,000 generated by sales of its newspaper The Black Panther
represented by far its largest single source of revenue.86 But the survival
programs were also substantially funded by the local Black business
 community, with contributions coming in the form of both cash payments
and donations in kind, and this was not always purely out of the goodness
of anyone’s heart.
    Panther leadership had announced early on their intention to “support the
businesses that supported their survival programs and … criticize and
mobilize against the businesses that did not,” and there was little ambiguity
in anyone’s mind about what this “mobilization” might entail:87 Panthers
had firebombed a North Oakland store that had donated only one dozen
eggs for the Breakfast Program rather than the requested six dozen.88
Newton’s spin on such tactics was that “Black capitalism will be
transformed from a relationship of exploitation of the community to a
relationship of service to the community, which will contribute to the
survival of everyone.”89 But he had earlier spoken, provocatively, of
“opening clothing and shoe factories to provide for more of the needs of the
community.”90 We are left to wonder what might have happened had the
Panthers developed their own organic production capability—setting up
affiliated cooperatives to furnish jobs and training, as well as inputs for the
survival programs, rather than depending upon a wary business community
for unreliable infusions of resource.
    And, of course, not one of the programs would have been possible
absent massive drafts of unpaid administrative, organizational and care
labor—labor, as the testimony of Huggins, Elaine Brown and others who
were there at the time makes painfully clear, that was almost exclusively
undertaken by the women of the party.91 Even in the ranks of an
organization nominally dedicated to the total liberation of Black Americans,
Panther women were second-class citizens and struggled to be
acknowledged for their contributions to the cause. As Brown memorably
put it, they had “to fight for the right to fight for freedom.”92 This, too, was
obvious at the time, for anyone with the eyes to see it, but it’s only with the
 passing years that most accounts have reckoned with just how badly the
party’s efforts were stunted by its own sexism.
    That the personal prejudices, failings and limitations of all-too-human
leaders could so deform the party’s potential can be directly traced to its
top-down organization. In both their centralization of authority and their
reliance on charismatic leadership, the Panthers left themselves vulnerable
to a decapitation attack, which is of course exactly what happened. Even
beyond this, though, it’s startling to realize just how antiquated the party’s
whole architecture now seems to those of us more accustomed to leaderless,
self-organized movements. It’s unfair to ask that the survival programs
anticipate organizational strategies that wouldn’t arise for a good twenty
years after their eclipse, but any such thing would have put real flesh on the
bones of the Panther slogan “All Power to the People.”
    Perhaps the biggest question hovering over the survival programs,
though, concerns what they were ever really intended to achieve. One
common line of thought suggests that the Panthers never meant for them to
bear the full weight of need, either in West Oakland or anywhere else, but
rather intended them primarily as a way to show up the state and shame it
into reparative action. This interpretation was bolstered by Bobby Seale
himself, who, in enumerating the benefits of the Breakfast for Children
program, argued that it “could highlight the government’s failure to provide
such a crucial social service, as well as add another dimension to [the
Panthers’] public image and potentially broaden their base of support.”93
And indeed, the programs were hugely successful in attracting support from
elements of the Black community that had previously been indifferent or
hostile.94
    But what Seale neglects to mention here is that Breakfast for Children
also fed hungry kids. The People’s Free Medical Clinics screened patients at
risk for hypertension and sickle-cell disease. The Free Busing to Prisons
Program made visits with incarcerated relatives possible. And if these
 programs and the others directly sustained people against a hostile world,
their downstream consequences unfolded with all sorts of time signatures,
and in ways that could not easily have been foreseen.
    The free clinics in particular resonated widely with other communities
under pressure. Their insistence that medicine serve the people directly
inspired a succession of actions undertaken in New York City by the
revolutionary Puerto Rican advocacy group the Young Lords, notably their
hijacking of a city X-ray van so they could offer tuberculosis screenings on
the block, and later the audacious 1970 seizure of Lincoln Hospital in the
South Bronx.95 (The demands made as a condition of ending the occupation
—for “door-to-door preventative medicine programs, [the right] to choose
the doctor you want to have, to have free daycare centers in all hospital
facilities, [and] to receive free healthcare”—were eventually written into
the New York State Patients’ Bill of Rights.96)
    The ripples set up by BPP education programs were felt at a still further
remove in space and time: Common Ground co-founder scott crow notes,
for example, that he was first exposed to notions of egalitarianism and
cross-racial solidarity in the Panther-organized East Dallas preschool he
attended as a small child.97 So while most accounts of the period conclude
bluntly that the Panthers’ arc across history ended in failure, I wonder if
anyone who owes the sustenance of body and soul through those years to
one or another of their survival programs would be inclined to judge them
quite so harshly.
    The Black Panthers are today fondly remembered for their impossible,
insurgent glamor, as it has come down to us through a series of iconic
images. These come readily to mind: the armed Black Panther Party for
Self-Defense of its earliest days, gathered in righteous defiance on the
Sacramento capitol steps. A long rank of Panthers in formation at a 1968
Free Huey rally in West Oakland’s De Fremery Park, immaculately turned
out in their uniform of black beret, black leather jacket, black turtleneck. Or
 the freed Huey himself, restored to his peacock throne, spear in one hand
and bolt-action shotgun in the other. There is a truth depicted in these
images, and it certainly comported with the party’s idea of itself: Black
people as agents of history, dazzlingly unbowed in the face of a state power
that aimed to sever and destroy them using all the means at its disposal.
    But if America itself has always constituted the permanent emergency in
Black lives, the enduring need is for a force that is able to counter all of the
ways in which bodies are made vulnerable to premature death, and
ultimately that has to do with the extension of care. Of all the facets it
presented to the world, then, the party that aimed to “serve the people, body
and soul” through the survival programs strikes me as the most truly
revolutionary. It proposed that the most radical strategy anyone can adopt is
the provision of loving care to people their own society would prefer to see
erased—and still more so, enlisting them in the effort of extending that care
for one another over the long haul.
    This is why my favorite picture of the Black Panthers is one in which
there are no leather jackets and no berets, no sunglasses and no rifles, in
fact no uniformed party members at all—just two Black women in floral-
print dresses, one middle-aged, the other heavier-set and a few years older,
sitting on a bench before a drab cinder-block wall.98 At their feet are two
kraft-paper grocery bags stuffed to overflowing with bread loaves and
packaged food, boldly screened with the words PEOPLE’S FREE FOOD
PROGRAM and the party’s pouncing-cat emblem. The older woman
clutches a copy of The Black Panther for Saturday, August 12, 1972, the
headline of which reads: “Survival Pending Liberation.”
    It looks like a hot day in the picture. It looks like a time and place in
which people understood that their struggles were linked with the struggles
of others. (I wonder how many people, on seeing this image, notice the
United Farm Workers button one of the women is wearing.) Most of all,
though, what you see in this picture is what it looks like when people refuse
 to be defeated—when they endure because they organized themselves to
endure, despite everything that was arrayed against them.
                                       *
In their respective ways, Common Ground, Occupy Sandy and the Black
Panther survival programs all managed to address shortfalls of care, and
there is no question that in doing so each of them saved lives. But as we’ve
seen, there were nevertheless real limits to what each was able to achieve. If
we’re interested in imagining a structure that is able to redress lapses in care
that afflict an entire society, and that can manage to subsist outside the state
for years on end, we’ll have to look further afield for inspiration.
    Ideally, what we’re looking for is a way of organizing the self-provision
of care that combines the ambition and scope of the Panther survival
programs with the bottom-up, self-organizing qualities of latter-day mutual
aid efforts. It would consciously be organized as a network, able to facilitate
the sharing of tactics and practices between nodes, without overriding their
ability to respond to local conditions (or their respect for local knowledge).
By operating outside conventional institutional structures, further, this care
effort would be free to innovate with respect to approach, method and
process—to do things in ways that no profit-driven enterprise or entity of
state would ever be likely to attempt, let alone adopt.
    As it happens, there is a real-world example of a system of mutual care
with just such qualities. It never faced anything like the same pitch of
opposition that did so much to undermine the success of the Panther
programs. But it did manage to see millions through a virtually complete
collapse of social provision in their society, and to do so in a way that
enhanced their capacity, their autonomy and their dignity. I am speaking of
the “solidarity networks” of post-2011 Greece.

On paper, there’s a clean distinction to be made between organized
abandonment and outright state failure. But the conditions experienced by
 the Greek people in the years since the global financial shock of 2008
suggest that there may not always be a great deal of practical difference
between the two.
    In Greece, the economic downturn was both more severe and more
protracted than elsewhere, eventually so total in its effects and
consequences that Greeks refer to it simply as I Krísi, “The Crisis.” In some
sense, the roots of the Crisis can be traced to Greece’s original adoption of
the euro in 2001, which geared the national economy directly to a far larger
European one that worked in a different way and responded to a different
set of imperatives—one that was, furthermore, overseen in the main by
French and German administrators not particularly well disposed toward
their neighbor to the southeast.99
    A balance of trade deficit opened up between Greece and the higher-
productivity economies elsewhere in the Eurozone, as Greece spent more
heavily on imported goods than it took in through overseas sales of its own;
debt began to accumulate. (Every perceived sign of Greek fiscal liberality
in this period, however minor, was accompanied by dark mutterings that
“Germany had not signed up to the euro ‘in order that it could pay for
Greece’s debts.’ ”100) It was this imbalance that brought about disaster
when global recession overtook the Eurozone: the Greek government found
itself pinned beneath a mountain of obligation it had no ready way of
servicing, given the scale of the domestic economy and the tax revenue it
was able to raise.
    To finance repayment of its sovereign debt, Greece was between 2010
and 2012 forced to borrow 240 billion euros from the International
Monetary Fund, the European Commission and the European Central Bank,
collectively known as the “Troika.” But inevitably, there were strings
attached: in return for their largesse, the Troika compelled the Greek
government to adopt successive “economic adjustment programs” imposing
a punitive regime of austerity, in which public spending was pared back to a
 minimum. Together, the measures constituted “the most extreme package of
spending cuts, tax rises and privatizations ever faced by any developed
country”—nothing less than a “liquidation of the public welfare system.”101
    This was a storm entirely of human making. The cuts were felt in every
sphere of Greek life, resulting in unprecedented levels of unemployment,
poverty and social deprivation.102 But they landed with particular force on
the health sector. The two memoranda of understanding that the Greek
government signed with the Troika contained provisions explicitly intended
to reduce healthcare capacity, via the “rationalization” of state provision.103
These measures included drastic cuts in hospital budgets, a drawdown of
the national healthcare workforce and a reduction in salaries and benefits
paid to the healthcare workers who remained in employment.104 As a direct
result, at least 2.5 million people, almost a third of the population, found
themselves excluded from access to public healthcare.105
    The consequences of this unprecedented withdrawal from public
provision were as swift and awful as they were unsurprising: plummeting
measures across just about every way we have of assessing health.106 The
ramifications included unchecked outbreaks of West Nile virus, H1N1
influenza and malaria; sharply higher rates of HIV infection among
injecting drug users; and a spike in the bleakest of all indicators: the number
of suicides recorded in Greece rose by more than 60 percent between the
pre-Crisis year of 2007 and 2013.107 The effects of austerity were stark
enough to be manifested in the figures for all-cause mortality, with a study
in the gold-standard Lancet medical journal finding that in 2011–12, some
2,200 excess deaths were most likely attributable to the impact of
“economic adjustment” measures.108
    Greeks were by no means inclined to remain passive in the teeth of the
Crisis or to bear its insults in silence. Those who had been compelled to
watch helplessly as the Troika and its partners in the Greek government laid
 waste to their dreams called themselves Aganaktisménoi—in Greece as in
Spain, the Indignant.
   On May 25, 2011, in response to the passage of yet another tranche of
austerity legislation, their indignation boiled over. In Athens, tens of
thousands of them occupied the central Syntagma Square, just opposite the
Greek parliament building, while parallel demonstrations took place in
Thessaloniki, Patras, Larissa and the country’s other major population
centers.109 Though immediately (and at various times thereafter) subject to
vicious repression on the part of the police, the occupation of Syntagma
went on for weeks, until the tents were finally cleared from the square on
July 30; occupations in Thessaloniki and Heraklion lasted into early
August.110
   At some point during these weeks, a profound transformation of affect
and perception took place among a fraction of the Aganaktisménoi gathered
in Syntagma; they moved from protesting the circumstances of their
collective immiseration to doing something about them.111 The first
rhizomatic tendrils of what would become a nationwide solidarity network
grew outward from facilities organized by the Syntagma Square assembly
to support the immediate needs of those participating in the occupation.112
As at Zuccotti Park just a few months later, this infrastructure encompassed
a collective kitchen, a first-aid clinic/“informal hospital,” and a
“neighborhood organization center” set up to coordinate actions taking
place elsewhere in the city.
   The self-organized, grassroots institutions that would play such a pivotal
role in sustaining Greek life over the decade to come were already present
in embryo in each of these impromptu provisions. But among them, it was
the clinic that held the most radical implications for the future. Conceived
as a “solidarity project” from the start, according to the architect and
activist Elisavet Hasa, it pursued “an alternative mode of care” founded in a
new relationship between the providers and seekers of medical services.
 What originated as a matter of immediate practical necessity, amid the
chaos and tear gas of the protest camp, developed into an expansive vision
of “autonomous self-organized care practices” and eventually a far-flung
constellation of sites at which that vision was realized.
    For all its humble beginnings, this was by no means a marginal effort, in
either scale or ambition: by 2020, there were more than thirty social clinics
operating across Greece, providing “primary and specialized care for
roughly 10 percent of the population and a rising number of migrants.”113
With so many denied access to the national health system, this network
played a critical role in maintaining the physical and psychological health
of millions living through one of the most sustained contractions in
peacetime living standards ever experienced by a population of the global
North.

What requires some explanation is how the solidarity network came to
spread beyond Syntagma and the parallel occupations of public space in the
other cities of Greece, and become woven into the rhythms and habits of
everyday life. There were two facets to this, one social and the other
physical.
    The social aspect is easy enough to account for. Some 29 percent of the
Greek population reported themselves to have participated in anti-austerity
protests in one way or another.114 Having met their own neighbors in the
course of the protests—some of them, seemingly, for the very first time—
people tended to maintain these connections as the squares were emptied
and they returned to the life of their communities.115 What they brought
back with them wasn’t merely a new way of doing politics, complete with
its own characteristic modes of organizing and collective decision-making.
It was also the sense that everyone in the streets around them was struggling
with the same punitive conditions they were.
     From the latter half of 2011 onward, a panoply of popular initiatives
expressing this newfound sense of solidarity appeared in Greece, each of
them organized and managed by assembly, in the way the protest camps had
been. Running alongside them were the Den Pliróno (“I Do Not Pay”)
movement, whose guerrilla electricians reconnected power for thousands
whose accounts had been shut down for nonpayment (and, from time to
time, disabled the electronic payment gates in the Athens Metro), and
several hundred “without middlemen” markets, where produce that had
been sourced directly from growers was sold at cost.116
    For the most part, these were simple, practical measures, directly
oriented toward the basic Maslovian needs of everyday life. But other
initiatives emerged to address the terrible shortfall in healthcare capacity
that had opened up—and here, especially, the expression of solidarity took a
distinct spatial form. The concentration and “rationalization” of state
services stipulated by the Troika had an immediate, tangible effect on Greek
cities: “Portions of the building stock that housed welfare services were
abandoned … hospitals and health clinics were merged, medical centers,
schools, and daycare centers were closed.”117
    Then the wave of abandonment settled onto private spaces.
Neighborhoods came to be pocked with vacancies and sudden voids—each
a place where some commercial storefront or residential premises had been
forsaken by its owners, in a curious echo of the nation’s own throes, when
whatever debt had been taken on in its acquisition could no longer be
serviced.
    This evacuation clearly presented communities with a challenge, but it
also offered them the means of addressing it. In neighborhoods across
Greece, activists set about occupying abandoned public, commercial or
domestic premises and reworking them into clinics and pharmacies. (Other
properties weren’t so much occupied as freely offered to local solidarity
 initiatives by their owners, on “the understanding that the initiatives would
cover property taxes and utility bills” or undertake needed repairs.118)
    Even in the years before the Crisis, this kind of adaptability had been a
hallmark of activist spatial practice in Greece, as when empty apartments in
Athens’s Alexandras Prosfygika housing complex were converted into a
free guesthouse for the visiting families of cancer patients being treated at
the adjacent Agios Savvas hospital.119 Now just about anywhere that could
conceivably be used as a site for the delivery of care actually was pressed
into service in this way—private residences, the ground-floor storefront
spaces of the low polykatoikía apartment blocks ubiquitous to Greek cities,
even the grounds of a tile factory that had been taken over by its own
workers after being abandoned by the owners.120 All were reworked room
by room, in a politicized process of adaptive reuse that didn’t merely
transform the use of space, but also its meaning: “living rooms [were]
converted into administrative areas or waiting rooms, and bedrooms
repurposed as medical examination rooms or storage spaces for
pharmaceuticals.”121
    In neighborhoods especially hard-hit by the Crisis, where little that could
pass the test of commercial viability survived, a mesh of mutually
reinforcing solidarity efforts emerged alongside the clinics. The effect was
to create an archipelago of spaces in which refuge was possible, burrowed
termite-like through the fabric of the uncaring city. A different set of values
held sway in these spaces, articulated in terms virtually identical to those
espoused by Common Ground and Occupy Sandy: in crossing the threshold
of any among them, you entered a zone in which “charity” was a dirty
word, and the fact of someone’s need was more important than their ability
to pay or the credentials of citizenship they might hold.
    In all cases, these were “small local operations, closely intertwined with
the life of the neighborhoods in which they were situated.”122 Perhaps
unsurprisingly, given everything we know about the gender dynamics of
 care, women were disproportionately represented in them, comprising more
than 60 percent of volunteers.123 But they reinforced one another,
multiplying the capacity of the solidarity network as a whole: clinic and
pharmacy workers were able to draw upon free “social kitchens,” while the
ability to access comparably free healthcare supported a wide range of
autonomous collectives in other domains, from legal-support clinics to
small-scale urban farms.124
    There was a circularity or wholeness to these interactions; in particular,
the value to other institutions of a place where anyone who needed to might
eat, drink, shower and restore themselves at no cost clearly cannot be
overstated. (The economics of such projects were further bolstered when
members of parliament representing the radical-left party SYRIZA agreed
to tithe 20 percent of their salaries to the support of solidarity initiatives.125)
    In order to share resources, extend their capacities and generally amplify
their presence in Greek life, the solidarity clinics forged a nationwide
network. At an assembly in Athens in November 2013, they adopted a
shared “10-Point Charter of Constitution of Solidarity Clinics and
Pharmacies”—those ten points, of course, unavoidably reminiscent of the
Black Panthers’. What this charter committed the clinics to wasn’t simply
an attempt to replace the healthcare services that had evaporated in the
course of the Crisis on a like-for-like basis, though that might have been
welcome enough given the circumstances. It was a reframing of the entire
relationship between the person seeking medical care, the provider of that
care and the society that contained both. And this in turn required a
wholesale deinstitutionalization of the practice of medicine.

No one could accuse the solidarity clinics of lacking ambition. What they
aimed to do was nothing less than supplant “the biomedical, hierarchical,
and profit-centered model of modern medicine with horizontal and
 noncommodified modes of care.”126 As anything so complex would have
to, this project proceeded on multiple fronts.
    The fundamental and in many ways defining quality of solidarity care
was, of course, that it was offered for free. The question of one’s ability to
pay ceased to be a gating mechanism, or a way of allocating medical or
pharmaceutical resources. No one using the clinics received a higher
standard of care because they could afford to pay more for it.
    Deinstitutionalization also meant that the sites of care had to be purged
of any visible aura of authority. This turned out to be not so very difficult,
when the examining room of your local clinic might have been a sales
office or a preteen’s bedroom six months previously. To be sure, this was
making a virtue of a necessity, but it was a virtue nonetheless: it meant that
clinical appointments took place in human-scale settings that had been
divested of any power to overawe or intimidate.
    This egalitarian sensibility extended to the way that people were greeted
when some malady or upset first drove them to seek medical attention. In
the solidarity clinics, the person our healthcare systems would ordinarily
call a “patient” was instead referred to as an “incomer,” the Greek word for
patient conveying unavoidable “connotations of feebleness.”127 A new
reception protocol was developed, to “greet incomers in empowering
ways,” and it sounds an awful lot like intake for Occupy Sandy, right down
to the attempt to help incomers “internalize the values of the clinic.”
    At the Workers’ Medical Center in Thessaloniki, for example, care
seekers were seen by a three-person team, in a conversation no more
hurried than it had to be. Their approach stands in the sharpest contrast with
the procession of rushed, mechanical fifteen-minute slots that so often
constitutes general practice elsewhere.
  Every new incomer meets with three health practitioners at the same time on their first ninety-
  minute visit: a general physician, a psychotherapist, and a social worker … There is a health
  card that the social worker or third member fills out, asking questions to which the patient can
  answer or not … The health card covers the mental, emotional, and physical health, but also
   is used to note the conditions of the family, home, work, food, sleep patterns, and family
  relations.128

All of these were considered salient to the question of overall health.
    The American activist Cassie Thornton, who spent time at the Social
Solidarity Health Center in Thessaloniki in 2017, later incorporated its
methods into her own strikingly innovative proposal for guerrilla
healthcare.129 She explains that the point of this inquiry is “to make a
hologram of every person: a three-dimensional image of health as clear as
possible” to both the clinical team and the care seeker themselves. This
mirrors Occupy Sandy practice, as well as what I was taught at the Berkeley
Free Clinic, when I trained and worked as a primary-care medic at the
beginning of the 1990s. Reframing this first encounter as a collective
inquiry, conducted among peers and invoking the gifts of everyone present,
goes a very long way toward subverting the “savior/saved” dynamic
endemic to modern Western medicine—and can also bring to the surface
information critical to a successful resolution of the health crisis, which a
more typical examination might have missed entirely.130
    The clinics differed from traditional medical institutions in whom they
extended care to, as well. The solidarity network served everyone denied
institutional care in Crisis Greece—not merely those excluded by virtue of
their inability to pay but also, in a time of desperate human flow, the
undocumented newcomers that made up a growing part of the population.
The Greek national health system had always required a social security
number of those wishing to book appointments or fill prescriptions, limiting
anyone who lacked one to whatever care they could manage to cobble
together from repeated visits to the local hospital emergency room.131 With
undocumented immigrants and refugees in Greece numbering somewhere
between 600,000 and 1 million, though, this failure of inclusion was
staggering, as irresponsible as it was unconscionable.132 The solidarity
clinics stepped into this breach, asking neither proof of citizenship nor any
 other form of credential from care seekers before offering them
treatment.133
   The final aspect of deinstitutionalization was possibly the deepest of all.
It was that care seekers were invited to participate directly in the
management of the clinics themselves. Each of the clinics in the solidarity
network was managed by an assembly that coordinated all aspects of its
operation, from fundraising and the procurement of necessary supplies to
counseling of the clinic staff itself.134 Anyone who came to a clinic to be
treated for their ailments was encouraged to join the assembly and actively
participate in its deliberations. Beyond a general commitment to directly
democratic forms of governance, this turned on the profound and enduring
insight that “the incomer’s active participation in their own health and
community is itself a central form of their health treatment.”135 Here scott
crow’s description of Common Ground’s understanding of the people they
worked with as “active participants in the struggle to make their lives
better” was echoed virtually word for word, inscribed in a practice that
defines mutual care about as well as anything could.
   This, then, was deinstitutionalized care, responsive to the needs of a
population laboring under all the physical and psychic assaults of Crisis. All
of the practical knowledge involved in setting up a clinic that worked this
way, and running it on an ongoing basis, was shared through the solidarity
network: how they went about securing the resources they needed, what
kind of maintenance was required by their more delicate equipment, when
and under what conditions they pursued alliances with other local actors,
even how they physically laid out their spaces.136
   Each clinic maintained an archive that went into an impressive amount
of detail regarding its day-to-day operations, consisting of “bills and cost
templates, shift schedules and medicine catalogs, inventories of equipment
and sketches of spatial layouts, architectural drawings of the property and
photographs,” and these, too, were distributed widely. Such protocols were
 surely more complicated than, say, instructions for the assembly of flatpack
furniture, but they required nothing a motivated community couldn’t scrape
together from the resources at hand. It was as if the source code underlying
the whole solidarity-clinic project had been uploaded for sharing and could,
therefore, be reproduced locally by every community in Greece that felt the
need of one.
    Formerly middle-class people seeking care in such settings were most
likely reassured to learn that in some ways these clinics worked exactly like
the state or private medical practices they’d relied upon previously. Anyone
issued a prescription by a solidarity pharmacy, for example, could have it
filled locally, or by any other pharmacy within the network.137 But such
markers of familiarity were largely cosmetic and served to camouflage the
far deeper transformation that had taken place. In the midst of the worst
contraction of possibility any of them had ever known, the solidarity
network offered Greeks an entirely new model of care. In Federici’s terms,
solidarity clinics weren’t merely places where people resisted their
dehumanization. They were also classrooms, or better yet laboratories, in
which together they might learn how to reconstruct the world.
                                      *
An objection that is very often raised by skeptics of deinstitutionalization is
that there are shortfalls in what any facility set up along these lines can do.
And to a degree, there is some justice to this: by and large, the solidarity
clinics did not actually have the capacity to offer cancer care, or advanced
trauma medicine, or diagnostics of any sort involving the latest scanners.
Anyone requiring that kind of intervention, whether they’d been in a car
crash or needed an MRI, would still need to visit a conventional hospital. In
such cases, providers in the solidarity network were often able to lean on
connections with sympathetic public and private hospitals and arrange
referrals for free treatment.138
     But none of this should be taken to imply that the clinics were incapable
of delivering healthcare. Because, just as the Black Panthers found (and I
can confirm, out of my own few years at the Berkeley clinic), the great
majority of people walking through the door of such a facility don’t require
anything so elaborate as acute trauma care. They may well be suffering
from a relatively minor injury or infection of one sort or another, but mostly
they are worried. It may even be the case that what nominally brings them
to the clinic is not the situation in their life they really want and need to talk
about. In most such cases the patient—the incomer, the seeker of care—is
very well served by the things an autonomous clinic actually does best:
listening to them, demonstrating that someone cares and giving them advice
about over-the-counter medications or simple, low-cost treatments they
might reasonably undertake at home. None of these measures requires
elaborate or expensive infrastructure, but they bear disproportionately on
“patient outcomes.”
    And this extends past the time of the visit. Our health is very greatly
determined by factors that are only ever, at best, under our partial control,
including where we live, what we can afford to eat, how we earn a living
and who we spend most of our time with. What distinguishes radical
healthcare providers from their mainstream peers is their understanding that
these aspects of our existence cannot be grasped, let alone treated, in
isolation from one another. The ailments of the body are connected to those
of the society that body moves through.
    A suggestion to “eat more leafy greens,” for example, is easy enough to
accommodate for someone used to doing their grocery shopping at a high-
end market. But it’s all-but-worthless advice to anyone who lives in what
nutritionists call a “food desert,” where the only affordable options they
might have access to are fast-food chains, convenience stores or
ultraprocessed vending-machine snacks. And, of course, it’s a stinging slap
in the face to anyone compelled to make their home in a refugee camp and
 feed themselves on whatever is served to them. This is something the Greek
solidarity clinics dealt with by maintaining close links with a range of
small-scale, democratically managed urban farms, “without middleman”
farmers’ markets and fishing cooperatives. The care they offered was
integrated, in other words, and it responded to the structural constraints on
health in a way our own institutionalized systems evidently remain unable
to, even in conditions as yet unbound by crisis. Why, then, has their model
of care not spread everywhere?

CareNotes, the collective editors of an insightful book on the Greek
experience called For Health Autonomy, note a widespread perception that
the solidarity clinics were merely “temporary materializations [organized]
by and for activists,” destined to fade away once the state had recovered its
senses and returned to the universal provision of care.139 This would
certainly seem to dovetail with what one regional solidarity-clinic
coordination group had in 2015 described as its “single aim”: “to cease to
exist, to be no longer needed, to have the state provide each and every one
with the access to the fully operational national healthcare system.”140 And
it was what actually seemed to be in the offing when the SYRIZA-funded
Solidarity for All network announced that it was creating a register of
clinics and allied efforts in preparation for folding them into a coordinated
national effort once the party had assumed power.
    But from the perspective of other activists, this was a blatant land grab:
an attempt to co-opt the energy of their movement, drain it of its
revolutionary content and reassert the normalcy of business as usual under a
shallow mask of left authenticity. Their hostility was implacable—not
merely to the Solidarity for All registration effort, but all other forms of
normalization, including several cases where an originally self-organized
clinic was taken under the auspices of a sympathetic local government.
 (Indeed, initiatives that had voted in assembly to accept municipalization in
this way were compelled to leave the solidarity network.)
    These tensions came to a head when a euphoric SYRIZA prevailed in the
national elections of January 2015, and what had been internecine
squabbles among tendencies of the activist left were overnight transformed
into questions of official government policy. The boundaries between
SYRIZA and the solidarity movement had always been somewhat blurred,
particularly given SYRIZA’s establishment of Solidarity for All—the
umbrella support group to which the party’s MPs had donated 20 percent of
their salaries—in autumn 2012.141 There was even a statute in the party’s
charter requiring its members to invest their time and energy in solidarity
initiatives.142 Many Greeks therefore expected that, in power, its strategy to
defeat the Crisis might involve a mixed ecology of care services, in which
those who preferred to do so (or continued to have no other option, like
undocumented migrants) would be free to secure their care from the
solidarity clinics, while everyone else returned to a newly revivified
national health system. Why would a party that had invested so much in
supporting grassroots efforts not incorporate them into its grander vision for
a better tomorrow?
    Others had so much faith in SYRIZA, especially after a 2015 reform
granting the uninsured access to the public health system, that they saw no
place at all for a national network of solidarity clinics. And it was evidently
this view that prevailed. According to the psychologist Ilektra Bethymouti,
one of its earliest participants, the solidarity network effectively came to an
end at the Fifth Panhellenic Meeting of Solidarity Clinics, in Thessaloniki
in April 2016.143 From that moment forward, each of the clinics that
survived was obliged to navigate whatever hazards it faced alone.
    In voluntarily dissolving the network they’d worked so hard to build,
healthcare activists placed a tremendous wager on SYRIZA’s ability to
restore the national health system to its full capacity. As the CareNotes
 collective observed, though, the confidence they placed in SYRIZA relied
on “a nostalgic misperception of the permanence of a stable and benevolent
social welfare state.” In other words: there was nothing worth returning to.
Even at its most complete, the care that people accessed through the state
was always contingent, conditional on a government remaining in power
that was willing to undertake robust and continued investment in the
national health. Any faith that such conditions might persist into the
indefinite future was a faith misplaced.
   Just how badly misplaced was made brutally plain when the new
SYRIZA government, under Prime Minister Alex Tsipras, immediately
executed what has to be regarded as a world-historical “backflip” and
“surrendered abjectly and totally to the Troika institutions.”144 In July 2015,
the Tsipras government agreed to a third tranche of “economic adjustment,”
imposing some of the harshest austerity measures yet seen in Greece, and
though they had to rely on the votes of opposition parties to get it across the
line, the package was approved by the parliament in August. The scars of
this betrayal lingered for years. At the next opportunity, in the national
elections of 2019, Greek voters handed a landslide victory to the center-
right New Democracy party, under whom refugees were once again
excluded from the national health system. Everyone who had staked so
much on the idea that another care was possible now had to watch as that
possibility slipped through their fingers once more.

There’s a powerful lesson in the Greek experience for those of us afflicted
by the deliberate hollowing-out of the UK’s once-mighty National Health
Service, the slow cratering of profit-driven healthcare provision in the
United States, or the more thorough abandonments that are surely yet to
come. The only way for any of us to secure even the rudiments of care,
when the systems we’re used to relying upon become unreliable, is to
develop the capacity to care for ourselves.
     And this is a possibility that remains open to us. Other than a
squeamishness about operating outside the law, perhaps, there is not a thing
that stops any of us from organizing our own solidarity clinics, pharmacies
and networks right now. In fact, given the often-enough lethal shortfalls of
care that increasingly manifest themselves in our communities, I wonder
more and more frequently why this hasn’t already happened.
    But if we do nevertheless manage to establish self-organized systems of
mutual care, at some point we are likely to come up against the same
challenge confronted by those active in the Greek solidarity movement:
What do we do when some larger and more powerful actor, whether of
market or state, proposes to multiply the impact of our exertions by joining
their effort to our own? When a progressive city government, or even a
FEMA, wants to “leverage” the power of grassroots initiatives by joining
them into some kind of superstructure that is not under their direct,
democratic control?
    These are questions that anyone involved with the stewardship of a local
mutual care effort, or really anyone at all who endeavors to do something
about the Long Emergency on behalf of their own community, will
ultimately face. And just as clearly, they are questions that individuals and
communities will have to decide for themselves.
    Based on what happened in Greece, though, what we can say empirically
is that everyone who trusted in SYRIZA to deliver the goods got nothing, or
worse than nothing. It may or may not be fair to paint all movements of the
electoral left with this particular brush, but objectively that is what
happened. Pragmatically, Greek solidarity activists would have been better
advised to maintain their network of clinics and pharmacies and the
profound investment in community capacity it represented. That way,
whether a “radical left” national government succeeded, went down to
ignominious failure or simply muddled along without any clear direction to
speak of, people across Greece would still have options corresponding with
 their own needs and preferences, whatever those happened to be. At least,
this is the deeper lesson for the Long Emergency: lifesystems must be
designed so that they’re as robust as possible to fluctuations of the
underlying political or economic order, because fluctuation is all we are
likely to know for the foreseeable future.
    Beyond this, though, the Greek solidarity networks incorporated a
recognition our own practice of care so urgently requires: that the upstream
causes of whatever ill health we may suffer from are increasingly out of our
control. Some of these causes are endemic and structural, consisting
precisely in the “group-differentiated vulnerabilities to premature death”
identified by Gilmore. Others have to do with the risks that are more
broadly attendant upon living on a wounded planet: the insults bodies are
subjected to when forced to labor in the spiking heat or breathe the smoke
of distant fires, or the slow erosion of sanity caused by living with
unreliable infrastructure.145 We know that self-organized networks of
mutual care can buffer us against these harms and offer refuge, especially
for those most vulnerable to the interlocking and cascading conditions. But
before any such thing can come to pass, enough of us need to perceive the
necessity for it that we are willing to devote our own time, attention, energy
and labor to making it real.
    The Crisis pushed millions of previously more or less apolitical Greeks
through a process that the great Brazilian educator Paulo Freire called
“conscientization,” in which people come to be aware of the interlocking
systems of power that bind them.146 “Radicalized” would not be too strong
a word for what they experienced. And they were therefore willing to
entertain radical approaches to the problems that confronted them: ways of
organizing themselves that burst through the psychic guardrails of ordinary
life; methods of caring for one another that bypassed the conventions of
occupation, role and status; and means of collective self-empowerment that
sustained them through their moment of greatest peril.
    We know, from Katrina and Sandy, that acute climate shock can
similarly radicalize people, opening them up to ways of doing things they
never would have considered previously. The question now is whether
sustained and chronic climatic disruption will produce a conscientization in
quite the same way. The empirical evidence of Katrina and Sandy is: yes,
they will. As the Long Emergency advances, leaving existing institutions
increasingly unable to provide for our needs, it is these networks we will
turn to—for our sustenance, for our healing, for our lives.

                             OceanofPDF.com
                                      3
                         Collective Power



In the wake of Occupy Sandy, I often wondered if the practices that
constituted the relief effort—and just as importantly, the values that
animated it—couldn’t be inscribed in our lives more permanently,
developed into some more enduring infrastructure of care.
   This was chiefly because a self-organized initiative had empirically
proven itself more effective in delivering disaster relief than its top-down,
command-and-control alternatives, and I couldn’t help but suspect that the
principle might extend to other contexts. But my curiosity was also driven
by the way it felt to participate in the effort: helping to figure out how a
random cluster of nonexperts might set up and run a high-tempo
distribution hub was so much more rewarding than any of the work I’d ever
done in ordinary late-capitalist life that I wanted everyone to experience
something similar. I found myself more and more often imagining what it
might be like if all of our institutions of governance were remade along the
lines of the way we’d been doing things. What would that feel like? What
new possibilities might open up if responsibility for far more of life was
placed back where it belonged, in the hands of ordinary people?
   One objection to this idea is that neither Occupy Sandy nor any of the
other solidarity networks we’ve discussed so far were ever intended to be
systems of universal, society-wide provision. They were emergency
interventions, intended to suffice only for the duration of a sharp,
 unexpected departure from the ordinary. Even the Black Panthers’ extensive
program of self-organized community services was only intended to support
Black survival “pending revolution.”
    In fact, people involved in mutual aid efforts, however heroic, have often
remarked that they wished they didn’t have to be. They’re painfully aware
of how contingent their offer is, how reasonable it is to fear that people in
need will fall between the cracks and how much more dignified and
comprehensive anything approaching true social provision would be. Here
one thinks of the demand of Greece’s autonomous clinics “that the state
assume its responsibilities” for care of the community, or of Bobby Seale’s
virtually identical comments, forty-five years earlier and an ocean away,
about shaming the government into upholding its formal obligations.1 All of
this is to say that self-organized care isn’t always necessarily the way we
might wish to do things in a better world, but in a state of exception it’s
what, and all, we have.
    But what about when the excursion from the ordinary becomes
permanent, when the organized abandonment of our communities starts to
look a whole lot more like outright state failure? When the circumstances of
the Long Emergency bite, how might we go about imagining not merely the
stopgap provision of services, but an entire system of governance based on
the same principles that underwrite the success of mutual care? Is it even
possible to organize communities this way?
    It’s clear that any such thing would be extraordinarily difficult to achieve
under the terms of political economy that currently condition our lives.
Right now the necessary resources are for the most part allocated by
systems that, whether they operate by logics of state or market, feel
inaccessible to us. And they feel inaccessible because they are inaccessible:
under the present dispensation, most all the decisions that matter are made
by small groups of people operating out of sight of the public, in institutions
 that may not even in principle be accountable to the people whose lives they
affect so dramatically.
    But as David Wengrow and the late David Graeber argue in The Dawn of
Everything, things have not always been as they are now.2 In a great many
times and places across the long reach of human association, in fact, they
found that the decision-making institutions governing the allocation of
resources were more accessible to ordinary people—more predicated on
their active participation, more responsive to local need, less hierarchical.
And of still greater relevance to our situation: that at least some societies
actively adjusted how they went about organizing decision power, allowing
them to flex in response to changing conditions in some quite subtle and
sophisticated ways. The strong suggestion is that we can still choose to do
the same.
    And if there is any condition we might want our social and political
arrangements to flex in response to, it is upon us now. The Long Emergency
offers us an opening—a rupture in both the capacity and the legitimacy of
the arrangements that now dominate our lives, and therefore a precious
opportunity to rethink those arrangements. As I’ve defined it here, it
consists precisely of a situation in which all of the institutions that
conventionally structure our world have been stressed to the breaking point
and must therefore be replaced by new ways of organizing the necessities of
life.
    But here a major difficulty arises. The trouble is that such moments of
breakthrough can generally only be put to beneficial use by people who
arrive at them with some concrete idea of what they want to achieve and
how they intend to go about doing so.
    What we need, then, is a theory to help us understand what kind of
institutions we might want to develop if we are to reclaim the capacity to
choose and to act in this moment of crisis. We need a theory of collective
power, in other words, based on all the same qualities that animate mutual
 care and make it work. How might local governance work, what might it
look like and how might it feel to engage with if it wasn’t coextensive with
government at all, but developed as an organic outgrowth of our own desire
for self-determination? What steps might we need to take now if we wanted
to get there?
    Since the time of Kropotkin, a great many political thinkers have taken
up the question of local power and how it may be developed outside the
state; it’s fair to say that this is a central concern of the left-libertarian
tradition. In the past century, however, none that I am aware of has
dedicated quite as much effort to exploring this question, in all its facets, as
the curious, obstreperous, often infuriating American writer Murray
Bookchin. The elements that appear and reappear in his conceptual tool kit,
over forty or more years of published writing—the deliberative assembly,
the autonomous polity and the confederation—are so well suited to the
challenges of our moment that his lifework is worth exploring in some
detail.

Murray Bookchin was born to Russian-Jewish immigrants in the Bronx in
January 1921 and seems to have more or less immediately committed
himself to an intensely politicized life, joining the Young Pioneers—the
Communist Party USA’s organization for children—at the age of nine.3 It
was neither the last political organization he would join nor the last he’d
break with and denounce.
   In fact, the list of groups Bookchin joined and positions he espoused
over the course of his life is somewhat dizzying. By the time he was
fourteen, the orthodox Stalinism of the CPUSA had already started to feel
confining, and following Moscow’s betrayal of the Republican cause in the
Spanish Civil War, it came to repulse him. At this point he joined the
Socialist Workers Party, but its Trotskyism proved no more congenial as a
final ideological home for him. Over the course of the decades that
 followed—during which he worked in an iron foundry and on the line at
General Motors, joined both the United Electrical Workers and the United
Auto Workers and served in the US Army—he gravitated first toward a
libertarian-socialist position and then, in 1958, a more explicit anarchism.
    Even this, however, eventually cloyed for him, and in a series of
blistering denouncements he declared himself no longer an anarchist,
reconciled himself with at least local forms of electoral politics and finally
moved to Vermont to put these ideas into practice. The strong impression
one is left with, across this whole long series of arrivals and heated
departures, is of someone perpetually searching for an institutional vessel
for his intensely felt beliefs and perpetually being disappointed by what he
found.
    But at just about every step of his postwar ideological journey, he
elaborated his commitments of the moment in print. His earliest published
pieces appeared in a rather heterodox and ideologically diverse New York–
based journal called Contemporary Issues (“A Magazine for a Democracy
of Content”), and as the title of a 1952 article called “The Problem of
Chemicals in Food” suggests, his concerns were ecological in scope from
the very beginning. In this, Bookchin opened up a question that had never
previously been treated as a valid area of concern for left thought: how
shared prosperity might be achieved without pushing Earth systems past
their safe operating limits.4 In the 1968 essay “Post-Scarcity Anarchism” he
went further still, imagining a politics of abundance in a time when fully
automated luxury anything must have seemed still more science-fictional
than it does now.5
    Despite these rather considerable contributions, and some remnant
currency in radical-ecology circles, it’s hard to overstate just how marginal
a thinker Bookchin had become by the final years of the twentieth century.
And yet, with maximum improbability, the thought elaborated so
laboriously in those books would turn out to be most relevant to the central
 global challenge of the twenty-first century and directly, indirectly or at
least dialectically inspirational of its most forward-looking sociopolitical
developments.
   What did that thought consist of? Bookchin wrote a lot, usually in a state
of high dudgeon at his many perceived adversaries on the left. Both his
positions and his labels for them evolved, and while he was generally
careful to note in later work just how they’d done so, this was not always
clear to casual readers who encountered his writings out of sequence. This
was especially so in the days before the internet came into widespread use,
when a robust understanding of his beliefs could only be cobbled together
by tracking down the evidence as it appeared across a scatter of
indifferently distributed books. With the benefit of latter-day collected
editions, though, and of internet resources like the Anarchist Library and
Dana Ward’s invaluable Anarchy Archives, it’s possible to sketch the
evolution of a series of interlocking concepts Bookchin called
“Communalism” and “libertarian municipalism,” as well as the broader
project in which they were both embedded, “social ecology.”6
   Social ecology was a startlingly novel formulation, founded on two
major insights. The first was Bookchin’s recognition, even before Rachel
Carson’s 1961 Silent Spring had given the contemporary environmental
movement its initial impetus, that the Earthly biosphere was in the throes of
a profound crisis as a result of human action and headed for worse. He even
predicted the specific form the crisis would take, warning as early as 1964
—more than a decade, in other words, before the 1977 White House memo
generally regarded as the first appearance in public thought of what was
then called “the greenhouse effect”—that atmospheric heating driven by
accumulations of carbon dioxide “may well rank among the most serious
sources of future ecological imbalance and may pose major threats to the
viability of the planet,” “undermining the very capacity of the Earth to
sustain advanced forms of life.”7
    Here Bookchin’s clear, early articulation of what has since become
universally accepted scientific consensus feels stunningly prescient:
  Since the Industrial Revolution, the overall atmospheric mass of carbon dioxide has increased
  by 13 percent over earlier, more stable, levels. It could be argued on very sound theoretical
  grounds that this growing blanket of carbon dioxide, by intercepting heat radiated from the
  earth into outer space, will lead to rising atmospheric temperatures, to a more violent
  circulation of air, to more destructive storm patterns, and eventually to a melting of the polar
  ice caps (possibly in two or three centuries), rising sea levels, and the inundation of vast land
  areas.8

Again, consider the unnerving clarity of vision it took to set these ideas in
print months before Martin Luther King was awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize, the Beatles played Shea Stadium, or American combat forces landed
in Vietnam. The only aspect of Bookchin’s 1964 framing that is in any way
incorrect is the optimism of locating the melting “two or three centuries”
from now.
    It’s Bookchin’s second insight, though, that really gives his social
ecology its continuing and acute relevance. This was that the planetary
crisis was caused, in large part, by what he called the “social pathologies”
of patriarchy, statism and capitalism, and could not be undone or reversed
without first unwinding them. He understood, before virtually any of his
contemporaries on the left, the causal link between our compulsion to
dominate—especially as it was expressed in the capitalist project of
unlimited growth—and the destruction of the ecosphere and therefore its
capacity to support all Earthly life.
    Marxist economics, with its theory of the “metabolic rift,” offers some of
the analytical insights you’d need to draw upon in order to reach a
conclusion like this; the intersectional feminism of the Combahee River
Collective others; and mainstream ecological science yet others again.9 But
social ecology is the first body of thought I am aware of that links the
planetary crisis to the alienation we suffer as individuals and communities
via their common causal factor of domination.
    Where classical anarchism had always been defined by its revulsion for
coercion and hierarchy, Bookchin now tied relations founded in these
qualities directly to the question of our persistence as a species. If we
wanted to survive, he argued, and to preserve the kind of healthy planetary
ecosystem in which we might all thrive equally, we would have to
undertake the work of reorganizing society and all its institutions so as to
eliminate the possibility of domination—either of nature by humanity, or of
any human being by another. This is a strikingly bold, integrative
conception of power, especially given that it was first articulated in an era
when the left was still largely given over to the machismo of national
liberation, and it speaks directly to the ecological and intersectional
concerns of our own moment like no other thought of the period.
   To facilitate meaningful change, though, this theory of social ecology
needs a corresponding form of concrete expression. Bookchin named this
Communalism, with a capital C, in explicit allusion and homage to the Paris
Commune of 1871. Communalism was designed around a set of
“preconditions for human survival,” among which were “the anarchist
concepts of a balanced community, a face-to-face democracy, a humanistic
technology and a decentralized society.” Taken together, these would
constitute nothing less than “a new politics structured around towns,
neighborhoods, cities, and citizens’ assemblies, freely confederated into
local, regional, and ultimately continental networks.”10
   As expressed here, Bookchin’s faith in the wisdom of ordinary people is
profound. He evidently could not countenance the idea that when given the
power to decide freely, anyone rational would opt for anything but cleanly
powered, human-scaled, locally managed production that could be
sustained over the long term. His clear supposition is that people
empowered to make consequential policy decisions for themselves would
(“naturally”) choose to forgo the neocolonial megaprojects, the sweetheart
deals and lobbyists, the expeditionary wars—in fact the whole grim
 architecture of extraction and exploitation that was tilting the entire
atmosphere toward an untenable state. The assumption underlying his entire
project, across decades, is that a free people organized on Communalist
lines would organically tend toward distributional justice, achieved via what
we’d now call a “circular economy.”11
    The locally scaled manifestation of Communalism was to be called
“libertarian municipalism,” a form of language Bookchin first started using
in the early 1970s. (As always with Bookchin, his use of the word
“libertarian” here reflects the older usage, in which it is more or less
synonymous with “anarchist.”) It was in and through this practice that
Communalism proposed to “eliminate statist municipal structures and
replace them with the institutions of a libertarian polity.”12
    So far as actually achieving this was concerned, libertarian municipalism
“depends upon libertarian leftists running candidates at the local municipal
level, calling for the division of municipalities into wards, where popular
assemblies can be created that bring people into full and direct participation
in political life.”13 Here Bookchin distinguishes between government, an
“institutionalized association that constitutes a system for handling public
affairs,” and the state, which he remains enough of an anarchist to define as
“a force for class repression and control.”
    The institutions of nonrepressive government are to be popular
assemblies: participatory, deliberative venues where “citizens … deal with
community affairs on a face-to-face basis, making policy decisions in a
direct democracy and giving reality to the ideal of a humanistic, rational
society.”14 In fact, all the “management, plans, and regulations” necessary
to the stewardship of a contemporary city would be “formulated
democratically by popular assemblies.” Where issues that transcend the
narrow and particular interests of a given municipality arise, “the
democratized municipalities should join together to form a broader
confederation.”
     There are a few things we might want to note about all of this. The first
is the improbability that significant numbers of “libertarian leftists” would
vote, let alone contest office, in conventionally bourgeois elections. Beyond
this, though, Bookchin never specifies how big his wards are to be, or
what’s supposed to happen if, once created, the people living in them show
little inclination toward participation in popular assemblies. He fails to
anticipate that many communities might prefer to define themselves by
constitutive exclusion of the outsider, and never clarifies who does and does
not count as a citizen for purposes of participation.
    In fact, he displays an unusually strong, Enlightenment-derived faith in
public reason (in both its senses of deliberative reasoning-in-public and of a
public with the broad capacity for reason) that can be difficult to sustain for
anyone who has been exposed to the various feminist and postmodern
critiques thereof. He never convincingly explains why his decentralized
confederal structures would necessarily be democratic ones, or why
federated communities that are run democratically should necessarily be
progressive or ecological in their commitments.15 He has no real answer to
capital flight and doesn’t seem to have entertained the possibility that any
polity that did succeed in organizing itself along Communalist lines might
simply be contained, undermined, suppressed or annihilated—as indeed
was the Paris Commune itself.

For all his blind spots, Bookchin’s notions of social ecology, Communalism
and libertarian municipalism offer a way of organizing our communities
that is particularly well tuned to the rigors of the Long Emergency. And
among all the aspects of this nested set of ideas, the most germane to us is
the concrete practice at its core: the assembly.
   What is the assembly? At its simplest, it is any group of people gathered
to discuss matters of common concern and, when faced with the necessity
of a decision, to choose among the courses of action available to them. If
 “democracy” in contemporary life so often gets reduced to the vote for one
representative or indifferent choice over another, the participatory tradition
of the assembly gives democratic values a far fuller and more robust
expression. It is an immediate, concrete exercise of collective power,
available wherever and whenever people come together in any number
greater than a handful.
    In the West, the formal articulation of participatory democracy begins
with the 1962 Port Huron Statement of the fiercely idealistic Students for a
Democratic Society, or SDS, which enshrined its authors’ belief that
“people should have a central role in determining those decisions that affect
their daily lives.”16 But beyond some thought that “decision-making of
basic social consequence be carried on by public groupings,” and that these
groupings have “the function of bringing people out of isolation and into
community,” the statement’s authors offered no particular guidance as to
how this might be achieved.
    It is fair to say that a certain woolliness on the details was a broader
failing of the era, a time when—as Francesca Polletta concludes, after
having studied seven American movements that embraced the practice—
even the most motivated “activists were making participatory democracy up
as they went along.”17 So perhaps Bookchin can be forgiven for not
outlining in any particular depth how he expected his flavor of public
deliberation to function. But what’s striking about Bookchin’s advocacy for
the assembly is that he sustains it uninterruptedly, from a time before Port
Huron had even given a name to “participatory democracy,” to an epoch in
which most seasoned activists on the left had given the form up as hopeless.
And this is largely because, wisely or otherwise, he was looking to a
different set of antecedents than the SDS or the other activists of the
generation immediately following him. Bookchin adduces proof of the
assembly’s superiority not as they did—from direct experience of its use as
organizing, capacity-building or consciousness-raising tool in the course of
 the Civil Rights struggle—but from historical accounts of its practice in
classical antiquity and colonial New England.
    The notion that more or less densely-settled communities might be run
on principles of broadly participatory decision-making has appeared in a
wide variety of times and places across human history, from the medieval
folkmoots, þings and althings of Northern Europe to the Haudenosaunee
Confederacy of pre-Columbian North America.18 As recent scholarship
suggests, it may even have been present at the very dawn of urban-scale
settlement, at the long-buried Ukrainian “mega-sites” of Maidenetske,
Taljanky and Nebelivka—the latter, fully the size of medieval London by
3200 BCE, evidently comprised of “self-governing districts … with
assemblies for decision-making.”19 Much of Graeber and Wengrow’s book
is dedicated to exploring this long and variegated history of deep political
participation and what it may imply for our own choices.
    But these are not the inspirations Bookchin draws upon in devising the
tenets of his libertarian municipalism. Alongside his near-contemporaries
Hannah Arendt and C. L. R. James, he looks instead to ancient Athens, the
institution of the Ecclesia and the sovereign Greek ethical imperative of
appearing before one’s neighbors and peers in face-to-face deliberation.20
    The monthly public assembly, the Ecclesia, does indeed appear to have
been a carefully balanced and elaborately well-thought-out process, in
which responsibility for decision-making in all matters of state was broadly
distributed across the citizens of Athens. But for the contemporary reader,
it’s impossible to engage Bookchin’s praise of it (or James’s or Arendt’s, for
that matter) without stumbling at the very outset against a circumstance that
ought to have been radioactively disqualifying for anyone claiming to be
concerned with the expansion of human freedom: Athens was a slave state.
Its vaunted “democracy” excluded an overwhelming majority of the
population. In fact, only free male veterans of military service enjoyed the
privilege of participating in the Ecclesia and, therefore, the other
 institutions of public deliberation.21 In his article exploring the roots of
participatory democracy, James mounts a bizarre, no-true-Scotsman defense
of Athenian practice as not really constituting slavery as such, and for his
part Bookchin does something very similar.
    Fortunately, history offers more recent, somewhat less compromised
examples of public deliberation that Bookchin could draw upon in his
further development of libertarian municipalism—medieval Lombardy, the
revolutionary sections of 1790s Paris, the anarcho-syndicalist Spain of the
Civil War years.22 But where he really seems to find the virtues of public
reason epitomized is in the New England–style town meeting.23 This is
something he consistently extols across thirty years of writing, to the degree
that he eventually moved to Vermont, where the town meeting survived as a
living tradition, so that he could practice the technique full-time.24
    For all this, it must be said that his understanding of the social,
psychological and emotional dynamics of the assembly form was not
particularly sophisticated—or anyway, not at least so far as that
understanding was expressed in his published oeuvre, which conspicuously
lacks the quality James C. Scott refers to as mêtis, or insight derived from
hands-on, practical experience.25 His many writings on the topic tend to
consist, rather, of a repeated series of exhortations that the face-to-face
assembly is the only “rational” and “moral” venue for collective decision-
making, and that its superiority in these regards is sufficiently self-evident
to recommend its widespread adoption.
    That this was not universally considered to be a wise idea among people
with more pragmatic experience of the form is something of an
understatement; the historian Laurence Veysey wryly notes that, in “urging
popular assemblies as the appropriate means for [the] day-to-day
management of resources,” Bookchin “unwittingly returned to the very
device which had been clung to for so many wearisome years” during
earlier upwellings of the utopian spirit in America, with dispiriting results.26
 There are, of course, sound reasons why we might want to be wary of a
naive or unconsidered practice of assembly. For Bookchin the process of
collaborative truth discovery is something that takes place through
deliberation in open assembly, always “according to the canons of reason,
reflection, and discourse that uniquely belong to our own species.”27 You
sense that he means for this to be radically inclusive and to affirm and
uphold the capacities for rationality that are in principle enjoyed by all
human beings. But as a guideline for something that is supposed to
constitute the sole legitimate expression of collective will for all those
living in a particular locale, this is woefully insufficient. Its insufficiency
becomes especially evident in a complex, heterogeneous society.
    Firstly, just because a process is formally open doesn’t mean that it’s
actually accessible or inclusive, let alone welcoming. The composition of
the deliberative group itself may feel as though it excludes the newcomer. It
can be intimidating to offer one’s opinion, especially in matters of
controversy, and most of all for those who are not native speakers of the
language in which the assembly is being conducted, or whose accent or
customary mode of speech otherwise marks them as other. It may be
practically difficult for people with any degree of speech or hearing
impairment, sensory sensitivity or social anxiety to participate. And, of
course, we might find ourselves unable to contribute should the place and
time of assembly come into too much conflict with the obligations already
imposed on us by work, family and the due care of the self.
    Without very clear guidelines as to the rules that guide deliberation—
limits on speaking time, for example, or the number of total comments
made—the proceedings of an assembly may easily be dominated by the
charismatic, the rhetorically gifted or simply those whose carriage and
mode of self-presentation convey the fact that they are habitually used to
being attended to. Any ambiguity in these procedures, particularly with
regard to decision rules, may give the impression of a consensus that
 doesn’t truly exist, or even be consciously exploited by the underhanded to
advance some sub-rosa agenda of their own. Absent some degree of
explicit, formal structure, an assembly process whose very reason for being
is that it is supposed to be equal, open and noncoercive may wind up
imposing its will on those who don’t know how to read the prevailing
currents of power, and, when it does, these dynamics will always break in
favor of the elite groups and individuals who already enjoy that power.
    And finally, the assembly works well where it is understood by all
parties to be the assembly—that is, either formalized as a process of
consensual governance, or consecrated by long-standing custom as the
sovereign decision body of a given community. What does not work so well
is when an ad hoc assembly is constituted of different people each time it
meets, and participants, perhaps reasonably enough, decline either to be
bound by the commitments of those who were there last week or to
recognize decisions made in their absence.
    Particular care needs to be taken when the assembly gathers in the open,
in public space. The activist-scholar Alberto Corsín Jiménez tells a story
about assembly participants in the main plaza of the Lavapiés neighborhood
of Madrid having to negotiate with a group of recent immigrants who also
wanted to use the plaza, reasonably enough, and were in the habit of
playing loud music over their deliberations.28 (It is notable that those
immigrants evidently did not feel that the assembly spoke to or for them, or
could.29)
    These were all points made resoundingly by a successive line of feminist
critics whose work exposed participatory and deliberative forms of
democracy to a powerful series of troublings: where Jo Freeman assailed
the tacit power dynamics that persisted even in ostensibly “leaderless” and
nonhierarchical activist groups, Nancy Fraser demolished the notion of a
unitary public sphere, and Lynn Sanders noted that not everyone necessarily
had the ability, the time or simply the inclination to participate
 deliberatively.30 (For his part, Bookchin seems never to have taken this
body of thought on board, even though aspects of it, notably Freeman’s
pivotal “The Tyranny of Structurelessness,” had already appeared by
1970.31)
    Despite its pretensions to universality, then, the problem of the assembly
is one of representative legitimacy. In order to be broadly perceived as
valid, an assembly has to convene a threshold percentage of the population,
and that number needs to be sufficient for it to practically enact its will.
Kali Akuno of the Mississippi-based libertarian-municipalist initiative
Cooperation Jackson is unusually specific in identifying that threshold,
defining the assembly as “a body that engages at least one-fifth of the total
population in a defined geographic area.”32 And this feels right: with one
out of every five people in a community directly participating in discussions
about its posture, priorities and future, their decisions undoubtedly bear a
fair amount of weight. How legitimate is it possible to be, by contrast, if
your “neighborhood assembly” of ten or twelve bodies occupies a single
room, when right outside the windows you can feel the entire city breathe
capital all around you, all the way out to its furthermost hinterlands?
    Even when the necessary pains are taken to ensure that a given gathering
in assembly is both genuinely invitational and consensually legitimate,
there is one final consideration, which is whether it is actually dispositive.
As suggested by the famous Atelier Populaire poster from the Events of
May 1968 (“I participate, you participate, we participate … they profit”),
canny activists have always understood that “maximum feasible
participation” is often a fig leaf for something else, a way of shedding
unwonted legitimation on some preexisting agenda.
    Neoliberal governments often deploy ostensibly participatory processes
with the greatest possible cynicism, to lend the color of popular ratification
to decisions that have already been made elsewhere: this is known as
“consultation.”33 But the misapprehension that the assembly’s role is
 essentially consultative is common enough, even among its radical
advocates. For example, the late Jackson, Mississippi, mayor Chokwe
Lumumba—widely known as a strong proponent of the form, and nobody’s
neoliberal—was comfortable characterizing the assembly as “a body where
the people challenge government, ask government questions, get informed
by government, and protest government when necessary.”34 But not, you
will notice, as an institution that supplants government—in other words, not
as a locus of power in its own right.
   So what we’re after isn’t mere participation, or even the stronger claim
on energy, attention and commitment represented by deliberation. To serve
the end of collective power, the assembly can’t simply be there to permit
the therapeutic venting of grievances, facilitate a process of “consultation,”
or allocate some token wedge of the local council’s annual budget. It must
exist to decide, and its decisions must be dispositive over real resource.
   Given that, the project of self-governance via assembly becomes
something that is worth pursuing. If nothing else, the ability to participate in
consequential decisions helps to shift the psychological locus of control,
however incrementally, from external to internal. The world is no longer
quite so much something that happens to you, and that you have no choice
but to accept, but something you can intervene in, concretely and directly.
The ability to act upon the world in this way is in itself palliative of the
awful helplessness in the face of events that characterizes our time.
   But it’s also about something even larger than that. For the feminist
philosopher Iris Marion Young, justice is more than merely a question of
the equal distribution of goods. It is a condition in which “action, decisions
about action, and provision of the means to develop and exercise
capacities” are accessible to all.35 This is why the practice of deliberative
assembly isn’t simply about getting together to vote for one or another
among the options before us. In helping us build our capability for
collective self-determination, and giving us a venue in which we might
 employ it, the assembly is, as directly as it is possible to be, concerned with
the achievement of justice.
   The question remains as to how any such thing might be practically
implemented. In many cities, some kind of neighborhood-scale deliberative
infrastructure is already there, in statute and practice both, and might be
repurposed toward more substantive ends: in New York City, for example,
David Harvey imagines “the revival of the now largely somnolent
community boards as neighborhood assemblies with budget-allocation
powers.”36
   This chimes with Bookchin’s practically achievable “minimum
program” for libertarian municipalism, which outlined a set of “steps that
can be taken now include initiating … municipalist movements that propose
popular neighborhood and town assemblies—even if they have only moral
functions at first—and electing town and city councillors that advance the
cause of these assemblies and other popular institutions.” But with even the
elements of this minimum program requiring significant commitments of
time and energy, any attempt at putting it into practice had to wait for a
moment in which large numbers were primed to accept its logic.
   That moment arrived at last with the new millennium, amid a set of
circumstances in politics that are generally referred to as the “horizontal
turn.”

Though protest groups like ACT/UP, Earth First! and Critical Mass had
pioneered its basic forms in the 1980s, we can roughly date the horizontal
turn proper to sometime between the fall of the Soviet Union at the end of
1991, with its final discrediting of the Marxist-Leninist logic of command,
and the breakout of networked organizing tactics into wide public visibility
at the 1999 protests against the World Trade Organization in Seattle.37 In
between those events, and inspired above all by the 1994 Zapatista
insurgency against the Mexican state in Chiapas, activists progressively
 abandoned traditional parties of the radical left in favor of flatter,
“leaderless” organizing structures.38
    This new way of coordinating collective action appears to have been
first explicitly named as such in the practice of horizontalidad that emerged
in Argentina in 2001.39 And for the first time since the consciousness-
raising groups of the mid-1970s, relatively small, nonhierarchical and self-
organized groups returned to the center stage of political activism.
    Rather than concentrating the power to decide in a single leader, or
tightly sharing it among a party cadre, horizontalism distributed it across
everyone motivated enough to show up and participate. Sometimes, the
decision logic employed was the pursuit of full consensus, at others a
simple majority vote. But materially, this looked much the same, wherever
on Earth you happened to encounter it: people gathered in a rough circle,
often in a courtyard, clearing or public plaza, visibly and volubly discussing
the matter before them. (If the universal symbol of leftism in the era of
national liberation was the Kalashinkov raised in a clenched fist, its truest
emblem in our own is undoubtedly the cheap and ubiquitous knockoff
Monobloc chair, visible in depictions of such gatherings from Bogotà to
Kampala to Berlin.40)
    To be sure, much of this was made possible by the diffusion of newly
affordable networked communication technologies, principally text
messaging and, a few years later, the smart-phone with its microblogging
and secure-messaging apps. But horizontalism was more than a matter of
information-technical innovation. The horizontalist generation developed a
new attention to mood, affect and subjectivity in deliberative gatherings. By
the time of the WTO protests in Seattle, activists were already using an
array of hand signals to convey the sense of a meeting, from enthusiastic
assent to vehement objection.41 Assemblies increasingly came to draw upon
a repertoire of techniques that simply did not exist in the West at the time of
 the Port Huron Statement, taking inspiration from Indigenous practice and
especially the Zapatista notion of a “world which contains many worlds.”42
   By 2011, those who occupied the squares had ready to hand
  a rich and growing panoply of organizational instruments—spokescouncils, affinity groups,
  facilitation tools, break-outs, fishbowls, blocking concerns, vibe-watchers and so on—all
  aimed at creating forms of democratic process that allow initiatives to rise from below and
  attain maximum effective solidarity, without stifling dissenting voices, creating leadership
  positions or compelling anyone to do anything which they have not freely agreed to do.43

These elements of horizontal practice constituted a lightweight, portable kit
of parts that was broadly available at moments of social or economic
rupture, and such moments came thick and fast as the second decade of the
new century dawned.
    Across the Arab world, from Tunisia to Bahrain, conspicuously young
populations finally lost patience with the absolutist oppression of elderly
despots and the foreclosure of their life chances that went along with it. The
indignados of Spain, like the Aganaktisménoi, were responding to a
different set of pressures: their aspirations for a better life had been sanded
away to nothing by the years-long recession gripping Europe’s southern
tier, often brutally exacerbated by austerity programs of the sort imposed
upon Greece by the Troika. And in the United States, millions could no
longer quite escape the sense that somewhere along the way, the American
dream had become the sole prerogative of an absurdly wealthy few; this
tiny sliver of the population, having reaped stratospheric profits from the
financialization of just about everything, now left everyone else to a grim
destiny of casualized employment, equally precarious housing and debt
service drawn out unto the grave.
    What united significant numbers of people in all these places was the
common sense that their future was being stolen away from them in real
time, without their having had the slightest say in the matter. And they
responded in much the same way: with a demand for ¡Democracia real ya!
(“Real democracy now!”). This demand was most visibly expressed in a
 wave of occupations that broke out spontaneously at Tahrir Square in Cairo
in January 2011, at Puerta del Sol in Madrid and Syntagma Square in
Athens in May, at Zuccotti Park in the financial district of downtown
Manhattan in September and, somewhat later, at Gezi Park in Istanbul. This
was the global coming-out party for horizontal praxis known as the
“movement of the squares.”44
    For many participants, myself included, this tide of protest constituted
the first time in our lives that our subjective experiences of the world were
reflected in mass political action of any sort. We had grown tired of being
told that politics would only ever amount to the choice of the least-worst
option and that the best we could ever expect to achieve was the most tepid
and incremental sort of reform. On some level that was deeper but harder to
articulate, we’d wearied of never seeing our dissent from the bland late-
capitalist consensus depicted, or even acknowledged, anywhere in public
life. So for us, the wave of occupations felt like a sudden irruption of
jubilee time. From Zuccotti Park itself to Dame Street in Dublin, the
predominant mood in every protest camp I was able to visit in the fall of
2011 was a kind of infectious glee or delight that this should be coming to
pass at all.
    It’s highly tempting to understand the “new municipalist” wave that
broke out during 2014–15, then, as in part an attempt to bottle the euphoria
of occupation and extend the logic that had guided the occupation of the
squares to a pursuit of lasting local power.
    Consciously or otherwise, new municipalism exploited the opening of
the Occupy moment to draw upon the massive surge of people radicalized
by their experience of austerity in the post-2008 period and with their
energy attempt an enactment of the late-Bookchinian project. Though there
never seems to have been any intention to articulate anything like a
“standard municipalist policy agenda”—any attempt to do so would be
“contrary to the decentralized, autonomous nature of the movement”—city-
 scale movements of highly similar sensibility sprouted up on six continents
in the years following 2011, virtually none of them affiliated with a
preexisting political party.45 Broadly concerning themselves with housing
justice, “the feminization of politics” and countering the invasion of local
economies by venture capital–funded Silicon Valley platforms like Airbnb
and Uber, they broadly thought of themselves as “new municipalists.”46
And what they applied to their contestations of local power was the
horizontal process and the assembly form they had learned in the squares.
   This was the critical moment at which large numbers of people moved
from protesting the neoliberal conditions under which they lived to actually
doing something about them. With varying degrees of success, each of these
movements now tried to adapt the “minimum program” of libertarian
municipalism to the real-world challenge of winning a citywide election. If
we suspect that this neo-Bookchinian approach to power might truly offer
up insights that help us endure the Long Emergency together, it is this
moment of transition from theory to practice we will need to consider most
closely.

Though large-scale efforts pursued new-municipalist strategies in places
from Valparaíso to Zagreb, it is the major cities of Spain that traveled
furthest down this road. During the long, drawn-out years of austerity that
followed the particularly sharp Spanish financial crisis of 2008, Madrid,
Barcelona, Zaragoza, Cádiz and A Coruña each gave rise to an organic
movement espousing municipalist values, organized not as a traditional
political party but as a “confluence.” In setting themselves the project of
winning citywide power, these confluences—Ahora Madrid, Barcelona en
Comú and their peers—collectively began to generate for the first time an
experientially informed body of thought about what municipalism is, how it
works and what it does on the ground.
    “Confluence” is a difficult-to-translate term in Spanish municipalism,
used to describe what might elsewhere simply be called a “platform.” As
was emphasized to me any number of times during my travels in Spain,
confluences are precisely not coalitions of parties. The primary point of
distinction seems to be that a coalition is a temporary, tactical coming-
together of existing entities that continue to maintain their own distinct
identities (e.g., a labor union, an NGO, a social movement) as they work
together toward a given end. By contrast, a confluence is an in-gathering of
individuals—in principle, even the same individuals who might have been
mobilized by a coalition among the parties to which they belong—
organized under a new identity and committed to a process of self-
definition by assembly.
   Partisans of any existing formation were free to join the confluences, but
they had to do so as unencumbered individuals. “Nobody could participate
in the gatherings in representation of other collectives, associations, or
institutions such as political parties and unions … Everybody was a bare
participant and had to speak on her own behalf.”47 In Spain, the language
used to explain this, even by ordinary activists, can be uncannily high-
theoretical; the word chosen to describe this logic by just about every street-
level Ahora Madrid participant I met was “molecular,” as if they’d just that
moment put down a dog-eared copy of Deleuze.
   Neither a social movement nor quite a political party, then, the
confluence offered distinct strengths and weaknesses. One clear strength
was its rootedness in the daily experience of specific neighborhoods, which
gave it both legitimacy and a means of staying abreast of evolving
conditions that conventional parties did not have access to in quite the same
way. Frequent asambleas populares kept the confluence grounded,
counteracting what might otherwise be its tendency to abstraction and
“making sure that it is constantly aware of the realities within which it
lives.”48 They also performed a search function—sweeping the horizon, in
 effect, helping the confluence as a whole discover emergent matters of
concern that might otherwise abscond from its awareness. These might in
turn reflect common or even citywide struggles and therefore prove
effective as issues to organize around.
    Another strength enjoyed by the confluences was their broad power to
convene. Bookchin’s libertarian municipalism had refused both a
conventional class analysis and the politics of identity as organizing
principles, regarding them as invidious and prone to the creation of power-
squandering fissures.49 Prefiguring Graeber’s brilliant rhetorical maneuver
in positioning Occupy as an appeal to “the 99%,” its bold, implicit gamble
was that the alienations and dislocations of late capitalism would eventually
be painful enough that they would be experienced by virtually everyone in a
society and could be mobilized as such.
    In the wake of 2011, this actually appeared to be the case: both the
asamblearismo of the squares and the new municipalism of the confluences
aimed to speak to, and therefore politically activate, people who were not
currently affiliated with any existing party or movement. The numbers and
enthusiasm of their public meetings spoke vividly to the success of this
strategy.
    But even at this point, it was not obvious how that passion might be
transformed into actual power. This speaks to a feature of the confluences
which in truth was probably both a strength and, in certain lights, a
weakness. Utterly uninterested in imposing a disciplined uniformity of
belief among members, the confluences always supported a robust diversity
of viewpoints, and this extended to the theories of change held among their
most committed activists. In Spain, this disagreement was, again, conducted
at an unusually high level of abstraction. It was generally articulated as the
tension between a “Laclauian” faction and a “Negrian” one.
    At issue between them was nothing less fundamental than the question
of how popular power can most readily be developed and exercised. One
 tendency within Ahora Madrid, broadly associated with the national left-
populist party Podemos, committed itself to establishing radical democracy
along the ambitious lines suggested by Ernesto Laclau and Chantal
Mouffe.50 This involved the pursuit of institutional state power and the
attempt to leverage it toward the “counterhegemonic” transvaluation of all
the values operating in everyday late-capitalist life.
    The opposing tendency, with roots in the left-libertarian Traficantes de
Sueños bookstore and publishing house, held to the contrasting theory of
“constituent power” developed by the Italian autonomist Marxist Antonio
Negri, and later elaborated with Michael Hardt.51 This body of thought
turned its back on the seizure of institutions and placed its faith instead in
the continual becoming of the multitude itself, conceived as such.
    Though the confluence form unquestionably drew its original energy
from a distinctly Negrian surge in the plazas and the neighborhoods, it’s
tempting to read the evolution of Spanish municipalism as a gradual eclipse
of the Negrian perspective by the Laclauian. In Madrid and Barcelona both,
this was accelerated by the practical realities associated with victory and the
assumption of electoral office.

In his 1996 book Aramis, or the Love of Technology, the late French
sociologist Bruno Latour describes a process that unfolds any time a
technology works its way from abstract idea to realization, a double
articulation he refers to as “recruitment” followed by “translation.”52
    In order to establish purchase in the world, a project needs to attract
partners, which might be individuals, institutions or even material objects.
This is what Latour calls recruitment, and it’s just as true of political
projects as it is of technical ones. A political platform running a candidate
for local office, for example, will need to recruit door-to-door canvassers,
volunteers to post on social media and people willing to work the phone
banks. If their proposition involves deliberation in assembly, they’ll require
 facilitators of assemblies, spaces to hold them and some way of recording
and storing the minutes of each. They’ll need to attract designers, printers,
videographers, drivers and, of course, funders to shoulder the financial
burdens of all this activity. Depending on the operating environment, they
may even need street medics, or people strong and confident enough to
provide security. And most obviously of all, they’ll need to recruit votes.
   Recruitment is vital in order to advance any nascent project. But each
new actor recruited apprehends what they’ve encountered a little bit
differently, and the project is slightly modified by the very act of their
recruitment. This is translation. Sometimes, the alterations required to
recruit one partner to the project are intolerable to another, and one or
another of them drops out.
   For our purposes, there are two particularly salient qualities of
translation. The first is that it is low fidelity. There is always some degree of
conceptual slippage involved, every time a new actor is recruited to the
effort. And the second is that this process is iterative: it repeats every time
some new component is added to the mix. Repeated enough times, like
some material-semiotic game of Telephone, it can result in the thing that
finally hits the streets bearing little or no resemblance to what was
originally imagined. It has evolved by drift.
   This is exactly what happened when the libertarian municipalism
imagined by Bookchin in the 1980s was translated into the “new
municipalism” practiced in the main cities of Spain, post-15M.53 What is
municipalism? The answer would depend on who you asked and when you
asked them. And a good deal of friction inheres in the fact that there’s
necessarily a mismatch, a profound one, between the way municipalist
assemblies worked in the squares and neighborhoods and the way
municipalist civic administration was compelled to operate.54
   This was, of course, recognized quite clearly by the people involved: as
Barcelona en Comú communications manager Marina López told the
 Guardian in 2016, a year into their first administration, “The difference
with being in power is there are two parallel processes—ours and the
institutional one, and they don’t work in the same way or [at the] same
speed.”55 The affects generated by each, the skills they called upon, even
the kinds of people they spoke to were all different from one another.
According to activists who were there, there was even a palpable difference
in tone and tenor between the original neighborhood assemblies of post-
15M Barcelona and the formally similar gatherings later convoked by
Barcelona en Comú in power.56
    So it’s not an exaggeration to say that parts of municipalist theory were
sawn off to fit. The notion that policy might continuously be developed in
deliberative assembly fell by the wayside—in Madrid, spontaneous
neighborhood assemblies were no longer taking place by the time the
citywide municipalist confluence Ahora Madrid was forged, while those in
Barcelona had largely dried up by the fall of 2012.57 And what of the
allegedly “crucial” distinction between policy development and
administration by recallable councils? Similarly, nowhere to be found:
following the municipalist victories in both cities, administration proceeded
much as if any other insurgent candidacy had taken City Hall. As central as
they may have been to the process of governance envisioned by Bookchin,
these practices were immediately shed by actually existing municipalism in
its 2015 Spanish manifestation. Indeed, one longtime activist quit Ahora
Madrid at the very moment of its ascension to power “because the project
had changed so much in the process of winning the election, that they no
longer recognised it as the radical, horizontalist, prefigurative project they
originally joined.”58
    Other issues were caused by a misperception of how much power the
city government had to make change. Bookchin had always taken pains to
distinguish between local electoral politics and the larger domain of
parliamentary politics. The position he seems to have been reaching for in
 his late phase was that, of all the forms of statecraft, the one we encounter
at the municipal level is the most accountable to ordinary citizens, the
easiest to participate in directly and the least unclean. He therefore winds up
defending the legitimacy of participation in local forms of elected
government, if only with the intention of one day disassembling them from
within, and arguably this is the point at which his transition out of
anarchism is complete. This is a rather nuanced position, but there’s nothing
that’s particularly unclear about it: participation in local government is
acceptable to the convinced municipalist, while that in the regional or
national state remains beyond the pale.
    As is so frequently the case, however, this seemingly crisp and clear
distinction in principle evaporates on contact with reality. For one thing, it’s
often not so very clear just where “local government” begins and where it
ends. In Spain, for example, municipal governments don’t enjoy the power
to levy taxes or even necessarily to allocate budget as they see fit. So when
Ahora Madrid came to power, they were broadly unable to enact those
aspects of their agenda that required any significant capital investment to
speak of. The power to affect Madrileños’ lives in most of the ways that
signified simply resided at a higher level than any amenable to the kind of
face-to-face neighborhood democracy Bookchin imagined. At this point a
Laclauian position starts to seem reasonable.
    The need to wrap a complicated and unconventional proposition in the
body of a single individual took its toll, as well. In Barcelona the
municipalist candidate, Ada Colau, had come out of housing activism, had a
movement history and enjoyed a longstanding reputation for daring on the
local left, but in Madrid the only name put forward that was acceptable to
all factions (see: recruitment and translation) was a local magistrate named
Manuela Carmena. Carmena was broadly respected for her incorruptibility
but otherwise had no particular identification with the municipalist moment
—and in time, this would tell. Ahora Madrid’s activists had banked on her
 serving willingly as the “empty signifier” called for in Laclauian theory, a
blank screen onto which voters could project whatever they wanted. And
furnished with this invitation, the voters went ahead and did just that.
Indeed, the range of things that people projected onto Carmena was notable
above all for its cringeworthiness, with graphics circulating in the run-up to
the election unabashedly portraying her as Batman, Angela Davis, Princess
Leia, Che or, most curiously of all, Maria von Trapp from The Sound of
Music, twirling in an Alpine meadow with an AR-15 assault rifle gripped in
each hand.59
    This surge of enthusiasm carried Ahora Madrid to victory in the
elections of May 24, 2015, albeit as a minority government supported by
the conventionally socialist PSOE (Spanish Socialist Workers’ Party). As
things turned out, though, not merely did Carmena refuse to be anybody’s
blank screen, neither did she govern as much of a municipalist. On the day
after being installed in Madrid’s City Hall, in the Palacio de Cibeles on the
Paseo del Prado, she told her electorate, more or less in so many words, that
as Manuela Carmena was who they had voted for, they would now be
governed as Manuela Carmena saw fit. Those who had declared themselves
not so much asambleistas or Madridistas as Manuelistas were closer to the
mark than they knew. (So much for the fine Bookchinian theory of
delegated and revokable power.)
    Finally, Ahora Madrid found out the hard way that, unlike their partners
in the PSOE or other traditional political parties of clear tendency and long
standing, a municipalist confluence formed relatively recently is not likely
to have significant knots of longtime supporters distributed throughout the
administrative apparatus. Even in a best-case scenario, upon acquiring the
keys to City Hall, a newly elected municipalist administration would still
have to tutor the civil servants who actually run things on the day-to-day in
relatively new and unfamiliar values, priorities and processes—and that
costs time, energy and political capital. And this, of course, presupposes
 that bureaucrats share a certain degree of sympathy with the newcomers and
are willing to try new ways of doing things. In administrative departments
that are not favorably disposed to the incoming administration, it will be
greeted instead as such interlopers generally are: with foot-dragging,
malingering, work-to-rule strikes and so on.
   In the end, Madrid and Barcelona both managed to see their confluences
into power: Ahora Madrid under Manuela Carmena until 2019, and
Barcelona en Comú with Ada Colau for two full terms, until finally going
down to defeat in 2023. Both cities objectively got “municipalism.” But
whether that municipalism was libertarian in any meaningful sense was
another question entirely.
   In his later writing, Bookchin staked everything on a wager that
municipalists could successfully occupy the local state, consolidate
whatever power inhered in it and use that power to catalyze further
transformations of democratic expression. On this theory, their time in
office would be dedicated to building a series of participatory
counterinstitutions that might then go on to seed libertarian values and
practices at every level of city life, driving a deeper, longer-term transition
toward Communalist life. In short, municipalist candidates would “become
Mayor to abolish the position of Mayor.”60
   Perhaps too much was lost in the process of translation that all ideas
must undergo as they make their way toward realization, but nothing of the
sort happened in Spain. What libertarian municipalism was stripped of, as it
made itself palatable to the Spanish electorate in the heady season of 2015,
was just about everything that made it distinct as a political tradition. Most
of the features that might have commended it to us as a way of contending
with a hot and dangerous future—the power it restored to neighborhood-
scale actors, the connections it drew between the exercise of that power and
broader movements toward ecological care, and more—fell away like a
discarded husk.
    Some of the measures called for in the Ahora Madrid platform were
eventually enacted during the Carmena mayoralty, notably an audit of
public expenditures, a freeze on evictions, gender parity in appointments
and a reconsideration of certain boondoggle megaprojects associated with
the previous administration. Beyond that, though, Ahora Madrid could not
possibly bear up under the hope Madrileños had invested in it, and Carmena
was defeated by the right-wing Partido Popular at the 2019 elections. The
hugely popular traffic-calming measures introduced in central Madrid under
Carmena were immediately reversed upon the PP’s resumption of power,
evidently largely out of spite and/or the desire to be performatively pro-car,
not because the change of policy produced any measurable benefit
whatsoever.61
   Barcelona fared somewhat better in this regard. Although a high-profile
effort to bring the city water supply back under public ownership was
eventually defeated in the Spanish Supreme Court, Barcelona en Comú did
manage to establish a municipal renewable-energy provider (as well as a
low-cost funeral company), remunicipalize home care, retrieve a number of
kindergartens and domestic-violence shelters from private providers and
perhaps bring to heel some of the overtourism and short-term rental custom
that had threatened to render life in the core neighborhoods of Barri Gòtic
and El Raval untenable for locals.62
   I do not mean to minimize the importance of these and municipalism’s
other accomplishments in Spain, particularly for those who continue to
enjoy them on a daily basis. They are real. But clearly they fall far short of
substantiating the claims Bookchin had made for his libertarian
municipalism, and neither do they offer anyone much of a recipe for doing
something about the conditions of the Long Emergency. If one of
municipalism’s failure modes is outright defeat, then, another is clearly
victory of the sort achieved in Barcelona and Madrid: governance hard to
distinguish, in the end, from that of a more or less entirely conventional
 social-democratic administration, lacking most or all of the participatory-
deliberative features Bookchin insisted on as essential.
   Indeed, the amount of recruitment and translation necessary to contest
City Hall almost seems to justify the anarchist critique of the later
Bookchin: on the available evidence, it certainly seems that to engage
electoral forms of democracy at all is already to be watered down and
recuperated, at such a high cost in effort that nobody involved retains
enough energy to try again later.
   So if we conclude, in the end, that the state is not amenable to being
reclaimed in this way, this is not driven by some misguided quest for
ideological purity.63 It’s simply pragmatic. By subordinating itself to the
conventional rhythms of representative politics—the pendulum swings of
sentiment, the tendency of nominally redistributive parties to accommodate
local business interests so as to prevent capital flight, the erosion of the tax
base and above all the possibility of defeat—the ostensibly mighty
municipalist wave of 2015 produced few if any lasting policy
accomplishments. Worse yet, there was no wholesale subjectivation,
radicalization or activation of the broader public, nor were institutions
created or allocated persistent sources of funding during the period in which
confluences enjoyed control of the local state.
   These sharp lessons suggest that the later Bookchin was wrong, to which
there are two possible responses. The first—and in Spain, this is what the
Laclauians of Podemos eventually went with—was to argue that local
power could not be sustained without the overarching, protective penumbra
of the national state, which should therefore be contested robustly through
the usual electoral means. Having seen power at the city scale slip through
their fingers, activists of this conviction saw no other way to accomplish the
counterhegemonic transformation of subjectivity they so desired than by
reorganizing themselves to win national elections.
    But this seems to neglect the fundamental lesson of defeat at the ballot
box: power that is developed through electoral means can evaporate that
way, too. Everything you built can be wiped away in a heartbeat, the
moment a sufficiently motivated opponent is sworn into office.
   Happily, though, there remains another approach to building popular
power, one that is less vulnerable to the shifting opinions of the electorate.
This is not to say that it is in any way undemocratic: if anything, its
interpretation of democracy asks a great deal more of the people than
simply showing up to vote every few years. It is in every way less
conventional, more interesting and harder to achieve than electoral victory,
but ultimately, I think, has much more to teach us about the future. It started
from the widespread conviction that to think in terms of the state was
already a mistake, in a place called Rojava.

There has been a profusion of names for what happened in the breakaway
cantons of northern Syria following the 2014 withdrawal of the Damascus
regime, and that profusion is frankly bewildering. Roughly
contemporaneous, and to all appearances equally authoritative, sources
refer in English to the Democratic Federation of Northern and Eastern
Syria, or the Federal Democratic System of Northern Syria, or the
Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria (AANES). Most of us
know it, more simply, as “Rojava.”
   With a population of somewhere between 2.5 million and 5 million, and
persisting in some form from July 2012 to the present, Rojava appears to be
modern history’s largest-scale and longest-running example of a place
where order was achieved in the absence of a state, where decisions of real
material consequence were made by ordinary people sitting in assembly.64
   This is already extraordinary enough. But what is still more
extraordinary, and what particularly commends it to us in our time of
troubles, is that the people of northern Syria achieved this with their world
 on fire, amid circumstances of the most terrible devastation. And what is
most extraordinary of all is that so little is known about it outside the
region, even now. It’s hard to credit that the efforts of millions of men and
women over a decade or more can simply be made to disappear from
history, but this increasingly appears to be the case. If we want to recover
the knowledge they won at such a high cost and see what lessons we might
be able to learn from their experience, perhaps it’s best to simply start from
the first weak signals that reached the West.
   Starting toward the end of 2014 and picking up speed all through the
year that followed, word began to filter out to the outside world that there
was something astonishing happening in Kobanê, Afrîn and Cîzire, the
three provinces of northeastern Syria. The most improbable stories started
to emerge: of an ecosocialist society blossoming on what seemed like the
most inhospitable of soil, even amid the all-consuming chaos of an
exceedingly brutal civil war; of a revolution “rooted in the theories of
Bookchin and the practice of the Zapatistas,” and a society sufficiently
committed to gender equity that it required every town, village and hamlet
to elect male and female co-mayors;65 of a fierce, all-female militia called
the YPJ, which had helped to defeat the puritan jihadis of Daesh in open
combat and in so doing rescued tens of thousands of captive Yazidi women
from being sold into sexual slavery.
   Much as with the movement of the squares, and then Occupy Sandy—
but still more so, because it seemed so much more ambitious and larger in
scope—each new dispatch from Rojava arrived as an explosive expansion
of what felt possible, and you couldn’t read the slightest thing about it
without wanting to jump and rave for the joy of it all. In an article published
just about immediately after crossing back into Turkey, the anthropologist
Mick Taussig described the incredulity he felt at what he’d seen in Kobane:
“Sometimes words fail you. Names are not enough. Anarchist? Feminist?
You have to be kidding.”66
    Since at first blush few places on Earth would appear to be less
hospitable to the rise of an ecological, feminist, libertarian-socialist society
than this war-scarred wedge of northern Syria, all of this requires a good
deal of explanation. In order to place what happened in Rojava in its proper
context and understand the process by way of which this miracle came to
be, we need to reckon with the singular figure of Abdullah Öcalan and
understand how the work of a deeply obscure American thinker came to
fructify the thought of a Kurdish rebel languishing in a Turkish jail.
   Born in eastern Turkey in a year variously estimated to be 1946, 1947,
1948 or 1949, Öcalan was Kurdish, a member of an ethnic minority
distributed in a powerless scatter across the four national territories of Iran,
Iraq, Turkey and Syria. At the point at which he co-founded the Kurdish
Workers’ Party, or PKK, in 1978, Öcalan was by all accounts a fairly
conventional Marxist-Leninist and thought of the Kurdish struggle in the
terms of national liberation that were common to the era. In this early
phase, the declared aim of the PKK was to establish a homeland for the
Kurdish people, a Kurdistan on the entirely conventional lines of the
Westphalian nation-state.
   Outlawed and branded a terrorist organization by the Turkish state, for
the next two decades the PKK was forced to operate out of more or less
clandestine sanctuaries in Syria, with Öcalan himself reportedly living in a
safe house in Damascus for much of the period. Following his CIA-
facilitated 1999 capture in Nairobi, however, Öcalan was spirited away to
the Turkish prison-island of İmralı in the Sea of Marmara, where he remains
imprisoned as of this writing, and this is the moment at which everything
began to tilt.67
   Spared execution only by virtue of Turkey’s hopes for eventual
accession to the European Union and denied access to his lawyers for more
than a decade now, he has remained on the heavily guarded island fortress
in all but total isolation. In the interest of allowing him to prepare an
 adequate legal defense, though, his jailers did grant the prisoner access to
books—”hundreds,” including works by Braudel, Foucault, the Zapatistas’
Subcomandante Marcos and the midcentury German feminist and
sociologist Maria Mies.68 And among those hundreds of titles were some
written by Murray Bookchin.
    There is no public account of just how Bookchin’s writing got to Öcalan
in the first place, or which books specifically were part of the tranche he
had access to; the only one mentioned by name in the correspondence
between the two is the 1992 Urbanization without Cities.69 The entire
matter remains something of a puzzlement: again, Bookchin was hardly
top-of-mind in radical circles in 1999, and indeed, Bookchin himself
appears to have been somewhat mystified by the development. (His
daughter Debbie, a prominent municipalist activist in her own right, relates
that upon receiving correspondence from the jailed PKK leader, her then
eighty-three year-old father turned to her in evident bemusement:
“Apparently the Kurds have been reading my work and are trying to
implement my ideas.”70)
    Yet to hear Öcalan tell it in his introduction to Democratic
Confederalism, it was these works that guided his pivot from garden-variety
Marxist-Leninism to the confirmed antistatist he became.71 If the
connection between Bookchin’s thought and the actually-existing new
municipalism of 2014 and thereafter was somewhat cloudy, in Rojava the
influence was direct and unambiguous.72
    It must be said that Democratic Confederalism breaks no particularly
new ground intellectually, but that is not to detract from its considerable
merits as a work of synthesis. Öcalan, in essence, caught Bookchin at a
point in his development before he had renounced anarchism, and took him
at his word. It’s this antipathy to the form of the nation-state that underlies
Öcalan’s striking refusal to call for the establishment of a “free Kurdistan”
and instead work toward the development of a confederal, nonstate society.
     More strikingly still, his writings unhesitatingly locate the origin of all
oppression in the gender relation, arguing that neither social justice nor
ecological balance will ever be possible until women collectively claim the
power denied to them through the past several thousand years of patriarchy.
This, indeed, was so central to his thought that “the fundamental principle
of democratic socialism inside the Kurdish freedom movement is referred
to as ‘killing the male.’ ”73
    This marked turn away from Marxist orthodoxy led Öcalan to reject the
idea of a “necessary passage through stages of [historical] development”
and to dedicate himself rather to the project of building “radical democracy
in the here-and-now.”74 Having already reorganized the PKK to counter its
increasing centralism and bureaucracy, starting in the 1990s, he now
proceeded to imagine what an entire society might look like if subjected to
the same sort of transformation.75 Based on his reading of Bookchin,
Öcalan concluded,
  A free life cannot be established by using the same tools that are used to enslave society,
  nature, women, and everyone else … [P]ower and state structures must be totally replaced
  with entirely different methods, and we should not, as many revolutions have done in the past,
  fall into the temptation of using the very weapons of the system that would corrupt our
  revolutionary goals.

Öcalan proclaimed the democratic confederal system at Newroz, Kurdish
New Year, 2005, initially giving it the unfortunate (and swiftly rethought)
name Koma Komalên Kurdistan.76
   What is proclaimed, however, does not just automatically come to pass,
and the establishment of the nonstate Kurdish society Öcalan dreamed of
had to wait for the necessary conditions to come into being. Those
conditions arose, for better or worse, amid what is by common reckoning
among the bloodiest and most bitter of all contemporary conflicts: the civil
war that broke out in Syria in 2011.
 For those not already immersed in the region’s shifting political, religious
and ethnolinguistic crosscurrents, this chaotic, fractally complex, multi-way
struggle can be almost impossible to understand. In its roughest outlines,
though, the civil war pitted the nominally Ba’athist, ethnically Arab Assad
regime in Damascus, supported and supplied to this day by Russia, against
a “Free Syrian Army” supported by Turkey; the jihadi Salafists of Daesh
(better known in the West as the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, or ISIS);
and a Kurdish-led coalition eventually organized as the Syrian Democratic
Forces, or SDF. By the end of 2011, the progress of these multiple
insurgencies forced the Assad regime to triage its remaining resources,
contracting to the rump regions where it felt itself to be on firm ground.
This very much excluded the country’s northern tier, where the Kurdish
rebels increasingly demonstrated that they could capture and hold territory
—and it left Daesh their primary antagonist.
    Known in the West primarily for a series of gruesome decapitation
videos and equipped with scriptural justification for an extensive armature
of practices that included ethnic cleansing, slavery and the establishment of
rape camps, Daesh made a highly clarifying foe for the nascent Rojavan
revolution. The recruitment pitch seems obvious, most particularly for the
region’s women, faced with a choice between forced “marriage” to a
Salafist slaver or taking up arms and throwing in with the autonomous, all-
female militia of the SDF, the Women’s Protection Units, or YPJ. The ranks
of the YPJ swelled.
    At Mt. Sinjar on the Iraqi border, where Daesh had slaughtered entire
Yazidi villages and hounded tens of thousands of survivors into the baking
hills, and then during the 2014–15 siege of Kobanê, the Kurdish-led
coalition revealed itself to be an effective fighting force. Supported by
United States airdrops of weaponry and supplies, as well as US airstrikes in
direct support of combat operations, the combined militias drove Daesh
 from Kobane by late January 2015, smashing its fighting formations and
setting the survivors to disorganized flight.
    The ground was now clear for the transformation that Öcalan had first
committed the PKK to at Newroz 2005. In the three cantons of Kobanê,
Afrîn and Cîzire, this took the form of an umbrella Movement for a
Democratic Society, known by its Kurdish acronym TEV-DEM, and a
series of institutional innovations that drove the practice of democratic
confederalism down to the hamlet level.
    What eventually became clear in the months that followed was that
Democratic Autonomy, the theory of collective life Öcalan had derived
from his reading of Bookchin, had been operationalized in Rojava and
somehow made real at the largest scale. Instead of an ethno-national
homeland, what the insurgent Kurds of northern Syria had set themselves to
building was a society without a government, built on autonomous cantons
and neighborhood assemblies and dedicated to gender equity and repair of
the ecosystem.
    In the West, such ideas tend, still, to be regarded as the province of
deeply unserious people—“luxury beliefs” only suitable for the spoiled
young, or others privileged enough not to know the pressures of exigency.
In Rojava, they were put into concrete practice, often by people for whom
privilege might mean having an intact roof on the building in which they
were sleeping that night. “I don’t know if you will believe me when I say I
could physically feel the revolution,” said the sociologist Dilar Dirik, upon
her arrival:
  “How does one feel freedom on a body?,” you may rightfully ask. But … as soon as I stepped
  on Rojavan soil, suddenly, I breathed freely for the first time in my life. And though I found
  myself in one of the most dangerous places in the world, I felt safer than ever.77

   Dirik was not alone in feeling that the people of northern Syria had
achieved something exceptional. To paraphrase Sartre’s famous comments
about Che Guevara, the autonomous citizens of this new Rojava—and
 especially those fighting in the ranks of the Kurdish militias, the YPG and
YPJ—struck me from the moment I first read about them as the most fully
realized human beings of our time. As revealed in interview after interview,
their choices and actions seemed fully aligned with their beliefs, in a way
that very few of us ever get to experience.78 Their understanding of
domination and what it requires of those who would unwind it was direct,
complete, unclouded. And despite the brutality of their war and the sorrow
of their circumstances, it was hard for me not to envy them a little. They
had been beset by something terrible, and they were doing something about
it. Beyond the general inspiration of knowing that such things are still
possible, it’s this specific quality of having been forged under maximum
pressure that commends Rojava to us now as a guide to fruitful conduct in
the Long Emergency.

Rojava made good on Bookchin’s proposal that larger polities be divided
into political units compact enough that they might be governed effectively
in regular, face-to-face assembly. This step appears to have been taken on
pragmatic grounds, after the neighborhood councils that had initially been
established proved unable to contain everyone who wanted to join them.
The sense that this sudden clamor to participate was the irresistible
upwelling of something far too long suppressed is palpable, even through
secondhand accounts:
  By the spring of 2012, hundreds of thousands of people were flocking to the neighborhood
  meetings, eager to participate, in numbers far greater than the venues could accommodate …
  Clearly the neighborhood unit was just too large. So to allow all residents to represent and
  organize themselves, the [revolutionary administration] created a new level in the cities’
  council structure: the commune, at the level of the residential street.79

The commune completed the architecture of open, democratic decision
bodies operating at every scale of Rojavan public life, from each canton
itself down to each cluster of households. “Decentralized administration
and differing needs and circumstances between the three cantons” meant
 that the details of its implementation have varied over time and from place
to place across the AANES, but some suggestive numbers can be offered.
    The city of Qamişlo, for example, was initially divided into six districts,
each of which was further subdivided into 18 communes of 300 residents
apiece; in the countryside, a single commune might suffice for a whole
village.80 By 2016, there were some 530 communes in Afrîn, and 620 in
Cizîre.81 These units became the basic cell of the Rojavan revolution,
simultaneously its fundamental enabling condition and its message.
    In principle, each commune organized under TEV-DEM was supposed
to be relatively self-sufficient, hosting a production cooperative that
generated enough to provide for its own needs as well as affording some
degree of trade between neighbors. Under this system, it was the
commune’s general assembly that apportioned the necessities of life among
residents—fuel, bread and so on—and also where decisions about the day-
to-day running of the community were made.82
    Each commune was also furnished, wherever possible, with a range of
committees corresponding with the administrative functions of a city
government, from the ideology committee, which handled the operation of
educational institutions, to the peace committee, charged with the
maintenance of public safety. In scale and function, these were roughly
parallel to the neighborhood assembly working groups of Spanish
municipalism. They were, however, able to achieve what the working
groups could not—not merely offering neighbors a venue in which they
could make decisions for themselves but actually furnishing them with the
tools necessary to enact the results.
    The commune structure allowed Rojava a degree of creativity in the
management of everyday challenges that exceeded anything Bookchin had
imagined, or for that matter anything ever deployed at scale in the West.
There were three particular features of Democratic Autonomy that seem as
though they were significantly enhanced by the system of local assemblies:
 its centering of women’s voices; its pursuit of justice, both civil and
criminal; and its ability to integrate the disparate, mutually wary ethnic and
religious communities of Syria’s northern tier.

Taken together with its antistatism, it is the deep commitment to feminism
that gave the Rojavan experiment much of its shimmeringly improbable
character (and in turn furnished the Western media with their most enduring
image of Rojava, the fighters of the YPJ).
    I have never come across a fully satisfactory explanation as to just how
and why the commitment to gender equity became so deeply entwined with
the Kurdish revolution. The equality of women seems to have been there all
along, as both abstract value and practical method, informing all phases of
the PKK’s struggle since at least the 1987 founding of its first all-female
body, the Union of the Patriotic Women of Kurdistan (YJWK). Even
beyond this, though, as Dilar Dirik makes clear in her invaluable study The
Kurdish Women’s Movement, everything we have come to understand as
“Rojava” would be unthinkable without accounting for the utter centrality it
placed upon women’s voices, perspectives and experiences of the world.83
    The Rojavan theory of feminism is called “jineology,” from jin, the
Kurdish for “woman,” and for better or worse, in practice it follows tenets
first laid out by Öcalan in his 2003 manifesto, The Sociology of Freedom.84
These were predicated on both a fairly traditional gender binary and a
comparable degree of essentialism, Öcalan holding that women were
“biologically more compassionate and empathic than men, had more
‘emotional intelligence’ and were closer to nature.”85 If it is bracing enough
to read a political figure with such widespread influence opine that “a
movement for woman’s freedom should strive for anti-hierarchical and non-
statist political formations,” it is just as disappointing to read in the same
breath that this is “because hierarchy and statism are not easily compatible
with woman’s nature.”86
     It is fair to wonder whether any jineology framed in this way can easily
accommodate the post-Butlerian understandings of gender current on the
Western left. But Öcalan is not Rojava, and jineology as it was interpreted
by Rojavan women inclined away from such raw essentialism: Dorşîn Akîf,
an instructor at the Women’s Academy in the Cîzire town of Rimêlan,
explained in 2015 that “Concepts of men and women aren’t biologistic—
we’re against that … Of course we believe that gender is socially
constructed.”87 (Even friendly Western observers may not have grasped the
depth of thought often involved in the day-to-day working-out of jineology,
though, prevented by their own prejudice from seeing its sophistication. As
the late David Graeber put it, “It never occurs to them that people in
Kurdistan might be reading Judith Butler too.”88)
    Whatever its weaknesses as theory, jineology was hugely effective in
practice. The mixed TEV-DEM communes implemented “the feminization
of politics” rather directly, in the form of the distinctive dual-mayor
structure, the mandate that each committee be at least 40 percent composed
of women, and above all in the mass participation of women in direct self-
determination. But Rojavan women also had access to their own dedicated
communes, organized under the auspices of the Rojava-wide confederation
of women’s organizations Kongra Star, and these went further still.89 If
jineology figured women as “the oldest colony,” the reorganization of
women’s life around their own communes can be understood in part as a
literal process of decolonization, ejecting the oppressor from the territory it
had so long exploited and undertaking the reclamation of an all-but-
forgotten sovereignty.90
    Parallel, women-only governance structures were set up by Kongra Star
in each commune, with veto power over any decision that bore on the girls
and women within their ambit. Participation in these councils was high, on
average fluctuating between 50 and 70 percent, and in some neighborhoods
regularly reached 100 percent of the adult female population.91 Kongra Star
 also sponsored the establishment of a Mala Jin, or House of Women, in each
district, as both an institution and a physical “place where women can turn
for assistance, support, mediation, advice, and protection.”92
    But it was the assemblies where the real alchemy happened. Their
invitation to discuss, debate and decide transformed what had been strictly
private, familial affairs—often enough hidden out of a misplaced sense of
shame—into matters of public concern, whose resolution the whole
community was thereafter accountable for. The widely circulated images of
fiery young YPJ fighters provided the world with one image of Rojavan
women no longer willing to bear the yoke of patriarchal oppression in any
of its aspects and prepared to defend their bodily autonomy at all costs.93
The women’s assemblies gave it another. These images were not nearly as
widely reproduced, but what they depict is in its own way every bit as vivid
and moving: headscarfed women, generally a few years older than their
opposite numbers in the YPJ, gathered by the dozen in their cheap Chinese
Monoblocs in one dusty courtyard after another, visibly determined to
assert themselves as the agents and protagonists of their own lives.

The commune structure also lay at the heart of the Rojavan approach to
public safety and the resolution of conflict.
   In most larger Rojavan population centers, there was an armed security
formation called the Aşayîs, which along with responsibility for countering
jihadi or Turkish attempts at sabotage took on some of the functions of
police; as “many” residents frankly explained their situation in 2014,
“without the Aşayîs, none of us could live here.”94 But wherever possible,
both disputes between neighbors and more serious breaches of public order
were handled locally and consensually, through the mediation of peace
committees. Katherine Finn, an Irish barrister who observed the Rojavan
justice system in operation in May 2018, noted that this “legal system
 mirrors the political structure, which is to say that there are fora for
resolution of legal problems from street level upwards.”95
    At the most local level, peace committees were composed of anywhere
between five and ten members elected from among the residents of a
commune, with the usual provision that at least 40 percent of them be
women. (In the parallel women’s committees organized under Kongra Star,
specifically charged with responsibility for domestic and other forms of
patriarchal violence, they were entirely composed of women.) These were
empowered to investigate and redress whatever breaches of the peace arose
in their commune’s immediate locale. Their basic tool was mediation.
    In such a mediation process, the members of the peace committee—none
of whom needed to be legally qualified, many of whom remained untrained
by anything except experience—gathered an alleged perpetrator, their
victim and any witnesses in a series of informal conversations, which
ordinarily took place in homes or other noninstitutional locations. There
they would collectively attempt to determine what had taken place and
what, if anything, could be done to repair it. Perhaps the most unfamiliar
aspect of this is that it does not rely upon the adversarial framing common
to Western systems of jurisprudence, in either common-law or Napoleonic
varieties: there is neither prosecutor nor defense. The emphasis is placed,
rather, on consensus and on a collaborative search for measures of redress
and rehabilitation that can be agreed to by all parties.
    The range of measures for redress available to peace committees was
both extensive and creative. It included imprisonment, as a last resort, but
more often involved a range of sanctions tailored to the specific situation,
most of which were aimed at keeping the offender in the community in
some way. These included
  a period of education, lasting until the trainers are convinced that the person has changed;
  work in a cooperative or public service; exclusion from the commune; social isolation—for
  some people the hardest [punishment] of all; boycott, if the convicted person has a shop;
  temporary relocation to another neighborhood; and exclusion from some public rights.96
    Beyond its moral decency, this desire to avoid imprisonment wherever
possible speaks to one of the key benefits of this sort of restorative practice
for collective resilience: when an offender can be rehabilitated locally, the
community retains access to their energy and whatever skills they might
have to offer, and the fabric of family and neighborly relations remains to a
greater or lesser degree intact.
   Should the members of a commune- or neighborhood-level peace
committee for whatever reason not be able to achieve agreement, they were
able to invoke a larger-scale form of public safety administration, known as
the “justice platform.” These convened anywhere up to 300 people to hear
cases, drawn from “related communes and councils, civil society
organizations [and] social movements,” and were considered to be the final
arbiter short of the formal court system.97 Due to their size, these more
often resorted to a majority-vote-decision rule than the strict pursuit of
consensus, but the spirit in which proceedings were conducted was the
same: the search for a resolution that all parties could live with. This is the
assembly writ large—the assembly with real dispositive power over life,
chartered and undertaken with all the high seriousness of any courtroom
anywhere.
   The turn to such relatively informal methods of jurisprudence wasn’t
simply an artifact of the civil war, some field expedient turned to out of
desperation. As with jineology, the commitment to restorative justice
precedes the revolution in Rojava, and its techniques had been practiced in
Kurdish communities on both sides of the Turkish-Syrian border for many
years. In 2011, a member of the legal committee in the Kurdish-majority
Turkish town of Gewer told a visiting team of German researchers that,
under Democratic Autonomy as it was practiced there, “We don’t lock
people up and then release them fifteen years later. Instead we try to effect a
fundamental transformation in the person and then reintegrate him.”98 This
chimes with the Mala Jin organization’s account of its own conflict-
 resolution work, a decade later: “We build peace in the society, we are
neither [civil] nor criminal lawyers. The goal … is to avoid taking the case
to the court.”99
    The AANES was and is by no means a prisonless LeGuinian utopia. It
has maintained a prison system throughout its existence, which at one point
held some 2,700 civilians and 11,200 Daesh prisoners of war, as well as a
far larger network of detention camps for as-yet-untried Daesh fighters and
their families.100 But there does seem to have been a concerted, consistent
effort to rethink criminal jurisprudence in such a way as to divert people
from ever entering this system. And though, as we’ve seen, there were
police units in Rojavan society, they appear to have conceived of their role
differently than any public safety department we’re likely to be familiar
with.
    Graeber gives us a sense of just how differently, in his account of a
December 2014 visit to an Asayîs training academy:
  Everyone had to take courses in nonviolent conflict resolution and feminist theory before they
  were allowed to touch a gun. The co-directors explained to us that their ultimate aim was to
  give everyone in the country six weeks of police training, so that ultimately, they could
  eliminate the police.101

In the West, police, prison and other institutions of the carceral state
maintain such a hegemonic hold over our imagination that we can scarcely
even conceive of ways in which the ends of public safety might be pursued
that do not make recourse to them. Our experiments with restorative justice
are just that: tentative, underfunded, small in scale. As yet, the infrastructure
to underwrite a consensual jurisprudence barely exists for us, and it
certainly has yet to be embedded in community safety institutions with
broad purchase, even given the widespread revulsion with policing that has
broken out in the post–Black Lives Matter, post–Sarah Everard moment.
   By distinct contrast, Rojava remains the only contemporary polity I
know of in which restorative practice was not part of an experimental or
 diversionary program intended to reduce loads on the conventional criminal
justice system. It was the system. By distributing the capacity to de-escalate
conflict, preserve public order and protect both individuals and
communities across the entire social field, Rojavan practice developed ways
of securing justice appropriate to a free people, and its methods and insights
remain available to call upon in other times and places where there is no
state.

Finally, Rojava appears to have devised a social architecture that was, at
least in certain times and places, successfully able to recruit participants
from a wide variety of Syria’s famously fractious factions and communities.
In part, this seems to have been due to perceptions among the part of the
population that did not throw in with Democratic Autonomy that a better
quality of life was being enjoyed by their peers.102 As a Kurdish Peshmerga
fighter not affiliated with the SDF told Dilar Dirik, admiringly, “We see
what their table looks like, we see how they eat. They don’t own anything
for themselves.”103
    But the embrace extended to other religious and ethnic communities, as
well: not merely Kurds, that is, but also the Alawite and other Arabs,
Armenians, Circassians, Druze, Syriacs, Turkmen and Yazidi living in the
three liberated cantons. Although Democratic Autonomy originated among
Kurds, in practice its village-level institutions were open, and participation
in them seen to be so beneficial, especially for women, that members of
other ethnic communities either enlisted in them directly or formed their
own equivalents. As Silvan Afrin, an economist from the city of Dêrîk,
described her local assembly, “It’s an open meeting, where people in the
neighborhood talk about their problems, and everyone comes, Arabs, Kurds,
Syrians, everyone.”104
    It’s certainly possible to overstate the case, but this remarkable ability to
attract members of communities figured as other, and integrate them
 individually and collectively in a process of shared self-determination,
stands out in a time that otherwise seems hell-bent on atomizing us along
every conceivable fracture plane of identity. The lesson appears to be that if
you can build something that tangibly improves the scope of agency
experienced in daily life, people will flock to it, whatever reservations they
may hold.
    This is part of what gets missed when Rojava is narrowly understood as
a Kurdish achievement. A pattern of life that did, indeed, begin among the
Kurds of northern Syria was effective enough in expanding their exercise of
freedom that it appealed to members of other communities—and it was
expressed through an institutional design that was open and capacious
enough to welcome everyone who felt it spoke to them. Another way of
describing this is as an insistence that there is no necessary contradiction
between the work of survival, the work of care and the work of justice.
    For now, all of this seems moot. At some point during a call with Turkish
president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan on October 6, 2019, a circuit closed
somewhere in the wet congeries that serves Donald Trump as a brain, and
under the impression that it was somehow a projection of strength and
resolve, he did exactly what Erdoğan wanted of him: he ordered that the US
special forces that had hitherto afforded Rojava an umbrella of deterrence
be withdrawn. This was an unmistakable signal that the fate of the Kurds
was no concern of the United States, and it effectively transformed Syria’s
northern tier into a free-fire zone.105 Two days later, under the cover of
airstrikes and artillery barrages, Turkish forces rolled across the border, and
the Rojavan experiment was effectively nipped in the bud.106
    Afrîn had already been lost to the Turks at the beginning of 2018. Now
much of the remaining territory of the three original cantons was converted
to a thirty-kilometer-wide “safe zone” carved up between Turkish and
Russian forces, the contours of which were agreed to without any Syrian
participation to speak of, at a meeting between Erdoğan and Russian
 president Vladimir Putin held barely two weeks after the former’s call with
Trump.107 A Turkish campaign of assassinations and drone strikes aimed at
destabilizing the AANES continues to the present, as well as the hugely
destructive diversion of water from the Syrian reach of the Euphrates.108
   Life in Rojava goes on, as best it can. But hemmed in by great-power
games, the realpolitikal necessity of cooperation with the Damascus regime,
and the unremitting hostility of its neighbor to the north, Rojava no longer
seems to have the organic capacity to continue its development of
Democratic Autonomy.

As different as they surely were, and for all the distance that separates the
ends they came to, the throughline that connects new municipalist Spain
with revolutionary Rojava consists in people doing something about
conditions of life they had come to find intolerable. In considering the
practical lessons of both, the original insight bound up in Bookchin’s social
ecology still feels substantially correct: that there is a profound relationship
between the microscale and the macro-, between the means of politics and
their ends, between ordinary people gathered in assembly to discuss the
problems they face and the fate of the ecosphere they belong to.
    In Rojava, the popular assembly finally surpassed the “moral functions”
it had been limited to at its maximum extent in municipalist Spain, and
opened at last onto actual power. In the apportionment of daily necessities,
in the restorative work of the peace committees, in the development of
women’s capacities, it was the venue in which questions of real
consequence for everyday life were decided. But this appears to have been
possible only because of the power vacuum left by the withdrawal of the
Syrian state, amid the devastation and anguish of civil war. There was in
practical terms no government in northern Syria following the Assadists’
withdrawal to Damascus and, until the establishment of the councils, very
little in the way of functioning governance, either.109 And this meant that
 the abstractions of Öcalan’s Democratic Confederalism could be translated
into a set of facts on the ground with relatively little in the way of slippage.
    What happened in Rojava during the years immediately thereafter is still
the preeminent example of what people do to care for themselves when the
emergency in their lives becomes permanent. Its power to inspire remains
undiminished. But if circumstances amounting to abject state failure are the
sole material conditions under which anything like Democratic Autonomy
becomes possible, it may not be a practically useful guide to surviving the
particular future we face. Until and unless we experience that failure for
ourselves—and, inshallah, nobody again ever should have to face what the
Syrian people have endured—the Rojavan experience may not offer us
much insight into action we can take in our own circumstances.
    We still need a way of caring for ourselves that is true to the possibilities
and constraints of our own situation, that can be put into practice around
and in the shadow of the state (as well as outside it entirely, should that
come to pass). We still need to discover a way of organizing collective
power that does not rely upon the shifting winds of electoral sentiment, that
lets people establish meaningful control over resource by themselves and
for themselves, without waiting for the approval of anyone else.
    I am convinced that, with its conceptual architecture of Communalism,
confederalism and libertarian municipalism, social ecology is a strong part
of the answer to these questions. But Bookchin devised this body of thought
at a time when the planetary crisis had not yet advanced to a critical stage.
In the terms we would use now, it was a strategy of mitigation, intended to
drive the decarbonization of production and therefore help to maintain
Earth systems within their safe operating limits.
    In our moment, those systems have already exceeded the parameters of
their normal variation—the bounds they’ve fluctuated within for all the
time since the Eemian interglacial period 125,000 years ago. The ecosphere,
by definition, no longer operates in the way it has for much of the time we
 have walked the planet. The time for mitigation has passed. So we now
need to weigh a question Bookchin never had to consider: Can practices
inspired by his social ecology and Communalism function as strategies of
adaptation? We need to discover if, and how, they might be translated into
terms we can use, and whether they are tools we can rely upon as we make
our way together amid the desperate seasons of this harsh new world.

                            OceanofPDF.com
                                      4
                            Beyond Hope



And so we find ourselves at a moment of decision. What can we do now, to
make our way through the terrifying set of conditions we’ve inherited?
What choices are available to us?
   We can buy less, and that more locally, in the hope that in aggregating
and responding to our purchase signals, the market will commit itself,
permanently and worldwide, to a low-carbon production pathway.
   We can vote, in the hope of electing legislatures and governments
committed to real climate action and able to see their policies enacted as
binding law.
   We can protest, in the hope that legislators will note and heed the will of
their constituents, and that governments and transnational bodies can be
pushed toward a more aggressive defense of the planet, whether they were
elected or not.
   We can engage in civil disobedience, in the hope that we can convince
enough of our fellow citizens of the lateness of the hour, and that they, too,
will be motivated to do something.
   We can engage in the sabotage of extractive industries, in the hope that
their calculus of return on investment can be shifted, and that shareholders
will tire of plundering the Earth for so little in the way of gain.
   We can work toward the revolutionary seizure of power, in the hope that
we will succeed in time to take meaningful action on climate, and that our
 success will inspire other would-be insurgents to undertake and accomplish
the same, everywhere.
    We can entrust our fate to technical means, in the hope that someone
somewhere will invent a way of safely decarbonizing the atmosphere, or
reflecting the sun’s heat back to space, or stabilizing the ice sheets where
they are, or really all of that.
    Each of us is free to commit to any of these courses of action, or—at the
risk of some incoherence—even all of them at once. They are all based on a
self-consistent theory of change of one sort or another. But despite their
superficial differences, all of these strategies share some deep qualities in
common. They are all indirect: they leave you moored in your life, standing
by, doing nothing to develop your own capacities. They act with delayed
effect: however long they take to work, we can be reasonably sure that it is
not soon enough. They are wildly contingent on the coordinated efforts of
others, depending on the energy, conviction and incorruptibility of human
beings beyond our reach or ability to influence, and their capacity to
cooperate with one another at scale.
    Finally, there’s no guarantee that any of them will work or even produce
any measurable results at all. You could invest every iota of your life energy
in any of these strategies for change for the rest of your days on Earth and
move the needle on climate not at all.
    This leaves us with one final possibility. We can act—directly,
immediately, locally, without waiting for the state or any other institution to
undertake our defense. What might that look like?

In her wonderful social history of squatting on New York’s Lower East
Side, Ours to Lose, Amy Starecheski tells the story of the electricity-
generating stationary bicycle set up on the sidewalk outside C-Squat on
Avenue C, which supplied power to a bank of phone chargers during the
extended outages that followed Superstorm Sandy.1 The entire community
 gathered around the chargers, at first simply to top up their phones, but later
simply because that’s where the people were. Over these days and weeks,
the sidewalk in front of C-Squat was the most obvious place for people
experiencing a sharp, sudden disruption of their way of life to seek out
useful information, the comfort of fellowship and vital material support.
   Here in microcosm is a model for the kind of community infrastructure
we will need to see us through the Long Emergency: when the grid goes
down or the water from the pipes isn’t safe to drink, there ought to be a
place close at hand where we can attend to these material needs … that is
also a place where we might seek the strength, insight and reassurance of
others in the same straits.
   As the unfolding reality of Earth system collapse increasingly intersects
with the organized abandonment of our communities, and the complex
systems we rely upon for the maintenance of everyday life prove to be far
more fragile and contingent than we’d ever understood them to be, many of
us will have more and more need of settings like this. What I believe our
troubled times now ask of us is that we be more conscious and purposive
about creating them in our communities—each one provisioned against the
hour of maximum need and linked with others in a loose, confederal
network. I call them “Lifehouses.”
   The fundamental idea of the Lifehouse is that there should be a place in
every three- or four-city-block radius where you can charge your phone
when the power’s down everywhere else, draw drinking water when the
supply from the mains is for whatever reason untrustworthy, gather with
your neighbors to discuss matters of common concern, organize reliable
childcare, borrow tools it doesn’t make sense for any one household to own
individually and so on—and that these can and should be one and the same
place. As a foundation for collective resourcefulness, the Lifehouse is a
practical implementation of the values we’ve spent this book exploring.
    There’s a kind of positive externality that emerges from organizing
things in this way, as well. As we’ve seen, one of the problems that always
vexes those of us who believe in the assembly, and similar deeply
participatory ways of managing our communities, is that these types of
deliberation are often a hard sell. Most of us are exhausted, for starters. Our
lives already hem us in with obligations and prior commitments, situations
that require our presence and undivided attention.
   We may not always have the energy or the wherewithal to travel very far
to “participate,” even if we’re convinced in the abstract of the value of
doing so. If the place of assembly is right in our immediate neighborhood,
though? And we happen to be going there anyway, to charge a phone, pick
up the kids, return a borrowed dehumidifier, or simply seek shelter from the
heat? Then the odds that any one of us will get meaningfully involved in the
stewardship of collective services increases considerably.
   Just like the phone chargers on the table outside C-Squat, think of the
infrastructural provisions as the “killer app”: the compelling proposition
that pulls people into the Lifehouse. But the deep value is in the other
voices we encounter there.
   Lifehouses would be most useful if we thought of them as places to help
us ride out the depredations of neoliberal austerity now, as well as the
storms to come. This means furnishing every cluster of a hundred or so
households with access to a structure that’s been fitted out as a shelter for
those displaced from their homes, a storehouse for emergency food stocks
and a heating-and-cooling center for the physically vulnerable. It should be
able to purify enough drinking water, and generate enough electric power,
to support the surrounding neighborhood when the ordinary sources of
supply become unreliable. And it should be staffed, on a 24/7 basis, by
volunteers who know the neighborhood and its residents well and have a
developed sense for the matters that concern them most.
    That way, when the moment strikes, there’s no need to organize
makeshift distribution sites like the tent in Malik Rahim’s driveway, or hope
that the parish church has a rector sympathetic enough to offer up their
space. Both the physical facilities and the social networks to support a
robust local mutual care effort are already in place. Indeed, that care effort
is at this point the merest extension or intensification of what people are
already doing in their everyday lives.
   The value of such a place extends past the material to the social, psychic
and affective. If a Lifehouse can be somewhere to gather and purify
rainwater, the nexus of a solar-powered neighborhood microgrid and a place
to grow vegetables, it can also be a base for other services and methods of
self-provision—a community workshop, a drop-in center for young people
or the elderly and a place for peer-to-peer modes of care like the
“hologram” Cassie Thornton derived from her experience of the Greek
solidarity clinics to latch on. It can be all those things at once, provisioned
and run by the people living in its catchment area.
   If mutual care needs a site, and so does collective power, then that site
should draw out and strengthen the connections between these ways of
being in the world.

It is imperative in this that we avoid any suggestion of planning or pre-
defining something that must emerge organically from people’s own
priorities and decisions. Everything important about this idea must be
worked out in practice, in the light of local experiences, local struggles and
local values. But in what follows, I’d nevertheless like to set out some of
my own thoughts about the things a Lifehouse ought to do and be.
    At the outset, though, I should probably set some expectations about
what Lifehouses cannot achieve.
    It’s clear even in these early days of the Long Emergency that the scale
of devastation involved in many climate-driven events will often be so
 extreme that no community hub will be able hold its own. There is no
suggestion here that (for example) any facility will help a community
survive sustained wet-bulb temperatures above 35°C (95°F) if it is unable to
maintain its own cooling, or shelter people from the total destruction of a
runaway wildfire, or do anything at all for them if it is submerged beneath
rising floodwaters.
    Not every community Lifehouse, further, will be able to provide for each
and every circumstance it might be confronted with. It’s obviously hard to
purify enough rainwater to drink when there hasn’t been a drop of
precipitation for months, or to grow anything unaided in soil that’s been
depleted of its fertility over decades. However resourceful people may be,
there will inevitably be times that they need tools, medicines or equipment
that simply cannot be procured or produced locally. In part, this is why we
cannot imagine the Lifehouse as something that stands alone. Each one
needs to be linked with others in some confederal structure, so they can
distribute some of their burdens across the network in moments of acute
pressure and in this way bear up under what might otherwise be an
intolerable load.
    But even that fails to address the central reservation some who are
otherwise sympathetic to the idea may hold. A Life-house, even a large-
scale network of Lifehouses, is not the revolution. It cannot directly hold to
account any of the actors we know are responsible for our peril. It can do
nothing overt to prevent the larger forces of market and state from
continuing to dominate the world and in doing so desecrate it. Our
commitment to build the Lifehouse may even dovetail uncomfortably with
the premise, if not the conclusion, of an argument we know the extractive
industries are preparing to foist upon us—that it is too late to stop the planet
from heating and therefore that there is little enough sense impeding them
in their pursuit of profit. And for this reason alone, the idea will not be
acceptable to many who think of themselves as belonging to the progressive
 tradition. All a Lifehouse can ever do is give people a space in which they
might realize a vision of social ecology, tending to themselves and the
planet by practicing and experiencing solidarity, mutual care and self-
determination.
   In the fullness of time, this may itself prove to be a form of slow repair
and, should it propagate widely enough, a healing of the damage done. But
in any timeframe we will live to see, any Lifehouse will, at best, remain
what scholars of these things call a “heterotopia of resistance”: a space
organized outside, apart from and in opposition to the main currents of a
society.2 Establishing such spaces may or may not help to advance the
grander vision of ecological accountability and justice we cherish, but I
think we will be very glad to have recourse to them when the moment of
need arrives.
   It probably does need to be said in so many words, though, that despite
the inherently global nature of this crisis, just about everything about the
discussion that follows concerns actions we take in our own backyard.
   When everything goes sideways, we’re largely compelled to make do
with the resources in our immediate vicinity. But there’s a good argument to
be made for continuing to organize and work locally, too. At this most
granular scale, it ought to be possible for us to reassert at least some control
over our conditions and to witness the results of our efforts.
   That “witness” is vital in ways that aren’t simply about functionalist
assessment. In dark times, we need to be able to see the impact of our
actions to keep despair at bay. We need to feel like there’s some more or
less direct gearing between the choices we make together and the concrete
extension of shelter to those in danger. We need, in other words, to feel our
power. That only really becomes possible when the questions we are
deciding involve things that are close at hand.
 If we do want to organize a Lifehouse in our community, the very first
question we’ll be confronted with is where we intend to house it. It will
have to be a place where people can safely gather in numbers, maybe not
the assembly of “one-fifth of the total population in a defined geographic
area” specified by Cooperation Jackson’s Kali Akuno, but not too far short
of that, either. Beyond sheltering those people from the elements, it should
be able to physically support the services and provisions they require when
everything else fails them.
   In many neighborhoods, there will often already be a building or
physical site that organically serves many of these functions. This is the
neighborhood’s naturally arising Schelling Point, or node of unconscious
coordination.3 Whether house of worship or union hall, high school gym or
public library, it will be where people in the surrounding streets
instinctively turn for safety and aid in times of trouble.
   For example, consider the 51,000-odd church buildings scattered across
England, each of them located at the heart of a town, village or urban
parish, and each generally built to abide across the centuries. In a time when
the profession of Christian faith is in precipitous decline, many of these
buildings have neither an active congregation to care for them nor
meaningful links to the lives unfolding all around them. They face
abandonment, decrepitude and eventual collapse, even as the human
communities they’re embedded in still have want of the sanctuary they once
offered. Many of these structures would make exceptional Lifehouses—it’s
easy to imagine them restored to new purpose with solar panels shading the
wonky gravestones, and perhaps a cluster of direct air capture units huffing
away out back.
   Even in places where no such stock of abandoned churches exists,
though, there will likely be solid options available for recuperation. Just
about every neighborhood that has become a sacrifice zone under the
ordinary circumstances of organized abandonment has one or more
 underutilized structures perfectly suited to use as a Lifehouse. Think of
commercial premises that can’t be leased profitably, or a school in a
catchment area depopulated of school-age children. These structures belong
to the category spatial researcher Samaneh Moafi calls “negative
commons”: having been discarded because they’ve lost all utility as either
capital or the state reckon it, they become available for collective use
almost as an afterthought.4 They are there to be grasped and made use of.
    A Lifehouse needn’t even be a conventional building per se. In a time of
violent and unpredictable hazards, there is some logic to implementing the
idea as a cluster of lightweight, rapidly demountable structures like those
erected by the radical architectural practice raumlaborberlin on the site of a
rainwater retention pond at Berlin’s former Tempelhof airport.5 This
complex, Floating University, has been designed to accommodate a wide
range of climate conditions. All of the structures that comprise it are built of
cheap commodity materials like scaffolding tubes, timber frames, sheet
plywood and straw and can be reconfigured very nearly at will as programs
and requirements shift.6 Floating University therefore evolves with the
seasons and changing uses and remains able to function as a gathering place
whether the ground beneath is fully flooded or parched to the point of
cracking. Given even a few days’ warning, the components of a Lifehouse
organized along these lines might be broken down and moved to a safe
location, or even laid by to wait out the danger in suitably hardened storage
onsite.
    Raising new structures any more substantial than those making up
Floating University, though, will become increasingly difficult to justify
over the years to come, on the principle that the least damaging building is
the one that’s already built.7 The enormous quantity of carbon released into
the atmosphere in any conventional construction process offers a very
strong argument for reclaiming the structures that already exist, at or close
to the psychic heart of the places in which so many of us live, as homes for
 community resilience hubs. There will, of course, be neighborhoods where
there are no such abandoned structures—but these, virtually by definition,
will be places where a robust market for land continues to function. Such
communities don’t have acute need for the things a Lifehouse does. They
would appear to already be adequately cared for by the market, and most
likely prefer it that way. The rest of us, though? We will increasingly want
somewhere we can come together to care for ourselves and for one another,
and to decide from among the courses of action available to us.
    In some cases, it may be possible for a community to form a special-
purpose land trust or the like: some legal instrument that would let it buy a
derelict school or house of worship legitimately, refit it as a Lifehouse and
build up a reserve fund for the upkeep, maintenance and repair that will
surely be necessary. But gaining access to underutilized or abandoned
structures, and occupying them over any meaningful period of time, will
often mean summoning the courage to operate outside the bounds of law.
Elaine Brown explains how this worked for the Black Panthers: “If we
wanted to open a clinic, we took over a piece of property, we didn’t pay
rent. We would run an electrical line from wherever, didn’t pay for
electricity. We’d go to the hospital and just steal supplies.”8
    I know that many of us struggle with such fearless directness of action,
often for excellent reason. There are no upsides to getting your life tangled
up with authority, for any of us, and the consequences of having done so
can easily drag on for years even where they are not immediately lethal. But
the Long Emergency has a way of clarifying the stakes of inaction. The
derelict middle school on the avenue is unambiguously worth more tonight,
as a shelter for bodies at risk, than the land beneath it is to some sovereign
wealth fund far across the sea at some abstract time to come. At moments
like this, when all that stands between people in desperate need and the
possibility of their rescue is a pair of bolt cutters, the moral force and the
 practical necessity of breaking the law are in complete alignment.9 All that’s
required of us is that we summon the courage to act.
    The mutual aid slogan has it that “audacity is our capacity.”10 The
French Jesuit (and philosopher) Michel de Certeau suggests that the
powerless must always “vigilantly make use of the cracks that particular
conjunctions open in the surveillance of the proprietary powers,” which is
really another way of saying the same thing.11 There’s no question that our
particular conjunction produces the kind of lapses in oversight Certeau is
talking about, and will continue to, in near-endless profusion. What we now
need to determine is whether they will be wide enough to smuggle our lives
through intact.

Being able to draw upon the resources of a properly outfitted Lifehouse has
surprisingly deep implications. A community that is able to house, feed and
care for its members, furnish them with clean water to drink and generate
enough power to heat or cool them will find that it is broadly robust to the
consequences of decisions made elsewhere. It is effectively autonomous.
   This is not the same thing as autarky, or total self-sufficiency, which is in
any event never truly achievable. But a degree of self-reliance in these
matters does afford a community significant room for maneuver in a world
that is otherwise defined by the constraints it imposes. Become resourceful
in these specific ways, and the ability of others to place limits on your
freedom of action is sharply circumscribed. You can participate in larger
networks or decouple from them at will, without affecting your underlying
capacity to provide for your neighbors.
   The technical term for this architecture of connection is “distributed,”
and it’s the least familiar of the three basic ways to organize a network.12
   We all know what centralized institutions look like. From schools to
hospitals to companies large and small, they’re all around us, in both public
and private spheres, and have been all our lives. In a centralized
 architecture, all information flow between one local node and another is
forced to travel through a controlling authority that sits at the hub of the
network. This is the way hierarchical, command-and-control organizations
like FEMA or the Red Cross are structured, and it makes them very slow.
Information from elements at the network edge has to travel all the way to
the center before decisions about posture and commitment can be reached.
As we saw with the Black Panthers, this kind of network topography is
acutely vulnerable to a decapitation attack: destroy the central node, and all
of the others are cut off from one another, utterly unable to learn anything
about another’s condition or coordinate their activity in any other way. (We
say of such networks that they have a “single point of failure.”)
    The obvious alternative to a centralized organizational structure might
seem to be one that is decentralized, and this is certainly the term that’s
most often used in political contexts to describe nonhierarchical
arrangements of power. But there’s some ambiguity in this, stemming from
the different ways in which network theorists and people who talk about
politics use language. Not all decentralized networks preserve the features
of robustness, resiliency and local autonomy that best suit a federation of
Lifehouses.
    In hard times, then, what we’re really after is a distributed structure, in
which independent capacity and decision-making authority reside in every
local node in the network, and each is free to connect with any or all of the
others, on a horizontal, peer-to-peer basis.
    This means that nobody involved ever has to wait for guidance or
permission from above to act: when emergent conditions arise, people have
all the tools, skills and resources they need to respond locally. It’s not
particularly efficient: in fact, there is by definition maximum redundancy
and duplication of effort in a network of this sort. But there is no single
point of failure. Individual nodes or the communication links between them
can be disrupted or even destroyed, without damaging any other node or the
 resilience of the network as a whole. This quality makes a distributed
topology very well suited to a time of widespread volatility, and it’s what
commends it to us for the organization of our Lifehouse network.
   What if something happens to the Lifehouse itself, though? Why not
distribute its functions around the neighborhood, so there’s no single point
of failure? It’s an excellent point, and people may want to consider doing
just that. But there does come a moment at which the benefits of dispersion
are outweighed by its disadvantages, and in this case the upsides of being
together feel like they are worth the risk of concentrating our life-critical
assets in one place.

The seemingly abstract distinction between the various kinds of network,
and the implications of each for local autonomy, become much easier to
understand when we consider a concrete case, like the supply of electric
power. This is the most basic infrastructural good a Lifehouse will need to
furnish—not just to run a bank of phone chargers, like the bike outside C-
Squat, but to maintain the refrigeration of food, the operation of medical
devices and, still more so, the relatively narrow range of conditions in
which bodies can be sheltered from climatic extremes outside.
   Technically, the North American power grid is decentralized. There are
only indirect links between the two major and three minor interconnections
that constitute it, each of which is itself composed of multiple system
operators protected by any number of failsafes, cutouts and backups. But at
any level experienced by ordinary consumers, the network is a centralized,
hub-and-spoke affair. Electricity is generated at one place, far away, and
brought to each individual client through an elaborate and vastly reticulated
infrastructure of substations, long-distance transmission lines and trunk
cabling.
   When a single transmission line falls to overload, storm or sabotage, all
the clients on the far end of the break are left without power.13 When the
 link that gets severed is a true single point of failure, or when more than one
cut is involved, the entire regional grid goes down. And when it does, it
may be weeks, even months, before power is restored, as some
communities learned to their sorrow in the aftermath of hurricanes Katrina,
Sandy and María.
    For the most part, we only liminally understand just how deeply we rely
on stable, continuous electric supply. It’s a classic example of an
infrastructure that works silently in the background to sustain us and that
we never value or even notice until it fails. Let the power be cut, though,
and we lose lighting, refrigeration, air conditioning, connectivity and the
ability to charge all the devices that constitute the material basis of modern
life, all at once. The second-order effects of a power outage for other
infrastructures can be every bit as severe and just as long-lasting: after
2017’s Hurricane María, for example, 87.9 percent of the cell towers in
Puerto Rico remained offline for three weeks or more.14
    This makes it essential that power supply to a Lifehouse be robust to the
kind of grid failure that now occurs routinely in the wake of major weather
events. The classic solution is for each site that requires uninterrupted
electric service to purchase and run its own gasoline- or diesel-fueled
generators instead of relying upon mains power from the grid. When
Common Ground realized that it was “vital to keep radios, fans and lights
on in the hot days and nights” of a Louisiana autumn, for example, it was
just such generators that allowed them to keep their operations going.15
(Demonstrating that what distinguishes a decentralized from a distributed
network is often a matter of scale and perspective, each generator was itself
the hub of a local constellation: Common Ground “would set one up in one
backyard and run extension cords to multiple houses.”)
    Generators may well have been “the only sources of power for months in
the Seventh and Ninth Wards, as well as the coastal areas” hit hardest by
Katrina (as indeed they were for weeks in those parts of the New York area
 struck hardest by Sandy, or much of Puerto Rico after María). And they are,
unquestionably, a distributed power solution that liberates anyone who has
one from total reliance on the grid. But as a way to power the activities of a
Lifehouse, generators are far from ideal. Each one is a point source of
pollution. All but the most recent models are disruptively loud. They’re not
designed to operate continuously over days or weeks. Above all, they
depend on reliable access to stocks of refined fuel, which is the true brake
on their ability to underwrite local autonomy.
    Here is where distributed, renewable power sources like solar, wind and
small-scale hydro truly come into their own. These are quiet enough for
people to live and work in close proximity to them—in the case of
photovoltaics, they are all but silent. They are nonpolluting and make no
further contribution to emissions once built and installed. But most
important, their fuel supply cannot be disrupted or deliberately interdicted.
This makes renewables ideal as measures of last resort, as was seen during
the savage self-destruction of Yugoslavia in the 1990s, when the residents
of the besieged Bosnian town of Goražde built hydroelectric generators
from salvaged car alternators and washing-machine drums; dropped into the
Drina River to spin, these guaranteed a modest flow of current, sufficient
anyway to charge batteries.16 This quality of robustness will prove essential
in the extended volatility of the Long Emergency.
    Ideally, then, each Lifehouse serves as the hub of a local microgrid,
linking together some combination of solar panels, wind turbines and
micro- or pico-hydro generators scattered across the neighborhood, sited
wherever they make the most sense.17 This wouldn’t have to shoulder all
the same burdens as a permanent off-grid installation but merely generate
enough supply to support environmental control, refrigeration and
connectivity at times when the grid was unavailable. The model here would
be the forty-one microgrids Resilient Power Puerto Rico installed on the
island between 2017 and 2022, each one stewarded by a local mutual aid
 organization and collectively responsible for “over 200 kW of power
generation now managed through community leadership.”18
    Resilient Power’s broader effort follows in the footsteps of Casa Pueblo
in Adjuntas, a democratically run community organization whose
headquarters has been solar-powered since 1999. When María knocked out
the power in Adjuntas, Casa Pueblo’s solar microgrid survived fully intact,
allowing the headquarters building to serve as an “energy oasis” where
locals were able to recharge life-critical equipment like respiratory therapy
machines, as well as phones or tablets.19 Here is the most robust, real-world
proof of the Lifehouse concept possible: in the midst of calamity, a self-
organized, autonomous local group used free power from the sun to shelter
and care for those imperiled by the storm and its consequences. The
experience of post-María Puerto Rico is unequivocal on this point. Locally
and democratically managed microgrids give each community that operates
one power over power itself and therefore all the capacity to protect life that
flows downstream from it.

If the ability to generate electric power is best distributed down to the
neighborhood level, then so is at least some ability to feed people. In
ordinary times, we can imagine a Lifehouse operating just like the People’s
Free Food Program did—or, for that matter, any contemporary community
food bank still does—with volunteers hustling up donations of canned food,
day-old baked goods and produce past its sell-by date from local merchants.
But where the Lifehouse really comes into its own is as a source of
collective nourishment when those usual channels of supply are unavailing.
   For those who have never experienced real deprivation, it can seem odd
to worry much about widespread hunger: if there is one thing late
capitalism seems to excel at, it is keeping up a cornucopian flow of cheap
calories. But the daily news is full of worrisome signals about the world
 food supply, even in conditions well short of the 2°C heating regime we
currently seem to be headed for by century’s end.
    In the same week of July 2023, for example, the Modi government
banned the export of all varieties of white rice save the basmati that Indians
tend not to eat, after record-breaking rains destroyed most of a year’s crop,
while Russia stepped up its interdiction of the Ukrainian wheat and oilseed
supplies some 400 million people worldwide depend on.20 As improbable
and frankly dystopian as it seems, we now genuinely need to consider
scenarios in which the staple crops that feed most of humanity have failed,
the extended supply chains that bring us the better part of our diet have
been amputated by war or embargo, or both of these things are true at once.
    Not every community will be equally vulnerable to this kind of supply-
chain disruption. But in the existing ecology of places like the UK, food
cannot be grown in quantities sufficient to support the full dietary needs of
the present population, even using the entire agricultural capacity of the
land. What’s more, the ability of any urban site to make up for shortfalls in
imported food is inherently constrained, hemmed in by poor or
contaminated soil, by limited sunlight and above all by insufficient area. So
the contribution any Lifehouse will ever be able to make is at best thought
of as something supplemental to other sources of supply, even if every flat
roof, community garden and allotment available were to be turned over to
full-scale production. We will have to be very clever about developing a
distributed capacity based on the widest possible variety of high-density
production techniques, from vertical farming to aquaponics and
fungiculture.
    It would be easier if adequate nutrition were simply a matter of
providing people with some threshold amount of calories. Worldwide, the
minimum daily energy requirement of the human body is typically met
through cereal crops—staple grains like wheat, rice and corn—that are
straightforward enough to grow in the sort of plots we’re contemplating.
 But protein is equally essential to the maintenance of bodies, and that’s
somewhat more challenging to produce in dense urban environments.21
    Self-described “ecomodernists” look to the emergent technology of
“precision fermentation” to provide us with the protein our bodies require.22
They look forward to a day when the land area now dedicated to cattle and
poultry operations can be returned to wildness and all our needs can be met
by bioreactors racked in clean, low-footprint city-center facilities. At first
blush, this scenario seems ideally suited to a world of Lifehouses. But
beyond being as yet utterly unproven as a source of palatable protein at
scale, precision fermentation is proprietary technology—some private
actor’s intellectual property, to be licensed as the owner sees fit. It is
nutrition conceived as tech start-up, leaving enthusiasts no other option than
to trust that the Silicon Valley mindset will have better results when applied
to industrialized food production than it has in any other context.
    A pronounced (and, in my opinion, entirely appropriate) skepticism
about this has tended to push people to the opposite extreme. The influential
farmer and agroecologist Chris Smaje, for example, argues that the push
toward industrial synthesis of food is dangerously wasteful of time we don’t
have, and that a return to “agrarian localism” is necessary if we want to feed
ourselves adequately in the times to come. This would involve a mass flight
from the cities and return to the land, where “the work awaiting the new
agrarians is clear—growing food and [fiber], building shelter [and]
producing a modest livelihood from the local ecological base.”23 Smaje
glosses this as a way to “unleash ordinary people and trust them to start
developing local food systems in which they make themselves part of a
renewable local ecology.”24
    The reason I don’t reject Smaje’s vision out of hand is the same reason I
trust the mutual care efforts we’ve previously discussed: they both turn on a
fundamental faith in our capacity to organize the fulfillment of our needs on
our own behalf. But while the approach Smaje recommends certainly ticks
 more of our boxes—it’s labor-intensive, it’s based on robust and well-
assimilated technologies and it derives all of its necessary inputs of energy
from the sun, at zero cost—it’s not at all clear that comprehensive
deurbanization and a mass return to the land would be achievable anywhere
(let alone desirable: this scenario has little enough appeal even for those of
us not haunted by visions of being “sent down” in the Cultural Revolution,
or of the neo-medieval peasantry grimly working the blasted and barren
terrain in the final, awful segment of the 1984 nuclear-war drama
Threads).25 I think it’s a reasonable bet that whatever else happens, most of
us will continue to live in densely settled urban places, even amid the worst
conditions of the Long Emergency. And if we’re not talking about buying
our protein from the precision-fermentation merchants, that means a
scenario in which we produce our food either directly, through relatively
energy-intensive vertical farming methods, or through exchange with
federated agroecological communities in our arable near-hinterlands.
    There is, of course, no reason why a Lifehouse might not enjoy close
relationships with one or more such farming communities. Recent academic
research suggests that some version of this is already achievable—in the
United States, for example, 90 percent of the population could feed
themselves entirely on crops grown within a hundred miles of where they
live, even now.26 But best of all would be for each Lifehouse to supplement
whatever food it might secure through such exchanges with local
production, as a hedge against all other eventualities coming to pass.
    That this is at all a realistic prospect turns on the possibilities opened up
by newly available techniques of vertical farming, which allow growers to
cultivate crops indoors, in hydroponic racks that are stacked as densely as
space and lighting considerations allow. These are designed to maintain the
ideal microclimate for the chosen crop and can yield continuous production
cycles year-round—of staple grains, as well as leafy greens and vegetables.
    At Tampines Block 146 in Singapore, for example, a variety of rice
optimized for vertical-farming conditions has been grown since October
2021.27 It takes roughly four months to produce each rice crop there, in a
six-story structure made of cheap twin-wall plastic and commodity
scaffolding racks much like the ones raumlabor used at Floating University.
It would be boundlessly unwise to hang too much of our planning for a
difficult future on this one pilot installation, but as a proof that calorie crops
can be grown under controlled vertical conditions using open-source
techniques, the implications for Lifehouse-based indoor agriculture are
reassuring.28
   Again, though, self-reliance means finding ways to produce protein
locally, as well as cereal crops or vegetables. The community technology
advocate Karl Hess experimented with basement trout farming in the
Adams Morgan neighborhood of Washington, DC, in the 1970s. But despite
the “five pounds of fish per cubic foot of water” his group managed to
produce in a typical setup—each yielding “three tons annually at costs
substantially below grocery store prices”—this sort of high-density
aquaculture doesn’t seem to have caught on.29
   By contrast, where Hess’s group had rejected chickens out of hand as
being “too noisy” for city-center contexts, the years since have seen a
certain hipster resurgence of interest in backyard coops, and the art of urban
chicken-keeping is now well developed. But the options now available
extend much further than either trout or chicken. High-density, controlled-
environment techniques lend themselves to the production of plant-based,
mycological or even insect-derived proteins, which can be cleverly
combined in closed-loop ecosystems. The Singapore vertical-farming
facility, for example, feeds the biowaste it generates into a local black
soldier fly farm, whose protein-rich larvae are in turn used to feed tilapia
for human consumption.
     More conventional, less energy-intensive agriculture always remains a
possibility, as well, wherever the constraints of space, soil quality and
sunlight permit. There may even be benefits to combining distributed solar
power generation with distributed food production. Not merely do well-
placed solar panels not compete with biomass for available sunlight, they
offer growing crops the dappled shade that protects them from overheating
or desiccation while, for their part, photovoltaic panels derive an efficiency
boost from the moist microclimate of growing things.30
    This allows us to conceive of Lifehouse plots as “agrivoltaic”
installations that harness these mutually beneficial qualities for increased
agricultural yields and enhanced power output both. A limiting factor here
is the continuing widespread availability of solar panels, whose
photovoltaic cells are mostly still manufactured in China and come to
consumers elsewhere via the same perilously extended supply chains that
held up so poorly during COVID-era disruptions.31
    Growing food has never been easy under any conditions, and crops fail
(or simply fail to thrive) for all kinds of reasons, both predictable and
unforeseen. In a time strewn with virtually unlimited hazards to agriculture,
from soil salinization to violent winds, achieving any meaningful yield to
speak of will clearly require massive investments of a community’s time
and effort. The ultimate justification for Lifehouse-based agriculture,
though, consists not in the argument that it is the easiest or most energy-
efficient of all possible ways to organize food production—it clearly is not
—but that it is one of the few ways that communities might improve their
odds of continued access to complex diets when long-distance supply
chains collapse.32
    The prospect is one of a tight, efficient loop: whatever is successfully
grown in the beds and racks of a Lifehouse can be offered immediately in
the associated co-op or food bank, used in the kitchen to make hot meals
with, or perhaps traded with others in the regional network. For Smaje, this
 may look like just another desperate, rearguard “attempt to rescue a high-
energy, high-capital urban consumerism that can’t and shouldn’t be
rescued,” albeit one with more of a horizontalist and communitarian spin
than is usually the case.33 I’d prefer to think of it as an attempt to strike
some workable balance between the naive techno-optimism of the
ecomodernists and the isolationism of rugged-individualist homesteaders—
and preferable, in any case, to a scheme centered on the decantation of
billions into a countryside as unprepared to greet them as they are to
understand it.
    And beyond that, there’s something inexpressibly wonderful about an
environment where things are alive and growing, in a world that is in so
many ways designed for the scaled production of death. As far back as the
late 1960s, activist-architects like Street Farm proposed that cities could be
places where a “profusion of sprouting, breathing, photosynthesizing, living
things surround and entwine human dwellings.”34 There’s no reason why
Lifehouses couldn’t be devised with this sort of vision in mind—and in
ways that were not possible in any earlier time, as well. The Street Farmers
meant this as a way to fend off ecocatastrophe, but it also happens to be a
reasonable tactic for enduring it once it’s arrived: an intact canopy is a self-
organizing, carbon-negative infrastructure with shading, temperature-
lowering, air-filtering and bioremediating qualities, as well as a home and
thoroughfare for other living things.
    If a Lifehouse-based program combined these qualities with a longer-
term restoration of urban soil, via the “do nothing” agricultural techniques
made famous by Masanobu Fukuoka’s book The One-Straw Revolution,
people under pressure of ecosystemic collapse might find that they could
simultaneously feed themselves well and care for other forms of life, and
leave the Earth better off for their having done so.35
 But, perhaps, for the most rudimentary or rigorously natural forms of
agriculture, all of these notions of local energy generation and food
production depend crucially on specialized physical hardware of one sort or
another. So the final element of autonomy any Lifehouse will need to
consider is how it might produce a greater proportion of these material
necessities locally. How can we plan for conditions under which the wind
turbines, aquaponics tanks or cargo-bike components so critical to the
community’s ability to feed and care for itself can’t simply be ordered off
the internet?
    One way would be for each community to develop some capacity for
“autonomous production,” or what the theorist Jason Adams glosses as
“local production for local use, outside the bounds of the wage-labor
system.”36 In concrete terms, this turns on access to a workshop furnished
with a usefully broad range of machine tools and equipment, from drill
presses to TIG welders to sewing machines, ideally co-located with other
facilities in the Lifehouse itself.
    The primary factor preventing a community group from assembling such
a workspace from scratch is plainly cost. Even the basic tooling for a digital
fabrication studio—say, a laser cutter, a computer numerical control (CNC)
milling machine and a few 3D printers—involves expenses that may run
well into the tens of thousands of US dollars, and there are very, very few
neighborhood groups willing or able to front that kind of money without a
clear, immediate, tangible and pressing justification. The maintenance of
some abstract capacity for material autonomy is not nearly enough—and of
course, by the time the need for autonomy becomes pressing, it may be too
late to do anything meaningful to achieve it.
    The answer may lie in the volunteer-run workshops that already exist in
most big cities, which rather uninvitingly tend to be called “makerspaces,”
“hackspaces” or “fablabs.”37 The typical makerspace already sports most of
the machine tools we’re interested in, particularly as regards digital
 fabrication, and is operated by a membership that’s passionate (or in most
cases, frankly evangelical) about what can be done with them. Although
there aren’t nearly enough of these workshops in existence to furnish each
neighborhood with its own autonomous production capacity, they do
constitute a version of this resource that’s available to draw on right now.
    Just as important, the global maker community nurtures within its
membership the hard-won knowledge of how to use these tools safely,
efficiently and well. And that knowledge tends to drive a set of politics that
are broadly consonant with the aims of a Lifehouse network. In
municipalist Madrid and Barcelona, the so-called “hackers” were key
players in the confluences, bringing with them not merely their facility with
hardware but all their ideas about the intellectual commons and free access
to tools and information.38
    The instinct for mutual aid runs deep in the community, as well. During
COVID, members of makerspace collectives around the world worked long
hours to churn out 3D-printed face shields and the low-cost, DIY air-
filtration units known as Corsi-Rosenthal boxes.39 And perhaps most
pointedly of all for our purposes, we have the example of an “intercultural
fablab” called Habibi.Works “implementing self-aid since August 2016” at
the Katsikas refugee camp in northern Greece, where members drawn from
the camp’s thirty nationalities bring its fabrication capacity to bear on the
challenges they face in their lives as asylum seekers.40 The values of open
access, solidarity and self-reliance held by so many in the maker movement
make them obvious as prospective partners in any Lifehouse-based
production workshop.
    The vast enthusiasm for the power and potential of digital fabrication on
the part of some makers has occasionally led to a misreading of community
needs, or really a failure to engage local people, understand their priorities
and place production capacity at their disposal. This was the case in
Barcelona in 2013, when academic researchers opened a fablab on the
 former site of a food bank in the impoverished Ciutat Meridiana district
without first having secured any real buy-in on the part of their new
neighbors.41
    It would be an understatement to say this was poorly received: residents
of Ciutat Meridiana even briefly occupied the fablab in protest, and it was
clear that what they were protesting was the insult to their autonomy every
bit as much as it was the loss of their food bank. As the counterexample of
Habibi.Works suggests, not nearly every makerspace will be so oblivious to
local need or sentiment, but it’s reasonable for anyone thinking of setting up
such a thing to ask deep questions about just who might constitute the
“community” in their “community production workshop.”
    It’s not a bad idea, then, for anyone interested in setting up such a thing
to think about how they might open lines of communication with their local
makerspace and its membership now—both to explore any natural affinities
that might exist and to address questions of access and inclusion. The
nascent workshop can only benefit from the insight of those most familiar
with these tools and techniques of fabrication, who understand best what
they can and cannot do. And with many makerspaces facing perpetual
difficulty in organizing accessible commercial space, there may be real
benefit in proposing they rehome their activity on the site of a newly
opened Lifehouse.
    A Lifehouse outfitted in this way will not be able to produce anything
particularly elaborate: most of the high-complexity physical artifacts on
which any real independence is predicated would exceed the near-term
fabrication capabilities of even the best-equipped collective workshop.
(Photovoltaic panels are perhaps the most obvious case in point, but there
are any number of other examples.) But even the most rudimentary local
production capacity will nevertheless help a community secure more of
what it needs, in more of the amounts required, for longer into any period of
supply-chain disruption. And this would be particularly useful with regard
 to components needed for the maintenance or repair of other life-critical
systems.42
   The years of techno-utopian hype about digital fabrication technologies
like 3D printing have tended to obscure that, at base, these are just
relatively simple ways of making relatively complicated things. And in a
time of unpredictable access to the material things we rely on, it’s this
unglamorous, easy-to-overlook wherewithal for autonomous production
that will ultimately underwrite any community’s capacity for mutual care
and the shelter of bodies in need.

There is an additional point that needs to be made about all the technologies
a Lifehouse relies upon, whether for generating power, providing for its
nourishment, maintaining its own physical capacities, or addressing any
other of its needs: that all of these means are themselves vulnerable to
entropy and decay. As any number of off-grid homesteaders and back-to-
the-land communes have learned the hard way, when such life-critical
systems do break down—and they will break down—and the capacity to
repair them fully and restore them to service does not exist within the
community, the margin of survival becomes very thin indeed.
    What is best of all, then, is to rely wherever possible on ways of doing
and being that are robust to disruption because they are fundamentally
simple and hardy. These are what I call “technologies of permanent
recourse.” They are tactics developed in and for hard times and
circumstances, that broadly remain available to us even under significant
stress. They aren’t based on finicky high-maintenance components, don’t
have lots of external dependencies, do not rely on the persistent availability
of an extended supply chain and can largely be built up and repaired from
those resources we already have ready to hand.
    They favor electromechanical means over electronic ones, mechanical
means over those, and passive, organic ones wherever feasible, and can
 therefore tend to be labor-intensive, as opposed to capital-, equipment-,
energy- or computation-intensive. They can be turned to surprisingly
sophisticated ends, including refrigerating food and filtering enough
drinking water for a neighborhood.43 Above all, they aren’t owned by
anybody: the methods underlying them are literally common knowledge.
    The next best thing, where some particular piece of equipment is
required, is for it to be something that can be salvaged from the everyday
environment at little or no cost. Common Ground was exemplary in this,
from their first lashed-together distribution hub to the UHF radio network
they built from gear that “most would consider obsolete junk.”44 But more
broadly this is a thread that connects many of the sites and efforts we’ve
considered, from the knock-off Monoblocs that dot the courtyards of
Rojava to the cheap scaffolding and commodity plywood that
raumlaborberlin uses in its structures.
    What commends such artifacts to us in the Lifehouse scenario isn’t
simply about the benefit we derive by further leveraging the sunk carbon
costs of their production, though that is certainly a consideration. It’s not
even fundamentally about their low cost, ready availability or robustness.
It’s about a secondary quality that emerges from these primary ones, which
we might follow the Roman Catholic priest and social philosopher Ivan
Illich in thinking of as “conviviality.”45
    Convivial tools derive a good part of their appeal from the fact that they
can be tinkered with. Like an old bicycle or a waterwheel, they can’t be
damaged too badly by experimenting with them, and at worst, if you should
happen to destroy one in an attempt to adapt or modify it, you ought to be
able to scavenge others of the same sort and start all over again. Even
better, they educate people in how to use them, tending to be organized in
modular subsystems that, if not quite self-explanatory, yield a diagram of
their functioning to a little patient investigation.
     Because tools like these lower the risk of looking foolish, or of wrecking
something delicate, expensive and irreplaceable, not simply the technically
inclined but a greater proportion of the Lifehouse community will be
comfortable engaging with them. And this open and unintimidating quality
is what pushes any truly convivial system past formal accessibility toward
active invitationality. Under such circumstances, competence with the
systems that undergird common life ceases to be a matter of a jealously
cultivated exclusivity and is instead broadly distributed throughout the
community.
    And when the need for maintenance or repair arises on some piece of
infrastructural equipment that is not convivial, as Illich defined it, let alone
based on a technology of permanent recourse, we might put some thought
into how we can better leverage the community’s existing base of
knowledge. Here Karl Hess offered the notion of a community skills
inventory: a way to compound individual resourcefulness by surfacing it
and making it more widely available.46
    You write code, your neighbor repairs furniture, the woman down the
street does a little plumbing—but, as things stand, none of you has any idea
of the capabilities that reside right in your immediate vicinity, or in what
permutations your skills might be combined. A shared skills inventory
repairs this gap in a community’s understanding of itself and what its
members can do. And better still, it points toward the possibility of cross-
training, so the most critical skills are distributed across the entire
community, and no one person has to bear the weight of being the only
trained medic or mechanic or beekeeper around. In this way a Lifehouse
doesn’t merely rely on the abilities of the people in its surroundings, but can
help to develop them, too.

Equipped in these ways, a Lifehouse community has everything it needs to
carry out programs of mutual care and in this way take a first vital step
 toward self-determination. But the full expression of local autonomy
involves the exercise of collective power: each Lifehouse must be free to
decide its policies and its trajectory through the world for itself. Following
the practice of the earlier movements we’ve discussed, it seems natural that
the means of doing so would be the assembly.
    Amid the dashed hopes of those movements, though—from the
sputtering-out of 15M, Occupy and the similar Nuit Debout protests in
France to the utter wreckage of our dreams for Rojava—the cringe factor
clinging to any discussion of the assembly is real. There’s a curiously
libidinal quality to this rejection: we seem to reserve a special portion of
hate for those things especially that we once thought might lead to our
liberation, because they didn’t turn out to work immediately and on the
spot. The assembly form is no exception to this principle, which makes
proposing it as a means of self-determination well suited to the Lifehouse
context even more daunting than it might otherwise be.
    But so far as I’m concerned, the assembly remains the technology of
permanent recourse par excellence. It is always there in potential, any time
more than two or three of us gather—a set of possibilities that remains
available whenever we need to discuss matters of common concern and
decide together what to do about them. If the Long Emergency is always
something that first confronts us in our immediate physical surroundings,
any effort at building up shelter from degree zero will necessarily involve
something along these lines. Our fate will turn on a small-scale politics of
deliberation conducted among neighbors, based on the capacity to assess,
propose, debate and decide.
    Here “resourcefulness” might mean nothing so much as refining our
capacities to listen, to empathize and to hold space—all qualities, as it
happens, that are practiced and developed in the assembly. So for all the
funk of earnest futility that has settled onto the form, it’s worth picking it
up, dusting it off, seeing how it can be made to work.
     That requires some careful thinking about what does not work. It seems
to me, first of all, that the assembly has been stuck with Bookchin’s “moral
functions” for quite some time, and that this is a major part of why so many
of us tend to find it unappealing. The various national citizens’ assemblies
that have been convened to debate climate policy furnish an excellent, if
pungent, example of the moral-functions trap.47 These mobilize the most
extraordinary draughts of goodwill and sincerity, but they have yet to
inspire any legislative or regulatory action to speak of, anywhere. This
leaves participants, for all their exertion, with no more traction on events
than if they had done nothing at all.
    There is, therefore, a profound mismatch between the intense intellectual
and emotional effort required by this way of showing up in the world and
the payoff it generally yields. I can’t imagine that many of us, exposed to
the intense time and energy pressures of late-capitalist life as we are, will
cheerfully devote our evenings to hammering out consensus on positions
that are destined to remain symbolic, “consultative” or “advisory.” And it
further seems natural that anyone who did, nevertheless, invest their
precious life energy in such a process would sour on it—permanently and
rightfully—when whatever consensus they’d so carefully crafted in this
way came to be disregarded in its entirety by those with actual power.
    There is a way out of this trap, though. The obvious way to resolve this
mismatch, and rescue the assembly from its own irrelevance, is for it to
have power over how it disposes of its own organic resources, so that there
is a direct connection between the decisions we make together and what we
can see happening in the world around us. This is the fundamental condition
for our own effective use of the assembly. It cannot be symbolic, or
therapeutic, or merely a way of taking the community’s temperature on a
given question. It actually has to have meaningful authority over allocations
of resource.
     And this is precisely what the Lifehouse offers. What the newly
established neighborhood assembly will have direct, unambiguous control
over is everything that attends the management of a community resilience-
and-resourcefulness hub: all the inputs it requires, all the resources it
generates and all of the questions that arise in the course of its daily
operation.
    If there’s limited space at the Lifehouse, is it needed more for storage or
shelter? If there’s limited energy, is it best spent trying to find a more
suitable space, or establishing a workshop or a vegetable plot at the existing
one? If there are funds to spend, should they be used to buy seeds or
machine tools? Should anyone, for that matter, be paid for their services to
the Lifehouse, or should it remain a purely voluntary effort? Can someone
who’s violated the social contract in one way or another be asked to leave
the building, or even permanently barred from using its facilities?
    Deciding questions like these, with immediate, visible, material
consequences, is real in a way that an advisory citizens’ assembly
hammering out consensus on matters of national policy cannot ever be. It is
to implant self-determination in a form not a million miles different from
that practiced by the communes of Rojava in the heart of our own civic life.
    And though we must say it very quietly, any sufficiently dense network
of communities self-managed in this way begins to look like the first subtle
stirrings of a nonstate society, organized from the bottom up. “Quietly,”
because the truth is of course that many, and perhaps most, of those who
use the Lifehouse and its services will be interested in no such thing.
They’ll just want somewhere they can turn to for aid, care and comfort
when the moment of maximum crisis has found them alone and vulnerable.
    But what if there’s less distance between these two perspectives than we
think? Reflecting on the wave of local mutual aid efforts that arose during
the COVID lockdowns, the anarchist researcher Shane Burley observes that
“[w]hat was so remarkable” about them was that for the most part they “did
 not come out of radical or political communities; they were just people
looking to survive by caring for one another.”48 This suggests that in a great
many places on Earth, a healthy, Kropotkinian instinct for solidarity
remains close to the surface, even after so many years of marination in the
neoliberal mindset, and will indeed well up spontaneously given the right
circumstances. Perhaps, then, among all the other living things growing
there, a Lifehouse can also incubate this new vernacular, the emergent
common sense of a world to come.

Whatever form a Lifehouse takes, it cannot simply be a bubble of safety,
secured for its own inward-turned membership but disconnected from
neighboring streets and the city and world beyond.
   There are several good reasons why we might want to conceive of the
Lifehouse, from the very beginning, as one node within a larger network.
Unless deliberately linked to one another, each is individually vulnerable,
whether to shortfalls of its own capacity to provide, disruptive
circumstances it simply cannot contend with, or, most distressingly of all,
the intentionally destructive acts of hostile parties. But there is also the
question of what insularity does to the culture of any group of human
beings.
   Organized only with reference to itself, a Lifehouse will have a hard
time escaping a condition the science-fiction writer and critic Brian Aldiss
famously derided as the “cozy catastrophe,” in which a blithe and favored
few continue to enjoy bourgeois comfort in isolation while the world
offscreen chars to cinders all around them.49 And the idea of a Lifehouse
that offers refuge to a lucky few, but in doing so fails a far larger number of
others, feels like a contradiction in terms, if not an affront to the very set of
values that motivated its creation in the first place.
   Most of these problems go away, or at least bite with considerably less
force, if each local, autonomous refuge were to be joined with others in a
 loosely linked federation, coupled via some common infrastructure that
cradles and sustains them all. But here we get into some practical trouble.
You can begin organizing a Lifehouse in your neighborhood right now,
without waiting for anything or anybody else. What you can’t do is assume
that anyone else, anywhere, will be motivated to do the same thing. And
that makes it very difficult to discuss the prospects for a network among
and between such local initiatives in any but the vaguest terms. About all
we can practically do, for the time being, is articulate the kinds of qualities
useful for such a network to have.
    I think we can reasonably assume that any effort we make to shelter our
own community against the turbulence of the Long Emergency will have
strong resonances with similar efforts unfolding in parallel elsewhere, at
least some of which will be motivated by values highly congruent with the
ones we hold. Whenever we should happen to encounter the representatives
of such an effort, it’s worth exploring whether these affinities are close
enough to permit mutual exchange and collaboration, in the way that the
Greek solidarity clinics circulated information about the methods,
techniques and protocols they relied upon.
    We might look to examples like the endlessly impressive Mutual Aid
Disaster Relief network in the United States, which aims to forge links
between radical grassroots resilience and recovery groups (and offers
guides covering everything from trauma counseling to bioremediation to
help them in their efforts). Or the annual Fearless Cities events, which
connect activists and initiatives from around the world who are working
toward local power in the new-municipalist tradition.
    But hovering behind that rather obvious thought is the suggestion of a
closer coupling, which becomes especially salient if we intend our labors of
care and sustenance to yield fruit at anything beyond neighborhood scale.
Should we propose to organize life in ways that prefigure the large-scale
mechanisms of decarbonized cooperation and exchange that any post-
 Emergency world will necessarily be founded on, we will need to identify
those who share our longer-term goals and join with them in a framework
capable of purposive, coordinated action.
   This conception of the relationship between the local and global appears
to have been first articulated in political terms by the Paris Commune of
1871. Kristin Ross, its most gifted English-language biographer, tells us
that the “Communal imagination operated on the preferred scale of the local
autonomous unit within an internationalist horizon,” a way of thinking
about social being that left “little room for the nation, or, for that matter, for
the market or the state.”50 “Under the Commune,” Ross tells us, “Paris
wanted to be not the capital of France but an autonomous collective in a
universal federation of peoples. It did not wish to be a state but rather an
element, a unit in a federation of communes” that was global in scale.
   If this sounds familiar by now, it should: it’s an early articulation of the
line of thought that was later developed by both Murray Bookchin and
Abdullah Öcalan. We tend to understand Bookchin’s libertarian
municipalism and Öcalan’s democratic confederalism as having to do with
a neighborhood-scale politics of autonomous communes and assemblies,
but this is to neglect the overarching structure that both Bookchin and
Öcalan explicitly imagined sustaining such local efforts. In fact, the
degrowthist writer Aaron Vansintjan argues that libertarian municipalism,
definitionally, “is not decentralized localism” at all, and is “only possible at
scale, extending beyond the individual municipality to form a network of
autonomous, but collaborative, settlements.”51
   What might such a collaboration involve, restated in the terms most
relevant to a Lifehouse? The easiest to imagine is a mesh of affiliated,
mutually reinforcing projects loosely joined at the scale of a city, much in
the way discrete relief efforts in Red Hook and the Rockaways and the
Lower East Side all flew the banner of Occupy Sandy. Perhaps, as well,
Lifehouses might be linked by shared technical infrastructure in the manner
 of Decidim, an open-source deliberative platform originally developed by
and for Barcelona en Comú that was thereafter adopted by other
municipalist groups.
    Beyond that point, we’re compelled to think in terms—a joint charter,
nested councils, a common identity?—that can only really be worked out in
practice by those directly involved, in response to their emergent needs and
desires. Speaking only for myself, though, I like to imagine a maximum
program of confederation working something like the exclaves or outposts
of a nonphysically contiguous, distributed, nonstate society—a Lifehouse
archipelago draping the habitable regions of the Long Emergency world in
the possibility of refuge.
    At the very least, we can imagine local efforts connected by an armature
that sustains them whenever conditions threaten to overwhelm them. At
such moments, we might want to invoke mutual aid in the sense of the term
more usually understood by emergency responders, as a formal standing
agreement by way of which communities agree to share resources with one
another in times of acute local need. When a crisis of this sort requires
something that exceeds our own capacity—whether specialized equipment
or anything else that draws on means or numbers beyond those we happen
to have on hand—such an agreement would allow us to request assistance
across the lines that formally cleave one Lifehouse from another. And like
any other such request, it is immeasurably easier if the parties involved
already exist in some kind of relationship with one another.
    Being connected to a broader network of Lifehouses also opens up the
prospect of knowledge sharing between them. Again, per Elisavet Hasa, it
was the diffusion of hard-won practical insight across the Greek solidarity
clinics that allowed them to persist for even as long as they did. Hasa points
out that it wasn’t just skills or process diagrams that circulated through the
Greek solidarity network, but inventories as well: detailed lists of all the
tools, devices and items of furniture that between them constituted the
 workings of a functioning alternative healthcare infrastructure, right down
to the disposal bins.
    A similar practice surfaced in municipalist Madrid, in the form of the
intercambiadero, an online database of the different tools, resources,
materials and infrastructures kept by the activist projects in the network,
“from garden hoses and wheel-barrows to shovels, sanders, or computer
servers.”52 We know that any such bill of parts can never constitute refuge
in and of itself without being animated by sustained, concerted effort. But it
amounts to an instruction manual for the achievement of collective dignity,
and it’s easy to see how an inventory of this sort might nevertheless furnish
irreplaceable insight for anyone wanting to organize a Lifehouse in their
own community but doesn’t have the first idea where to start.
    There’s another facet, as well, to what Vansintjan suggests about the
necessity of federation. The greatest threat facing (or presented by) any
Lifehouse is the case where it is either consciously captured by an
identitarian group of one sort or another or is simply dominated from the
start by a homogeneous local population. In either event, it will feel
unwelcoming and exclusionary: “for” some people, but not others. At its
worst and most intentional, this can harden into the kind of reactionary
localism epitomized by the Greeks-only kitchens organized by the fascist
Golden Dawn or, at a larger scale, the off-grid redoubts white nationalists
dream of establishing in secessionist Cascadia.53 But even short of
circumstances like those, it’s not hard to imagine how something that
thought of itself as a “community resilience hub” might nevertheless come
to conceive of the community it served in fundamentally defensive terms.
Such “Lifehouses” would be armored, inward-facing, hostile to the
newcomer—and therefore anathema to every value upheld by the efforts
we’ve explored in these pages.
    Confederation is the remedy for this tendency and perhaps even the sole
way of practically countering it over the long term. We’ve already explored
 some of the material advantages a Lifehouse derives from membership in a
confederal super-structure of some sort. The way to prevent local hubs from
sliding into exclusionary defensiveness is by reframing those advantages as
privileges: in order to enjoy them on an ongoing basis, local Lifehouses
would have to maintain consensual standards of openness and
invitationality. Beyond the sincere conviction of its members, this is the
only factor that might keep a Lifehouse in any way inclined in that direction
from collapsing into reactionary localism, and for that reason it feels
absolutely essential to me that such values be articulated and affirmed at the
level of the whole network.
    Beyond such basic commitments, that each Lifehouse will necessarily
reflect distinctly local values is entirely as it should be. But in any linked
structure of more than three or four such communities—let alone one we
might imagine extending to the continental or even global scale—there will
be a point at which the desire to uphold particular local values comes into
tension with those espoused by the federation as a whole. There must be
some way to address this tension that allows a broader community to flex
and that prevents it from shattering at the first sign of principled divergence.
Here I want to introduce the notion of the pragma: a local agreement or
adaptation allowing groups to reconcile their observance of some
overarching principle with whatever shim or fudge factor in implementation
is necessary to meaningfully enact that principle locally.
    The pragma is best thought of as additional information about how
things are done locally that does not constrain anybody else within the
network. A Lifehouse where people are predominantly vegan, for example,
might wish to enunciate that value as a pragma. A Lifehouse in which many
people are in recovery, similarly, may wish to adopt a pragma discouraging
or even forbidding the on-premises use of alcohol or other drugs. The point
is to manage divergences of commitment or belief short of the point at
 which local groups holding them would be forced to defederate from a
larger network, or be defederated.
    Aren’t people already doing this all the time? Of course they are—
tacitly. The whole point of articulating such adaptive measures as pragmas,
though, is to make this process explicit, so as to function as a relief valve
for at least some of the pressure that so often leads to factionalism and
splitting on the left. Instead of forcing the entire network to observe (say)
the tenets of BDS and running the risk of having the whole thing fracture
and come undone, there is nothing to prevent a local Lifehouse from
choosing to do so collectively, as a pragma.
    In this way, local Lifehouses can maintain whatever principles they like,
so long as they don’t come into direct conflict with those espoused by the
network as a whole. Your Lifehouse observes Ramadan? Wishes to forgo
the use of products or services based on so-called “AI”? Asks for a 1
percent tithe from businesses operating in its catchment basin? Go ahead
and do that. Who, after all, has the standing to tell you how your
community should show up for itself? But do it as a pragma and in this way
preserve the benefits of acting as an autonomous element within a larger
articulated whole.

If we want to build ourselves a refuge against the hard times to come, then,
at least one way of doing so seems clear. We don’t have to imagine the
revolutionary seizure of state power, or some deus ex machina event that
wipes the slate clean and allows us to begin anew. All we need to imagine is
a meshwork of Lifehouses spanning the land, each one a place where
people come to avail themselves of sanctuary, restoration, sustenance and
solace, each one managed and governed by the people who use it. If this is
in some ways an ambitious vision, it’s also one that is comparably modest
and achievable. Amid all the anguish of our great undoing, it sketches the
improbable outlines of something extraordinary: a wildcat infrastructure of
 care, drawing on the best that is in us, to shelter the most vulnerable among
us, at the very moment we need it.
    But in order for any of this to come into being, someone still has to be
the first to act.
    In her great novel of “ambiguous utopia,” The Dispossessed, Ursula K.
Le Guin has her protagonist, the heterodox physicist Shevek, form a
“syndicate of initiative” with his partner and a few allies at just such a
moment of decision.54 The members of a syndicate of initiative speak for no
one else. They act only in their own names, guided solely by their own
assessment of the moment and what it requires. They take upon themselves
the full responsibility for acting and remain accountable for their choices in
the face of opposition that seeks to undermine everything they endeavor to
achieve. But what they do redefines the parameters of the situation they
contend with.
    There is a curious parallel between the choice Shevek and his syndics
make and that made by anyone who undertakes some program of mutual
care outside the state. The first moments of any project along these lines are
always fraught with risk, and in such moments it’s easy to be dissuaded by
the daunting weight of all the forces aligned against success.
    But here I want to invoke what I earlier described as “the great secret of
Occupy Sandy,” a quality that we know from the testimony of people
involved is something it shared with Common Ground, the Greek solidarity
clinics and the communes of Rojava above all: taking initiative in this way
feels wonderful. Taking concrete action in defense of our communities—
doing something about the situation we find ourselves in and exercising
collective power over it—is reparative in itself and a specific for the
numbing dread that otherwise gnaws at us in this time of storms. It can even
help us manage the helpless, corrosive rage occasioned by the cruelty and
injustice of this Emergency, or the terror we feel at the thought of our
pending nonexistence.55
    If we have reason to expect that a surging sense of joy and reconnection
is what awaits us at the culmination of our effort, that ought to be enough to
see us through the difficulties of its inception. Or enough, anyway, that
we’re able to show up for ourselves and for all those who need us.
   So let us organize our own syndicates of initiative and together build the
Lifehouse. Let’s start with what is closest at hand, build outward from there
and link our efforts with those of the others who have set themselves the
same task. Let’s let go, finally, gratefully, of all our vain hope for the future
and use that energy instead to undertake the work—the necessary work—of
care, of repair, of survival.

There is just one final thing to say about the Lifehouse and whatever
promise it may hold, which is that the powerful generally cannot tolerate
and will not simply let people pursue even the humblest projects of
autonomy and self-determination.
    Across the centuries, popular attempts at self-reliance and self-definition
have been assailed wherever and whenever they have appeared, by state and
nonstate actors both. But everything history teaches us about the fate of
such initiatives since the days of the Paris Commune suggests that the state
constitutes by far the greater threat to their existence.56 What brought the
Commune to its abrupt end, after a mere seventy-two days, was the same
thing that has so often doomed the ventures in self-governance that
followed: exogenous state violence. From Vienna’s Karl-Marx-Hof in 1934
to Barcelona in 1939 to Rojava in 2019, in fact, just about any time a space
has emerged in which even modest numbers of people have managed to
organize the necessities of life on their own initiative, those spaces, those
people and all their hopes have been crushed by force of arms.57 It may
well be that all of these experiments might sooner or later have succumbed
to their own internal tensions and contradictions, but we’ll never know that
—because what actually cut them short was the armed might of the state.
     In our time, of course, most liberatory projects fall well short of any
point at which they might even remotely constitute a threat to power or
capital of the sort that was posed by Communard Paris, Red Vienna or
revolutionary Barcelona. But to ensure that this remains the case, a
thoroughgoing program of preemptive harassment is directed at anything
that might constitute a kernel of insurgent counterpower, most especially so
if the actors involved are in any way racialized or marked as other.
    Nothing is too petty in this respect. No radical effort is too small, local
or unassuming to escape hostile notice, and no activity so self-evidently
benign that some attempt will not be made to disrupt it—not even feeding
the hungry. FBI agents circulated ginned-up kompromat to San Francisco
businesses in a largely successful attempt to “impede their contributions to
[the Black Panther Party] Breakfast Program.”58 City building inspectors,
accompanied by police, threatened the volunteer staff of the youth-centered
nonprofit Chicago Freedom School with fines of up to $1,000 a day for
“preparing and serving large quantities of food without the proper retail
food establishment license,” because they bought pizza for teenagers who’d
been tear-gassed while protesting the murder of George Floyd.59 The
Houston Police Department continues to cite Food Not Bombs activists,
issuing fines amounting to an unsupportable $23,500, for the sin of
furnishing free meals to the homeless.60 The State of Georgia indicted
activists protesting the “Cop City” police training center in South River
Forest under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations act,
characterizing each tranche of reimbursement for kitchen supplies among
them as “an overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy.”61 It probably
shouldn’t surprise us when agents of the state harness every institutional,
regulatory and legislative means at their disposal to undermine alternative
projects and seal off the spaces in which they might grow. But what still
retain a capacity to astonish are the spite and psychic smallness with which
they so often go about doing it.
     When harassment won’t suffice, the state has other means of disruption
available. From the Earth Liberation Front and Animal Liberation Front in
the United States to the long infiltrations of activist communities in the UK,
it is clear that even the smallest, most ineffectual or harmless radical
groupuscules will be penetrated, compromised and seeded with agents
provocateurs.62 This extends to mutual aid initiatives with an overt politics.
One of the earliest members of Common Ground—so trusted, indeed, that
between January and April 2007, he served as its director of operations—
was an FBI informant.63
    And sometimes, indeed, the means of disruption are raw and lethal. Let a
community assert any degree of territorial control or show any sign that it
intends to subsist outside capital permanently, and it will swiftly find itself a
community marked for elimination in one way or another.
    This is neither hyperbole, nor paranoia, nor an inflated sense of the
significance of such efforts. More than one Lower East Side squat was set
ablaze under mysterious circumstances and allowed to burn to the ground as
officers of the city’s department of Housing Preservation and Development
stood by.64 In Philadelphia in May 1985, the Black separatist group known
as MOVE was massacred, their whole neighborhood burned down around
them. And any student of the Black Panthers can tell you what happened to
its emergent generation of leaders: Bunchy Carter was set up for
assassination. Fred Hampton and Mark Clark were murdered in their beds.
    This will toward elimination is now bolstered by technological
capacities the state never had in the time of the Panthers. These include
spyware to eavesdrop on a target’s conversations and map their social
connections; automated facial recognition that tracks individuals of interest,
even amid large crowds; anomaly-detection algorithms that allow an
operator to detect and characterize patterns of behavior in similarly large
datasets and in this way anticipate the emergence of protests; and the first
tentative steps toward deployment of lethal autonomous systems on the
 borders—all gleefully vended by the grubby NSO Groups and Palantirs of
the world.65
    Much of this technology, inevitably, is hugely overhyped and will never
work in the ways touted. But enough of it already does that any state
equipped with it will enjoy the prerogative of isolating potential cells of
dissent or resistance at the threshold of emergence and either preempting
their formation or otherwise disrupting their ability to act effectively. As to
what constitutes “dissent or resistance” in the mind of the state, we know
that the symbols of Extinction Rebellion and Greenpeace, as well as
YPG/YPJ insignia and the green-and-black flag of ecoanarchism, have
appeared in a visual guide to extremist groups circulated by Counter
Terrorism Policing in the UK.66 Despite later caviling by that organization
and attempts to withdraw the materials in question, they undoubtedly
represent the way our efforts at mutual care and the development of
collective power will be perceived by many within the state security
apparatus.67
    All of this might seem a million miles removed from our talk of
Lifehouses, with their humming microgrids and verdant gardens. But as the
pressures of the Long Emergency intensify and the competition for
resources tightens, I think it’s a fair bet that the attempt to furnish care will
itself attract the kind of violence that was previously lavished only on
(actual or perceived) threats to the dominant order. And while the state may
always constitute the preeminent threat, it’s by no means safe to assume that
this violence will be coming from the state alone.
    This will particularly be the case wherever someone extends care toward
refugees, asylum seekers, or other individuals or communities marked for
othering and exclusion. Any gesture in this direction is sure to attract the
rage of local fascist or ethnonationalist formations, just as Golden Dawn
physically attacked free clinics, social centers and refugee camps during its
years of greatest influence in Greece.68 Some of these formations, like
 Golden Dawn itself, will even claim that some kind of ecological
consciousness justifies their assaults on whatever infrastructure exists to
shelter the weakest and most vulnerable.69
    If a mutual care effort manages to persist for long enough in holding any
space at all, the odds are that someone somewhere will eventually be moved
to oppose it by force. So long as it confines itself to the more stereotypically
feminized aspects of care work and social reproduction, that effort may—
may—be tolerated. But even then, there are no guarantees: even something
as beloved and broadly supported in the community as Occupy Sandy was
attacked, and whoever was responsible in that case was perfectly willing to
firebomb a church. If the broader prospect we face is one of grinding
twilight wars and unrelenting, wanton cruelty at all the interfaces where the
habitable zone meets the world in flight, that cruelty will surely extend to
the very spaces, and providers, of shelter. We can already see it happening.
    So even in the case that, against all odds, we are actually able to create
Lifehouses and in them make common cause against the future bearing
down upon us, our efforts can’t end there. The implacable truth is that such
communities must organize and prepare to defend themselves, or stand by
in helpless acquiescence as they and everything they love are made to
perish from the Earth.70
    Concretely, this is a dreadful, heart-stopping prospect and cannot be
regarded with anything remotely like equanimity. But history is
uncompromising on this point, and it is something that everyone embarked
upon the politics of care must ultimately reckon with. This is the grim thing,
the lesson of Golden Dawn and COINTELPRO, of Daesh and the vigilantes
of Algiers Point: there is little point in sheltering bodies from the undirected
chaos of the storm if you are not also prepared to protect them from those
who specifically mean to do them harm.

                              OceanofPDF.com
                                        Conclusion


  At the end of the world, plant a tree.
                                                    —Musnad Ahmad, hadith 12491,
                                                      as reported by Anas Ibn Mali


In the last, peri-apocalyptic chapter of David Mitchell’s 2014 novel The
Bone Clocks, the provisional government entity responsible for the
apportionment of misery in an Ireland at the end of its tether is called,
simply, Stability.1 Its armed convoys bring the monthly ration of food, and
its sullen teenage conscripts help themselves to the local produce, and the
local women, as compensation for the salary that no longer comes. Stability
is resented. It is clumsy, unjust and heavy-handed. It achieves its barely
ceded legitimacy through force of arms. But it manages to keep the peace
and the calories flowing, however minimally in either case, and for that the
towns people of Kilcrannog accede to its oafish rule with something
approaching gratitude.
    There’s a canny understanding in Mitchell’s act of imaginative framing:
the name he gives this occupying force captures what desperate people are
desperate for when beset by insurmountable crises on all sides—and
equally, implies all the many precious things they are willing to trade away
cheaply, if only granted that one thing they can be certain of. It almost
doesn’t matter what flavor of politics nominally guides Stability in its
attempts to assert control over a reality become ungovernable, and Mitchell
doesn’t bother to specify. In the state in extremis it administers, everyone
but those lucky few closest to the center (or able to grow for themselves)
 goes to bed hungry, and that hunger speaks louder than any prior belief or
commitment.
   Stability offers some ground to stand on. It constitutes some assurance,
however illusory, that tomorrow will be much like today in the ways that
matter, or enough like today to make plans, anyway. If it sacrifices a few
complainers and malcontents to keep the broader peace, well: you know
what they say about eggs and omelets—and better still if the breaking of
eggs happens somewhere safely out of sight. We should never
underestimate the appeal of a promise like this when everything’s gone
maximally sideways.
   Stability will be the fundamental value proposition of a certain kind of
politics in our time of undoing, and we need to reckon with just how
seductive it will prove to be for too many of our neighbors in the global
North. For them, the overriding instinct will be to press on, to avoid
confronting any of the increasingly blatant asymmetries of access to care
that characterize our world, just so long as someone promises to preserve
the rudiments of a comfortingly familiar way of life. And they may even
succeed at securing some measure of continuity for themselves—but only
by shedding increased turbulence and suffering onto others, as if to say:
there’s only room enough for us on this lifeboat.
   Such massive failures of empathy and simple human decency are, of
course, repulsive. But there is nothing inherently wrong with stability itself.
All living things require some degree of consistency in their environment if
they are to endure past their first moments of existence. If the word has
taken on a tinge of conservatism, that is only because what the powerful so
often wish to stabilize is a situation of injustice. The far deeper challenge is
how to protect and extend those situations in which people manage to cast a
penumbra of care and comfort not merely over themselves but over
everyone they can reach who stands in need of it.
    Each of the projects in this book, in their own way, have tried to do just
that: carve out a period of space and time in which desperate people could
be sheltered from the press of need long enough to find their feet and,
eventually, their voices. Very often this involved arranging the most basic
provisions of physical safety, bodily sustenance and medical care for people
to whom those things had been denied. The Panthers did it for the poor
Black communities bypassed, or at very best patronized, by the Great
Society. The volunteers of Common Ground and Occupy Sandy did it for
themselves, in neighborhoods brought to the ground by heavy weather—as
did the Greek solidarity clinics, in a land undone by nothing more material
than a few fatal paragraphs in a loan agreement.
   If care is what sustains our capacity to exist at all, though, what sustains
care is the exercise of power. In a world where the maintenance of a high
standard of comfort for a very few seems to require that virtually everyone
else be deprived of any control whatsoever over the circumstances of their
being, any ability to grasp resources and direct them toward the care of
those in need requires that we reassert our claim to that control. The
Spanish municipalists aimed to extend the ambit of self-determination to an
entire city, and the Kurds of northern Syria across a territory every bit the
size of a smaller nation-state. Murray Bookchin dreamed it at the scale of
the entire globe: a confederal mesh of autonomous communities spanning
the planet, in which free people might bring the metabolism of their
collective being back into line with the cycles and rhythms of a thriving
Earth.
   What I’ve tried to evoke, in my account of each of these cases, is the
sense of collective power as a positive pressure, pushing outward against
the chaos and night. Wherever communities exercised this power, they were
able to establish an envelope, however fragile or temporary, inside of which
the injured might catch their breath and restore themselves—and therefore
regenerate their organic capacity to endure, to resist and to create.
     It has never been easy to achieve this, anywhere or at any point in
history, and we know that wherever someone has attempted to do so, that
attempt has most often been resisted with force. But what was never easy
becomes sharply more difficult still in a time of unending storms. It will
often feel as if everything is conspiring against our ability to care, feed and
protect ourselves, and maintain the lifesystems that sustain us against a
world ruled by death.
    It increasingly seems that if there is going to be any rescue at all, it’s
going to be that which we devise on our own, together, largely unaided by
anyone or anything else.

There is a certain compensation in this.
    Conversations about decarbonization policy or carbon-credit markets or
stratospheric aerosol injection, after all, offer agency solely to a narrow
technical and managerial elite. They center only particular kinds of
knowledge, even though the policies being discussed stand to affect every
living thing on the planet. They’re not detached from our experiences of the
world under heat, precisely, but they take place at too many removes for
those experiences to really weigh in considerations. (It’s hard to imagine
anyone who might have struggled ashore from a foundering raft, say, or
charred half their body after falling to a searing sidewalk, seated around a
table in those air-conditioned conference rooms.)
    So far as virtually every one of us is concerned, these strategies to rescue
the world involve decisions made by other people, and we may or may not
even be informed about them until they’re fait accompli. Bizarrely, they
don’t propose any role for you and me, other than that we carry on doing as
we always have. All they ask of us is that we continue to consume, continue
to live in isolation from one another, continue our complicity in the churn
that gave rise to the storms to begin with.
     But the kind of conversations we will need to have if we propose to
build the Lifehouse are different. These conversations will take place with,
among and between people directly exposed to the conditions of the Long
Emergency, who will be directly affected by whatever decisions are made.
They will engage each and every one of us, draw on our whole capacity as
living beings and necessarily result in novel approaches to knowing, doing
and being. I can tell you from personal experience that something
extraordinary begins to happen when people discover what it feels like to be
sustained by their own efforts in this way. Their sense of what is doable, so
impoverished through the long neoliberal twilight, expands to encompass
new horizons. And we know from the testimonies of so many who were
there what that feels like—again, it feels like healing, accompanied by a
massive upwelling of purpose, power and possibility. If ever there were
anything that might help us overcome the deer-in-the-headlights paralysis
otherwise so endemic to our time, it consists in this. We can number it
among the few, precious gifts of the Long Emergency that has otherwise
taken so much from us.
    But there is a flip side, as we know there must be. As anyone who has
ever undertaken the care of another knows, the work it takes to stabilize a
situation on the edge of chaos often seems overwhelming—the more so
when the need for it is sustained indefinitely. The work of mutual care in
the Long Emergency will be constant, and it will never end. It will
unavoidably exact a toll from everyone who undertakes it. There’s no way
around this: at some point, everyone who energetically commits themselves
to the effort of repair will experience depletion, exhaustion and burnout.
    We know, too, that these things invariably fall most heavily on those
who work hardest to push back the night. You might expect that people who
were so attuned to what the care of body and soul requires, and so
boundlessly dedicated to the restoration of others, would not forget to
replenish themselves. But all the people I know called to this work most
 urgently also seem to be those who tend to beat themselves up because they
can never do enough. And it’s true. There will always be someone who
needs them and always someone they cannot reach.
    What I want to say to them is this: it’s not anyone’s job to reach every
last one of the billions of human beings imperiled by our time of
Emergency, nor are you betraying them by remembering to take care of
yourself. There are relatively few things I have ever taken to heart from the
Jewish ethical tradition which is my birthright. Among them, though, are a
few lines attributed to a rabbi named Tarfon who lived around the end of the
first century of the current era, later bound into the compilation of oral
wisdom known as the Pirkei Avot: “It is not incumbent upon you to
complete the work [of repairing the world], but neither are you at liberty to
desist from it.”2 I have always found Tarfon’s charge electrifying, possibly
because it is both bracing and comforting, and I continue to turn to it for
strength in difficult moments.
    In context, I interpret Tarfon to mean that we keep organizing, even if
what we’re doing often feels like little more than shifting drifts and piles of
washed-up flotsam around the terminal beach. We keep doing the work,
come what may. We make such shelter as we can, for as many as we can,
for as long as we can, and when we are asked, we do what we can to help
others make shelter themselves. This work is what we have, it is all we have
and it is all anyone can ask of us. As difficult as all of this might be to
accept, internalizing it affords us one final gift, which is the gift of clarity.
    So, no: protest marches will not save us, nor will any political party.
Blockchains will not save us. Meatless Mondays will not save us. UBIs will
not save us. Greta will not save us. Central bankers will not save us.
Mindfulness will not save us. Mass timber will not save us. Voting will not
save us, but neither will not voting. Vertical farming will not save us. A
World Congress of Mayors will not save us. Blowing up pipelines will not
save us. Carbon credits will definitely not save us. Green New Deals will
 not save us. Cyanobacteria will not save us. Cargo bikes will not save us,
not even electric ones. “Precision fermentation” will not save us. Painting
roofs white will not save us. Airships will not save us. AI will not save us.
Nothing that any billionaire does will save us. If anything at all is going to
save us, it will have to be us. “Who will build the ark?” the late Mike Davis
famously asks.3 The only possible answer is that we will, together.
    Thus, perhaps, the strangely affirmative character of a life so close to the
precipice. There is so much to do, so many who need what we have to offer.
The darkening landscape before us is lit by the flashing certainty that there
is nowhere else we were meant to be but here, nothing higher or more
important we will ever do than this. And it is gathered here, in the ruin and
wreckage of all our hopes for the future, that we might finally learn what it
is to know care—for ourselves, for one another and for the wounded Earth
that cradles us.

                      at Newington Green, September 2019–September 2023

                              OceanofPDF.com
                         Acknowledgments


My debts to Nurri Kim are too many and profound to list, or even try to
characterize. In so many ways, she is my very own Lifehouse. All I can do
is thank her, with my infinite love, and hope to be the same for her for all
our days on Earth.
    Leo Hollis trusted me to deliver, during long stretches of radio silence
that would have driven any ordinary editor to apoplexy. It cannot have been
easy. I hope he feels that the results repay the effort. My thanks also to the
copyediting team of Jeanne Tao and Jeffrey Klein, whose commitment,
attention to detail and indulgence of my idiosyncrasies is greatly
appreciated.
    In my conception of the Lifehouse, I acknowledge a profound psychic
debt to the six “Visions” illustrations Clifford Harper produced for
Undercurrents magazine in the mid-1970s, depicting, respectively, a
“Collectivised Garden,” a “Basement Workshop,” an “Autonomous
Housing Estate,” an “Autonomous Terrace,” a “Community Workshop” and
a “Community Media Centre,” all repurposed from vernacular British
housing typologies, and all explicitly running on renewable solar and wind
power. Clifford’s visions continue to resonate and to inspire, and it would
please me to no end for people to discover his work through reading about
it here.
    After seeing my original Mastodon post on the Lifehouse, a friend
named Gregor May pointed me to a few tantalizing paragraphs he had
spotted in the course of his own archival research. These appeared on page
34 of the Whole Earth Catalog for March 1970 under the caption, “Some
 Ideas on the ‘Lifehouse’ Concept,” and were attributed to an organization
out of Palo Alto called ecology action (complete with groovy lowercase
orthography). Per ecology action:
  The lifehouse is a neighborhood community center set up in your own home, where help and
  information on the starting and running of food co-ops, gardens, sidewalk trees (among many
  other related things) can be found … Eventually, the lifehouse concept will, hopefully, result
  in the “community of San Francisco” being run by its citizens on an ecologically sound basis
  … The will to do something about your own survival is the most important thing. The
  lifehouse will provide an opportunity for all of us to be involved in exercising our will to
  survive.

If, like so many other steps we might have taken to protect the climate, the
best time to have put this idea into practice was a half-century ago, perhaps
the original framers would nevertheless be heartened to know that people
keep coming up with it.
    While any errors of fact, interpretation, emphasis or taste you may trip
over are, of course, my sole responsibility, this book that is substantially
about community would have been impossible had I not been sustained,
challenged and encouraged by a community of brilliant thinkers and doers.
To lift a line from a book I know I read in adolescence, but which otherwise
failed to make much of an impression on me: I am glad you’re here with
me, here at the end of all things.
    I am once again grateful for the insight, solidarity, support and energy
furnished, in various ways, by Jabari Adisa, Javier Arbona, Jon Ardern,
Timo Arnall, Markus Bader, Rev. Chris Ballard, Fay Ballard, Debbie
Bookchin, August C. Bourré, Tanya Byrne, Greta Byrum, Elisabeth
Calderón Lüning, Deb Chachra, Brendan Cormier, Alberto Corsín Jiménez,
Aimee Meredith Cox, Cansu Curgen, Nicholas de Monchaux, Dilar Dirik,
Cory Doctorow, Christina Dunbar-Hester, Nick Durrant, Dominic Evans,
Christopher Fahey, Simone Ferracina, Carrie Friese, Daisy Froud, César
García Sáez, Andrey Goncharov, Sarah Grant, Avsar Gurpinar, Suzi Hall,
Clifford Harper, Elisavet Hasa, Owen Hatherley, Eric Höweler, Tom Igoe,
 Margaret Jameson, Gaby Jeliazkov, Olalekan Jeyifous, Priya Jha, Matt
Jones, Erin Kissane, Janette Kim, Olive M. Kim, Justina Kochansky, Laura
Kurgan, Laurie Laybourn-Langton, Chris Lee, Anthony Leone, Sophie
Lewis, Enma López Araujo, David Madden, Azadeh Mashayekhi, Adrian
McEwen, Justin McGuirk, Michael McQuarrie, Ana Méndez de Andés,
Anna Minton, Samaneh Moafi, Oli Mould, Leila Nachawati, Tamara Paris,
Dan Pfiffer, Leigh Phillips, Benedetta Piantella, Alison Powell, Babak
Rahimi, Padmini Ray Murray, Kristien Ring, Carla Rivera Blanco, Tod
Robbins, John Robinson, Ahmet A. Sabancı, Fred Scharmen, Dubravka
Sekulić, Dianna Settles, Shiri Shalmy, Natalia Smirnov, Easton Smith,
Stavros Stavrides, Ninni Suni, Cordy Swope, Alice Taylor, Matthew
Thompson, Simon Gareth Thorpe, Fran Tonkiss, Joe Trellick, Sophia Tu,
Shan Vahidy, Christina Varvia, Brenda Vértiz, Frank Vial, Glenn Wallis,
Eyal Weizman, Ines Weizman, Darren Webb, David Wengrow, Daniel
Wolpert, J. Meejin Yoon, Jillian C. York, and everyone I worked alongside
in ACT/UP Philadelphia, at the Berkeley Free Clinic and at 520 Clinton. I
owe a particular debt of gratitude to my steadfast Mildmay Chums David
Madden and Dubravka Sekulić for enduring my primordial drafts, late-night
rants and consistently iommic taste in music. Thanks also to Billy Smith
and Cheyenna Layne Weber for helping me ensure the accuracy of certain
details of the text.
   This book was written to the sounds of Aluk Todolo, Barn Owl,
Bismuth, Bong, James Cleveland and the Angelic Choir, Current 93,
Deafheaven, Deathprod, Earth, Ex Eye, Gazelle Twin, Godspeed You!
Black Emperor, Hildur Guðnadóttir, Lee Hazlewood and Nancy Sinatra,
Krallice, KTL, Lankum, Lingua Ignota, Frank London and Jon Madof,
Masada, MMMD, Muslimgauze, Nadja, Nature and Organisation,
Panopticon, Planning for Burial, Phurpa, RAKTA, Emma Ruth Rundle, Ben
Salisbury, Scarcity, Senyawa, She Drew the Gun, Sleep, Songs: Ohia, the
Staple Singers, SubRosa, SUNN O))), Swans, Thou, the Clara Ward
 Singers, White Hills, Windhand, Wolves in the Throne Room, Wrekmeister
Harmonies, Year of No Light, Zeal and Ardor and “Life on Earth” by
Hurray for the Riff Raff (the version with Preservation Hall Jazz Band, over
and over again). Biomechanical recalibration by Phil Cavell at Cyclefit,
London. When in Helsinki, Adam Greenfield enjoys Kulttuurisauna,
Hakaniemenranta 17. Support your local independent bookshop.

                       YOU WANT IT DARKER.

                             OceanofPDF.com
                                           Notes


Introduction
  1 National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Centers for Environmental
    Information, “Monthly National Climate Report for October 2012: Sandy Storm Surge and
    Wind Summary,” November 2012, ncei.noaa.gov.
  2 My own contemporaneous account of Occupy Sandy, including a detailed description of
    how the 520 Clinton relief hub worked, can be found in “Preliminary Notes to a Diagram of
    Occupy Sandy,” posted on my blog on November 21, 2012. speedbird.wordpress.com.
  3 Sharon Lerner, “How Sandy Saved Occupy,” American Prospect, November 27, 2012;
    James West, “What Happened to the Money That Occupy Sandy Raised?,” Mother Jones,
    June 18, 2013.
  4 “Red Cross Recovery Efforts to Help Sandy Survivors,” American Red Cross, December
    19, 2012, redcross.org.
  5 “Energy Transition Will Move Slowly over the Next Decade,” Economist Intelligence Unit,
    December 1, 2022, eiu.com.
  6 J. David Goodman, “Suspicious Fire Chars Part of Brooklyn Church,” New York Times,
    December 23, 2012.
  7 Rebecca Solnit, A Paradise Built in Hell: The Extraordinary Communities That Arise in
    Disaster (New York: Viking, 2009).
  8 Charles E. Fritz, Disasters and Mental Health: Therapeutic Principles Drawn from Disaster
    Studies, Historical and Comparative Disaster Series No. 10 (Newark: University of
    Delaware Disaster Research Center, 1996).
  9 John P. Clark, The Impossible Community: Realizing Communitarian Anarchism (New
    York: Bloomsbury, 2013), 214.
 10 Cassie Thornton, The Hologram: Feminist, Peer-to- Peer Healthcare for a Post-Pandemic
    Future (London: Pluto Press, 2020), 4.
 11 From a phone interview conducted with an unnamed Occupy Sandy volunteer, August 23,
    2013, in Eric Ambinder and David M. Jennings, The Resilient Social Network (Falls
    Church, VA: Homeland Security Studies and Analysis Institute, September 30, 2013).
 12 Clark, Impossible Community, 214.


1. The Long Emergency
  1 Aine Fox, “Shapps Admits Rail Network Cannot Cope with Extreme Heat as Track Hits
   62C,” Independent, July 19, 2022; Kit Malthouse, “Heatwave Response,” Hansard,
   Commons, vol. 718 col. 963, July 20, 2022.
 2 The reading for June 8, 2023; it has come down marginally since, as it tends to on a
   seasonal basis, but the general trend is upward and accelerating. You can see the current
   reading at co2.earth/daily-co2.
 3 Graham Caswell, “The Window for a Livable Future Is Closing, Warns IPCC,” Green
   Central Banking, February 28, 2022, greencentralbanking.com.
 4 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation
   and Vulnerability (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2022).
 5 Jeff Tollefson, “Earth Is Warmer Than It’s Been in 125,000 Years,” Scientific American,
   August 9, 2021.
 6 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Climate Change 2022.
 7 Chi Xu et al., “Future of the Human Climate Niche,” Proceedings of the National Academy
   of Sciences 117, no. 21 (May 4, 2020).
 8 Cormac McCarthy, The Road (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2006).
 9 Eamon Barrett, “Taiwan’s Drought Is Exposing Just How Much Water Chipmakers Like
   TSMC Use (and Reuse),” Fortune, June 12, 2021; Willy Shih, “Severe Winter Weather in
   Texas Will Impact Many Supply Chains beyond Chips,” Forbes, February 19, 2021.
10 Thiemo Fetzer, “Subsidising the Spread of COVID-19: Evidence from the UK’S Eat-Out-
   to-Help-Out Scheme,” Economic Journal 132, no. 643 (April 2022).
11 David Wallace-Wells, The Uninhabitable Earth: Life after Warming (New York: Tim
   Duggan Books, 2019).
12 Alan Buis, “Too Hot to Handle: How Climate Change May Make Some Places Too Hot to
   Live,” Ask NASA Climate, March 9, 2022, climate.nasa.gov.
13 Daniel J. Vecellio et al., “Evaluating the 35°C Wet-Bulb Temperature Adaptability
   Threshold for Young, Healthy Subjects,” Journal of Applied Physiology 132, no. 2
   (February 2022).
14 David Wallace-Wells, “The Mysteriously Low Death Toll of the Heat Waves in India and
   Pakistan,” New York Times, July 14, 2022.
15 Sarah Toy, “Streets Are Getting So Hot They Are Causing Serious Burns,” Wall Street
   Journal, July 26, 2023.
16 Syed F. Saquib, Joseph T. Carroll and Paul Chestovich, “Seasonal Impact in Admissions and
   Burn Profiles in a Desert Burn Unit,” Burns Open 5, no. 2 (April 2021).
17 Jorge Vega et al., “A 5-Year Review of Pavement Burns from a Desert Burn Center,”
   Journal of Burn Care and Research 40, no. 4 (July/August 2019).
18 Jack Healy, “Scorching Hot in Phoenix: What It’s Like to Work in 115 Degrees,” New York
   Times, June 20, 2021.
19 Chunwu Zhu et al., “Carbon Dioxide (CO2) Levels This Century Will Alter the Protein,
    Micronutrients, and Vitamin Content of Rice Grains with Potential Health Consequences
    for the Poorest Rice-Dependent Countries,” Science Advances 4, no. 5 (May 23, 2018).
 20 Ibid.
21 Nicky Driedonks, Ivo Rieu and Wim H. Vriezen, “Breeding for Plant Heat Tolerance at
   Vegetative and Reproductive Stages,” Plant Reproduction 29, nos. 1–2 (June 2016). There
   is special promise, as well, in an emerging wave of agricultural crops and techniques
   adapted for hotter, drier environments, ultimately inspired by long-standing Indigenous
   lifeways of the American desert Southwest. See Gary Paul Nabhan et al., “An Aridamerican
   Model for Agriculture in a Hotter, Water Scarce World,” Plants People Planet 2, no. 6
   (November 2020).
22 Jean-François Bastin et al., “Understanding Climate Change from a Global Analysis of City
   Analogues,” PLOS ONE, October 16, 2019.
23 Allison M. Thomson et al., “RCP4.5: A Pathway for Stabilization of Radiative Forcing by
   2100,” Climatic Change 109, nos. 1–2 (November 2011).
24 Allianz SE, “Megacities Exposed to Flood Risk,” December 8, 2015, allianz.com.
25 Stephane Hallegatte et al., “Future Flood Losses in Major Coastal Cities,” Nature Climate
   Change 3, no. 9 (September 2013).
26 Geert Jan van Oldenborgh et al., “Attribution of Extreme Rainfall from Hurricane Harvey,
   August 2017,” Environmental Research Letters 12, no. 12 (December 13, 2017).
27 Eric S. Blake and David A. Zelinsky, National Hurricane Center Tropical Cyclone Report:
   Hurricane Harvey, 17 August–1 September 2017 (National Hurricane Center, January 23,
   2018).
28 Hallegatte et al., “Future Flood Losses.”
29 Christopher Flavelle, Jill Cowan and Ivan Penn, “Climate Shocks Are Making Parts of
   America Uninsurable. It Just Got Worse,” New York Times, May 21, 2023.
30 C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group, “How to Adapt Your City to Sea Level Rise and
   Coastal Flooding,” C40 Knowledge Hub, February 2022, c40knowledgehub.org.
31 Michael Oppenheimer et al., “Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands,
   Coasts and Communities,” in Hans-Otto Pörtner et al., eds., The Ocean and Cryosphere in a
   Changing Climate (Geneva: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2019); United
   Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, The World’s
   Cities in 2018: Data Booklet (United Nations, 2018).
32 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation,
   and Vulnerability (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2015).
33 See “TPC Camp,” in Charley Hailey, Camps: A Guide to 21st Century Space (Cambridge,
   MA: MIT Press, 2009).
34 Christopher Flavelle, “How the Government Is Failing Americans Uprooted by Calamity,”
   New York Times, July 23, 2022; Andreas Seibert, From Somewhere to Nowhere: China’s
   Internal Migrants (Zürich: Lars Miller Publishers, 2008).
35 Ricardo Martén and Camillo Boano, “Checkpoint Urbanism: Violent Infrastructures and
   Border Stigmas in the Juárez Border Region,” Urban Studies 59, no. 3 (February 2022);
   “Greece: Violence against Asylum Seekers at Border,” Human Rights Watch, March 17,
      2020; Border Violence Monitoring Network, Systematic Human Rights Violations: Border
     Violence, Pushbacks and Containment in Ceuta and Melilla (August 6, 2021).
36   The United States Customs and Border Protection agency, for example, claims a zone of
     jurisdiction extending 100 miles from any land or maritime territorial boundary. As of 2018,
     65.3 percent of the American population lived within this zone. Tanvi Misra, “Inside the
     Massive U.S. ‘Border Zone,’ ” CityLab, May 14, 2018, bloomberg.com.
37   “Sea-Watch Ship Aurora Detained on Fabricated Grounds,” sea-watch. org, August 21,
     2023.
38   “The Pylos Shipwreck,” Forensis, July 7, 2023, counter-investigations. org.
39   As this posture was dubbed by Theresa May, then Home Secretary of the United Kingdom,
     in a world-historical instance of saying the quiet part out loud. James Kirkup and Robert
     Winnett, “Theresa May Interview: ‘We’re Going to Give Illegal Migrants a Really Hostile
     Reception,’ ” Telegraph, May 25, 2012. See also Liberty, ed., A Guide to the Hostile
     Environment: The Border Controls Dividing Our Communities—and How We Can Bring
     Them Down (London: Liberty, May 2019).
40   Chris Rumford, ed., Citizens and Borderwork in Contemporary Europe (New York:
     Routledge, 2009); Chris Rumford, Cosmopolitan Borders (London: Palgrave Pivot, 2014).
41   So are shootings among civilians. “Estimated risk of firearm incidents increased almost
     monotonically with higher temperatures … even moderately hot temperatures were
     associated with higher risk of shootings.” Vivian H. Lyons et al., “Analysis of Daily
     Ambient Temperature and Firearm Violence in 100 US Cities,” JAMA Network Open,
     December 16, 2022.
42   John O’Loughlin, Andrew M. Linke and Frank D. W. Witmer, “Effects of Temperature and
     Precipitation Variability on the Risk of Violence in Sub-Saharan Africa, 1980–2012,”
     Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111, no. 47 (November 25, 2014).
43   Marshall Burke, Solomon M. Hsiang and Edward Miguel, “Climate and Conflict,” Annual
     Review of Economics 7 (August 2015).
44   Damian Carrington, “Lack of Migrant Workers Left Food Rotting in UK Fields Last Year,
     Data Reveals,” Guardian, February 9, 2018; Sarah Butler, “Up to £60m in UK Crops Left
     to Rot Owing to Lack of Workers, Says NFU,” Guardian, August 15, 2022.
45   Tim Stokholm, “The Mediterranean Migrant Crisis: A Critical Challenge to Global Nation‐
     States,” University of East London Centre for Social Justice and Change Working Paper No
     3, January 2016.
46   Marc Levinson, The Box: How the Shipping Container Made the World Smaller and the
     World Economy Bigger (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2008); Deborah Cowen,
     The Deadly Life of Logistics: Mapping Violence in Global Trade (Minneapolis: University
     of Minnesota Press, 2014).
47   Catherina Zara Raymond, “Piracy and Armed Robbery in the Malacca Strait,” Naval War
     College Review 62, no. 3 (Summer 2009); David Rosenberg, “The Political Economy of
     Piracy in the South China Sea,” Naval War College Review 62, no. 3 (Summer 2009).
 48 Matthew Mpoke Bigg, Ivan Nechepurenko and Neil Mac-Farquhar, “Russia Pulls Out of the
   Black Sea Grain Deal,” New York Times, July 17, 2023.
49 Liz Alderman, “Crops ‘Stored Everywhere’: Ukraine’s Harvest Piles Up,” New York Times,
   July 28, 2022.
50 Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (UK), “New Intelligence Shows Russia’s
   Targeting of a Cargo Ship,” press release, September 11, 2023, gov.uk.
51 Joe Ware and Karolina Grotowska, Cooking Up a Storm: The Climate Threat to Food
   Supply Chains in UK, Germany and Italy (London: Christian Aid, September 2023).
52 Those working in the nascent field of critical logistics studies increasingly prefer this term
   to the misleadingly linear “supply chain.” See “Supply Matrix,” Field Notes Toward an
   Internationalist Green New Deal, internationalistgreennewdeal.org.
53 Jasbir K. Puar, The Right to Maim: Debility, Capacity, Disability (Durham, NC: Duke
   University Press, 2017).
54 Chris Vallance, “Heatwave Forced Google and Oracle to Shut Down Computers,” BBC,
   July 20, 2022; Denis Campbell, “London NHS Trust Cancels Operations as IT System Fails
   in Heatwave,” Guardian, July 21, 2022.
55 Nesrine Malik, “When State Services Fail, Citizens Pay Extra or Sink. This Is Sunak’s
   Britain Now,” Guardian, January 9, 2023.
56 Robert I. Rotberg, “Failed States, Collapsed States, Weak States: Causes and Indicators,” in
   Robert I. Rotberg, ed., State Failure and State Weakness in a Time of Terror (Washington,
   DC: Brookings Institution Press, 2004).
57 David Harvey, The Limits to Capital (Oxford, UK: Basil Blackwell, 1982); Ruth Wilson
   Gilmore, Abolition Geography: Essays Toward Liberation (New York: Verso, 2022).
58 Ida Danewid, “The Fire This Time: Grenfell, Racial Capitalism and the Urbanisation of
   Empire,” European Journal of International Relations 26, no. 1 (March 2020).
59 Arline T. Geronimus, Weathering: The Extraordinary Stress on the Body of an Ordinary
   Life in an Unjust Society (London: Virago, 2023).
60 Aaron B. Frank and Elizabeth M. Bartels, eds., Adaptive Engagement for Undergoverned
   Spaces: Concepts, Challenges and Prospects for New Approaches (Santa Monica, CA:
   RAND Corporation, 2022).
61 David Harvey, Rebel Cities: From the Right to the City to the Urban Revolution (New York:
   Verso, 2012).
62 The Royal Society, Geoengineering the Climate: Science, Governance and Uncertainty
   (London: Royal Society, September 2009).
63 Ruth Maclean and Dionne Searcey, “Congo to Auction Land to Oil Companies: ‘Our
   Priority Is Not to Save the Planet,’ ” New York Times, July 24, 2022; Josefine Fokuhl and
   Todd Gillespie, “Germany Revives Coal as Energy Security Trumps Climate Goals,”
   Bloomberg, December 22, 2022; Severin Carrell, Peter Walker and Helena Horton,
   “Dismay as Rishi Sunak Vows to ‘Max Out’ UK Fossil Fuel Reserves,” Guardian, July 31,
   2023; Helen Davidson, “China Continues Coal Spree, Despite Climate Goals,” Guardian,
   August 29, 2023; Global Energy Monitor, “India Enters an Unnecessary Coal Plant
      Permitting Spree in 2023,” briefing, August 7, 2023, globalenergymonitor. org; Mariam
     Zachariah et al., Extreme Heat in North America, Europe and China in July 2023 Made
     Much More Likely by Climate Change (London: World Weather Attribution, 2023).
64   Holly Jean Buck, After Geoengineering: Climate Tragedy, Repair, and Restoration (New
     York: Verso, 2019).
65   Christoph C. Raible et al., “Tambora 1815 as a Test Case for High Impact Volcanic
     Eruptions: Earth System Effects,” WIREs Climate Change 7, no. 4 (July/August 2016).
66   Elizabeth Kolbert, Under a White Sky: The Nature of the Future (London: Bodley Head,
     2021), 179–81.
67   Some climate scientists assess that this circulation is close to shutting down already, no
     matter what anyone does. Peter Ditlevsen and Susanne Ditlevsen, “Warning of a
     Forthcoming Collapse of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation,” Nature
     Communications 14, Article 4254 (July 25, 2023).
68   Clive Oppenheimer, “Climatic, Environmental and Human Consequences of the Largest
     Known Historic Eruption: Tambora Volcano (Indonesia) 1815,” Progress in Physical
     Geography: Earth and Environment 27, no. 2 (June 2003).
69   Brian Kahn, “No, We Shouldn’t Just Block Out the Sun,” Gizmodo, April 24, 2020, cited in
     Kolbert, Under a White Sky.
70   Buck, After Geoengineering, 128–33.
71   “Warming will continue beyond 2100 under all … scenarios except [stringent mitigation].
     Surface temperatures will remain approximately constant at elevated levels for many
     centuries after a complete cessation of net anthropogenic CO2 emissions.”
     Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Climate Change 2014 Synthesis Report
     (Geneva: IPCC, 2014); Johan Rockström et al., “Safe and Just Earth System Boundaries,”
     Nature 619 (July 6, 2023).
72   Donella H. Meadows et al., The Limits to Growth (New York: Universe Books, 1972).
73   Andreas Malm, Corona, Climate, Chronic Emergency: War Communism in the Twenty-First
     Century (New York: Verso, 2020). Emphasis in original.
74   Richard I. Cook, “How Complex Systems Fail,” 1998.
75   Gerald K. Haines and Robert E. Leggett, eds., CIA’s Analysis of the Soviet Union, 1947–
     1991: A Documentary Collection (Washington, DC: Center for the Study of Intelligence,
     2001).
76   Ted Nordhaus, “Am I the Mass Murderer? Pushing Back on Climate Catastrophism Is Not a
     Thought Crime,” Breakthrough Institute, March 29, 2022, thebreakthrough.org.
77   Cindi Katz, “Under the Falling Sky: Apocalyptic Environmentalism and the Production of
     Nature,” in Antoni Callari, Stephen Cullenberg and Carole Biewener, eds., Marxism in the
     Postmodern Age: Confronting the New World Order (New York: Guilford Press, 1994);
     Sasha Lilley et al., Catastrophism: The Apocalyptic Politics of Collapse and Rebirth
     (Oakland, CA: PM Press, 2012); The Invisible Committee, To Our Friends (South
     Pasadena, CA: Semiotext(e), 2015); Leigh Phillips, Austerity Ecology and the Collapse-
     Porn Addicts: A Defence of Growth, Progress, Industry and Stuff (Washington, DC: Zero
      Books, 2015); Out of the Woods Collective, Hope against Hope: Writings on Ecological
     Crisis (Philadelphia: Common Notions, 2020).


2. Mutual Care
  1 Kelly Hayes and Mariame Kaba, Let This Radicalize You: Organizing and the Revolution of
    Reciprocal Care (Chicago: Haymarket Books, 2023).
  2 Peter Kropotkin, Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution (London: Freedom Press, 2009 [1902]).
  3 Melani Cammett and Lauren M. MacLean, eds., The Politics of Non-state Social Welfare
    (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2014).
  4 Mutual Aid Disaster Relief, Lessons Learned (zine), June 2020, 19.
  5 Dean Spade, Mutual Aid: Building Solidarity During This Crisis (And the Next) (New York:
    Verso, 2020).
  6 scott crow, Black Flags and Windmills: Hope, Anarchy, and the Common Ground Collective
    (Oakland, CA: PM Press, 2014).
  7 Hurricane Katrina External Review Panel, The New Orleans Hurricane Protection System:
    What Went Wrong and Why: A Report (Reston, VA: American Society of Civil Engineers,
    2007); United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Policy
    Development and Research, Current Housing Unit Damage Estimates: Hurricanes Katrina,
    Rita, and Wilma, February 12, 2006 (Darby, PA: Diane Publishing).
  8 “The city’s population, estimated at 485,000 in 2000, was reduced to fewer than several
    thousand by the end of the first week of September 2005.” Kevin McCarthy et al., The
    Repopulation of New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Gulf
    States Policy Institute, 2006).
  9 Patrick Sharkey, “Survival and Death in New Orleans: An Empirical Look at the Human
    Impact of Katrina,” Journal of Black Studies 37, no. 4 (March 2007); US House of
    Representatives, Select Bipartisan Committee to Investigate the Preparation for and
    Response to Hurricane Katrina, A Failure of Initiative: Final Report of the Select Bipartisan
    Committee to Investigate the Preparation for and Response to Hurricane Katrina
    (Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 2006).
 10 Anderson Cooper interviewing Senator Mary Landrieu on Anderson Cooper 360,
    September 1, 2005, cnn.com; Sheri Fink, “The Deadly Choices at Memorial,” New York
    Times, August 25, 2009.
 11 crow, Black Flags and Windmills, 18; John P. Clark, The Impossible Community: Realizing
    Communitarian Anarchism (New York: Bloomsbury, 2013).
 12 Rhiannon Firth, Disaster Anarchy: Mutual Aid and Radical Action (London, Pluto Press,
    2022); crow, Black Flags and Windmills, 93.
 13 United States Census Bureau, “Table B19013: Median Household Income in the Past 12
    Months (in 2007 Inflation-Adjusted Dollars),” in 2005–2007 American Community Survey
    3-Year Summary File (December 9, 2008).
 14 crow, Black Flags and Windmills, 103.
 15 Clark, Impossible Community, 211.
16 The Invisible Committee, The Coming Insurrection (Los Angeles: semiotext(e), 2009
   [2007]), 83.
17 Sam Dolnick and Corey Kilgannon, “Wind-Driven Flames Reduce Scores of Homes to
   Embers in Queens Enclave,” New York Times, October 30, 2012.
18 Office of the Mayor, New York City Special Initiative for Rebuilding and Resiliency, A
   Stronger, More Resilient New York (June 11, 2013), 13.
19 “Impact of Hurricane Sandy,” New York City Community Development Block Grant—
   Disaster Recovery, nyc.gov.
20 Michael Schwirtz, “Housing Nightmare Looms in Wake of Storm,” New York Times,
   November 4, 2012.
21 Occupy Sandy, directed by Josh Fox (International WOW Company, 2012), at 15:13.
22 Ibid., Occupy Sandy site coordinator Justin Wedes, at 7:35.
23 These facilities included a kitchen, a medical clinic, media-outreach and legal aid tents, a
   clothing, bedding and hygiene supplies depot, and a 5,000-volume library housed in a tent
   paid for by New York music legend Patti Smith. All were destroyed by the NYPD in the
   course of their clearance of the park, in the predawn hours of November 15, 2011 (along
   with at least one of my friend Dan’s WiFi routers).
24 Working Group on Principles of Consolidation, “Principles of Solidarity,” New York City
   General Assembly, September 23, 2011, nycga.net.
25 Sharon Lerner, “How Sandy Saved Occupy,” American Prospect, November 27, 2012.
26 Our experience was far from uncommon, nor was this kind of indifference-verging-on-
   hostility by any means limited to Sandy. scott crow describes a Red Cross/FEMA site in
   post-Katrina Baton Rouge turning away hundreds of volunteers willing to ply the
   treacherous floodwaters in their own boats, “simply because they could not figure out what
   to do with them.” crow, Black Flags and Windmills, 10. Clark similarly notes that the Red
   Cross “was conspicuous by its absence in the areas of greatest need, including the city of
   New Orleans.” Clark, Impossible Community, 216.
27 Rebecca Solnit, A Paradise Built in Hell: The Extraordinary Communities That Arise in
   Disaster (London: Penguin, 2009).
28 Dean Spade, “Solidarity Not Charity: Mutual Aid for Mobilization and Survival,” Social
   Text 38, no. 1 (March 1, 2020).
29 Occupy Sandy, at 8:31.
30 Sam Knight, “Occupy Sandy and the Future of Socialism,” Truthout, April 5, 2014, in Peer
   Illner, Disasters and Social Reproduction: Crisis Response Between the State and
   Community (London: Pluto Press, 2021).
31 Nick Pinto, “Hurricane Sandy Is New York’s Katrina,” Village Voice, November 21, 2012.
32 Those suffering impacts from the storm were more than twice as likely to turn to peers for
   help than they were to seek assistance from any organ or echelon of government. See
   Kathleen A. Cagney, David Sterrett, Jennifer Benz and Trevor Tompson, “Social Resources
      and Community Resilience in the Wake of Superstorm Sandy,” PLOS ONE, August 31,
     2016.
33   Firth, Disaster Anarchy, 101.
34   Colin Ward, Anarchy in Action (London: Freedom Press, 1973).
35   Knight, “Occupy Sandy and the Future of Socialism.”
36   Eric Ambinder and David M. Jennings, The Resilient Social Network (Falls Church, VA:
     Homeland Security Studies and Analysis Institute, September 30, 2013).
37   Spade, “Solidarity Not Charity,” 133.
38   Michael Haber, “Legal Issues in Mutual Aid Operations: A Preliminary Guide,” Hofstra
     University Legal Studies Research Paper No. 2020-06, June 5, 2020, ssrn.com.
39   “Cambio desde abajo y desde adentro: Notes on Centros de Apoyo Mutuo in post–María
     Puerto Rico,” Latino Studies 16, no. 4 (December 2018); Roberto Vélez-Vélez and
     Jacqueline Villarrubia-Mendoza, “Mobilizing Solidarity: Hurricane María as Structural
     Opening for Mutual Aid,” Sociological Review (September 2021); Brian Larkin, “The
     Politics and Poetics of Infrastructure,” Annual Review of Anthropology 42 (October 2013).
40   Sara Ahmed, The Promise of Happiness (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2010).
41   Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition, 2nd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
     1998 [1958]).
42   Lise Vogel, Marxism and the Oppression of Women: Toward a Unitary Theory (New
     Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1983).
43   Silvia Federici, Revolution at Point Zero: Housework, Reproduction, and Feminist Struggle
     (Oakland, CA: PM Press/Common Notions, 2012).
44   Hayes and Kaba, Let This Radicalize You, 57–79.
45   Robyn C. Spencer, The Revolution Has Come: Black Power, Gender and the Black Panther
     Party in Oakland (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2016).
46   Ruth Wilson Gilmore, Golden Gulag: Prisons, Surplus, Crisis, and Opposition in
     Globalizing California (Oakland: University of California Press, 2007).
47   Martha J. Bailey and Nicolas J. Duquette, “How Johnson Fought the War on Poverty: The
     Economics and Politics of Funding at the Office of Economic Opportunity,” Journal of
     Economic History 74, no. 2 (June 2014).
48   Sar A. Levitan, “The Community Action Program: A Strategy to Fight Poverty,” Annals of
     the American Academy of Political and Social Science 385 (September 1969).
49   Section 202(a)3 of the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964, Public Law 88-452, August 20,
     1964.
50   Lillian B. Rubin, “Maximum Feasible Participation: The Origins, Implications, and Present
     Status,” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 385 (September
     1969).
51   Memorandum from Office of Economic Opportunity Director Sargent Shriver,
     “Involvement of the Poor in All OEO Programs,” September 9, 1966.
52   Robert Goodman, After The Planners (Middlesex, UK: Penguin Books, 1972).
 53 Bobby Seale, Seize the Time: The Story of the Black Panther Party and Huey P. Newton
   (New York: Random House, 1970), 38.
54 Newton, able to cite state code chapter and verse since his days in the Anti-Poverty Center’s
   law library, was famous for leading these patrols with well-thumbed law book in hand.
   Ibid., 131.
55 Seale statement, Sacramento, CA, May 2, 1967.
56 “Capitol Is Invaded: State Police Halt Armed Negro Band,” Sacramento Bee, May 2, 1967.
57 Committee on Internal Security, Gun-Barrel Politics: The Black Panther Party, 1966–1971,
   H.R. Rep. No. 92–470 (Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 1971).
58 Huey P. Newton, Revolutionary Suicide (New York: Random House, 1973), 175.
59 Wallace Turner, “Witness Says Newton Shot Policeman,” New York Times, August 8, 1968.
60 People v. Newton, 8 Cal.App.3d 359 (Cal. Ct. App. 1970), 87 Cal. Rptr. 394, May 29, 1970;
   Joe Street, “ ‘Free Huey or the Sky’s the Limit’: The Black Panther Party and the Campaign
   to Free Huey P. Newton,” European Journal of American Studies 14, no. 1 (Spring 2019).
   See also Emil Caldwell, “Newton Is Cleared of Charges in Slaying,” New York Times,
   December 16, 1971.
61 It also led, more or less directly and immediately, to new gun-control legislation—not
   merely the Mulford Act, but the national Gun Control Act of 1968. Adam Winkler,
   Gunfight: The Battle Over the Right to Bear Arms in America (New York: W.W. Norton,
   2011).
62 The “hate groups” encompassed included the Southern Christian Leadership Conference,
   headed by Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. See memorandum from FBI director J. Edgar
   Hoover to SAC Albany, “Counterintelligence Program: Black Nationalist Hate Groups:
   Racial Intelligence,” March 4, 1968.
63 Ward Churchill, “To Disrupt, Discredit and Destroy: The FBI’s Secret War against the
   Black Panther Party,” in Kathleen Cleaver and George Katsiaficas, eds., Liberation,
   Imagination and the Black Panther Party (New York: Routledge, 2001).
64 Ward Churchill and Jim Vander Wall, The COINTELPRO Papers: Documents from the
   FBI’s Secret Wars Against Domestic Dissent (Boston: South End Press, 1990), 139.
65 Huey P. Newton, “Black Capitalism Re-analyzed I: June 5, 1971,” in To Die for the People:
   The Writings of Huey P. Newton (New York: Vintage Books, 1972).
66 Ibid.
67 Spencer, The Revolution Has Come, 85.
68 Joshua Bloom and Waldo E. Martin Jr., Black Against Empire: The History and Politics of
   the Black Panther Party (Oakland: University of California Press, 2013), 181.
69 See Spencer, The Revolution Has Come, 173, 235.
70 Earl A. Neil, “The Role of the Church and the Survival Program,” Black Panther, May 15,
   1971.
71 Spencer, The Revolution Has Come, 131.
72 The Panthers’ Sickle-Cell Anemia Research Foundation directly screened “nearly half a
   million people throughout the country” in the three years from 1971: David Hilliard, ed.,
      The Black Panther Party: Service to the People Programs (Albuquerque: University of
     New Mexico Press, 2008), 24. Black Panthers Bobby Seale and Marsha Martin discussed
     the program and its approach to screening for sickle-cell disease on the nationwide Mike
     Douglas Show on February 16, 1972: Alondra Nelson, Body and Soul (Minneapolis:
     University of Minnesota Press, 2011), 127.
73   “Free Food Program,” in Hilliard, Black Panther Party, 36.
74   As reformulated in the version of March 29, 1972.
75   Mary T. Bassett, “No Justice, No Health: The Black Panther Party’s Fight for Health in
     Boston and Beyond,” Journal of African American Studies 23, no. 4 (December 2019).
76   Nelson, Body and Soul.
77   Olivia B. Waxman, “What School Didn’t Teach You About the Black Panthers,” Time,
     February 25, 2021.
78   Nelson, Body and Soul, 79.
79   Spencer, The Revolution Has Come, 119.
80   Hilliard, Black Panther Party, 5.
81   Spencer, The Revolution Has Come, 119.
82   Alondra Nelson, “The Longue Durée of Black Lives Matter,” American Journal of Public
     Health 106, no. 10 (October 2016).
83   Judson L. Jeffries, Comrades: A Local History of the Black Panther Party (Bloomington:
     Indiana University Press, 2007); crow, Black Flags and Windmills, 33.
84   Spencer, The Revolution Has Come, 116.
85   Bob Avakian, “Rise and Fall of the Panthers: End of the Black Power Era,” Workers
     Vanguard, no. 4, January 1972.
86   Jane Rhodes, Framing the Black Panthers: The Spectacular Rise of a Black Power Icon
     (New York: New Press, 2007), 105.
87   “How did we feed the children? We told storekeepers: ‘If you don’t give us a dozen eggs a
     day, you have a problem. You really won’t have a store.’ People cry, ‘Oh, my God, the
     Panthers are ruthless! They’re extortionists!’ OK, but we fed our people.” Elaine Brown,
     interviewed by George Luke, July 2, 2022.
88   “Black Panther Says He Made Bomb,” San Francisco Chronicle, June 25, 1970, in Hugh
     Pearson, The Shadow of the Panther: Huey Newton and the Price of Black Power in
     America (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1994), 199.
89   Spencer, The Revolution Has Come, 123–4.
90   Newton, To Die for the People, 104.
91   Spencer, The Revolution Has Come, 94.
92   Elaine Brown, A Taste of Power: A Black Woman’s Story (New York: Pantheon Books,
     1992), 191.
93   Spencer, The Revolution Has Come.
94   Ibid.
95   Johanna Fernández, The Young Lords: A Radical History (Chapel Hill: University of North
     Carolina Press, 2020).
  96 The original version of the Patients’ Bill of Rights was written by Cleo Silvers. Most of the
    more radical provisions of the Silvers version have since been deleted. Alondra Nelson, “
    ‘Genuine Struggle and Care’: An Interview with Cleo Silvers,” American Journal of Public
    Health 106, no. 10 (October 2016).
 97 crow, Black Flags and Windmills, 21.
 98 Taken by Stephen Shames in Palo Alto in 1972.
 99 “Greece Admits Fudging Euro Entry,” BBC, November 15, 2004.
100 Kate Connolly, “Greek Debt Crisis: The View from Germany,” Guardian, February 11,
    2010.
101 Aditya Chakrabortty, “Athens Protests: Syntagma Square on Frontline of European
    Austerity Protests,” Guardian, June 19, 2011; Solidarity for All, 2014–2015: Building Hope
    against Fear and Devastation (Athens: Solidarity for All, January 21, 2015), 17.
102 Ibid., 3-7.
103 Kees van Gool and Mark Pearson, “Health, Austerity and Economic Crisis: Assessing the
    Short-Term Impact in OECD Countries,” OECD Health Working Papers No. 76, 2014;
    Elias Kondilis et al., “Economic Crisis, Restrictive Policies, and the Population’s Health
    and Health Care: The Greek Case,” American Journal of Public Health 103, no. 6 (June
    2013).
104 van Gool and Pearson, “Health, Austerity and Economic Crisis.”
105 Dimitra-Dora Teloni and Sofia Adam, “Solidarity Clinics and Social Work in the Era of
    Crisis in Greece,” International Social Work 61, no. 6 (November 2018); Effie Simou and
    Eleni Koutsogeorgou, “Effects of the Economic Crisis on Health and Healthcare in Greece
    in the Literature from 2009 to 2013: A Systematic Review,” Health Policy 115, nos. 2–3
    (April 2014).
106 Amalia A. Ifanti et al., “Financial Crisis and Austerity Measures in Greece: Their Impact on
    Health Promotion Policies and Public Health Care,” Health Policy 113, nos. 1–2
    (November 2013); Alexander Kentikelenis et al., “Health Effects of Financial Crisis: Omens
    of a Greek Tragedy,” Lancet 378, no. 9801 (October 22, 2011).
107 Stefanos Bonovas and Georgios Nikolopoulos, “High-Burden Epidemics in Greece in the
    Era of Economic Crisis: Early Signs of a Public Health Tragedy,” Journal of Preventive
    Medicine and Hygiene 53, no. 3 (September 2012); Organization for Economic Co-
    operation and Development, “Suicide,” in Health at a Glance: Europe 2016: State of
    Health in the EU Cycle (Paris: OECD Publishing, 2016).
108 Nikolaos Vlachadis et al., “Mortality and the Economic Crisis in Greece,” Lancet 383, no.
    9918 (February 22, 2014).
109 Lower Syntagma was occupied by those espousing a variety of left, progressive and
    anarchist positions, and Upper Syntagma by those who tended toward nationalism. Maria
    Kaika and Lazaros Karaliotas, “The Spatialization of Democratic Politics: Insights from
    Indignant Squares,” European Urban and Regional Studies 23, no. 4 (October 2016).
110 Helena Smith, “Greece Votes for Five-Year Austerity Plan,” Guardian, June 29, 2011;
    “Greece: Warning after ‘Massive’ Amounts of Tear Gas Fired by Police,” Amnesty
       International UK, June 29, 2011, amnesty.org.
111   Sissi Korizi and Antonis Vradis, “From Innocence to Realisation,” City 16, nos. 1–2 (April
      2012).
112   The Coordination Committee of Social Solidarity Clinics identifies the solidarity clinic in
      Rethimno, Crete, as the very first such facility operating in Greece, from 2008 onward:
      Social Solidarity Clinics and Pharmacies: Making Solidarity Contagious (Coordination
      Committee of Social Solidarity Clinics and Pharmacies of Attica, 2015). Angelos
      Varvarousis and Giorgos Kallis, “Commoning against the Crisis,” in Manuel Castells et al.,
      eds., Another Economy Is Possible: Culture and Economy in a Time of Crisis (Cambridge,
      UK: Polity Press, 2017). Elisavet Hasa, “In the Absence of Care: Building Solidarity in
      Athens,” Avery Review, no. 54 (October 2021).
113   At the movement’s peak, the number of solidarity clinics operating in Greece exceeded
      forty: Social Solidarity Clinics, 2; CareNotes Collective, eds., For Health Autonomy:
      Horizons of Care Beyond Austerity, Reflections from Greece (Brooklyn: Common Notions,
      2020).
114   Wolfgang Rüdig and Georgios Karyotis, “Who Protests in Greece? Mass Opposition to
      Austerity,” British Journal of Political Science 44, no. 3 (July 2014).
115   John Wiltshire, “After Syntagma: Where Are the Occupiers Now?,” OpenDemocracy, May
      24, 2013.
116   Jacob Chamberlain, “ ‘We Won’t Pay’ Movement Brings Guerrilla Electricity to Poverty
      Stricken Greece,” Common Dreams, August 8, 2013, commondreams.org; Jon Henley,
      “Greece’s Solidarity Movement: ‘It’s a Whole New Model—and It’s Working,’ ” Guardian,
      January 23, 2015.
117   Elisavet Hasa, “Making-Do in Times of Crisis: Exploring the Architecture of Solidarity
      Clinics and Pharmacies in Athens,” in Liska Chan and Elleen Stapleton, eds., Making Do
      and Transformational Participatory Urbanism: Communities Claiming Space and Creating
      Place (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2024).
118   Hasa, “In the Absence of Care.” A decree passed by the SYRIZA government in 2016
      mandated, further, that all unused public properties of less than 100 sq m area be transferred
      to whatever suitable “agency of the social solidarity economy” could be found.
119   Stavros Stavrides, Common Space: The City as Commons (London: Zed Books, 2016).
120   Ioanna Theocharopoulou, Builders, Housewives and the Construction of Modern Athens
      (Athens: Onassis Foundation, 2022). Following the worker takeover of an owner-
      abandoned tile factory called Vio.Me, in Thessaloniki in 2013: Haris Malamidis, “Workers’
      Medical Center at Vio.Me Self-Managed Factory,” in CareNotes Collective, For Health
      Autonomy.
121   Hasa, “Making-Do in Times of Crisis.”
122   Ibid.
123   Solidarity for All, 2014–2015, 15.
124   Tonia Katerini, “Organising to Survive in Greece,” Red Pepper, December 5, 2012.
 125 Donatella Della Porta et al., Movement Parties against Austerity (Cambridge, UK: Polity
    Press, 2017); Varvarousis and Kallis, “Commoning against the Crisis,” 150.
126 CareNotes Collective, “The Autonomy of Care: From Heathcare to Care Work in Greece,”
    in For Health Autonomy, 39.
127 Cassie Thornton, “A Different Medicine Is Possible in Our Global Economic Crisis:
    Reinventing Healthcare in Greece (and the United States),” in CareNotes Collective, For
    Health Autonomy.
128 Ibid.
129 Cassie Thornton, The Hologram: Feminist, Peer-to- Peer Health for a Post-Pandemic
    Future (London: Pluto Press, 2020).
130 CareNotes Collective, “Elements of Care Work in Greece,” in For Health Autonomy.
131 Thornton, “A Different Medicine Is Possible.”
132 Solidarity for All, 2014–2015, 12.
133 The solidarity networks consistently upheld what we’d ordinarily think of as a left critique
    of society. Access to the community kitchens operated by the fascist party Golden Dawn,
    however, was restricted to those who could furnish proof of Greek citizenship.
134 CareNotes Collective, “The Autonomy of Care,” 30.
135 Thornton, The Hologram, 5. Emphasis in original.
136 Hasa, “In the Absence of Care.”
137 Hasa, “Making-Do in Times of Crisis.”
138 Solidarity for All, 2014–2015, 17. Sometimes these referrals were made on a quid pro quo
    basis: Malamidis reports that the public hospital in Rethimno, Crete, offered to treat two
    care seekers per day gratis, in exchange for medicine from the inventory of the local
    solidarity clinic. Haris Malamidis, Social Movements and Solidarity Structures in Crisis-
    Ridden Greece, (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2020), 180.
139 CareNotes Collective, “The Autonomy of Care,” 30.
140 Social Solidarity Clinics and Pharmacies, 3.
141 Solidarity for All, 2014–2015, 28.
142 CareNotes Collective, “Updates on the National Solidarity Clinic Assemblies: An Interview
    with Ilektra Bethymouti,” in For Health Autonomy, 140.
143 Ibid., 150.
144 Evel Economakis, “A View from Athens: Is a ‘Backflip’ by Syriza in the Greek Debt Crisis
    Negotiations Inevitable?,” New Statesman, June 26, 2015.
145 Shao Lin et al., “What Happened to Our Environment and Mental Health as a Result of
    Hurricane Sandy?,” Disaster Medicine and Public Health Preparedness 10, no. 3 (June
    2016). See also Immaculata Abba, “In the Dark in Nigeria: What Poor Electricity Does to
    Our Minds,” Popula, July 29, 2023.
146 Paulo Freire, Pedagogy of the Oppressed, trans. Myra Bergman Ramos (London: Penguin
    Books, 2017 [1970]).
 3. Collective Power
  1 Point 4 of the Charter of Constitution of Solidarity Clinics and Pharmacies, cited in Elisavet
    Hasa, “In the Absence of Care: Building Solidarity in Athens,” Avery Review, no. 54
    (October 2021).
  2 David Graeber and David Wengrow, The Dawn of Everything (London: Allen Lane, 2021).
  3 Janet Biehl, introduction to Janet Biehl, ed., The Murray Bookchin Reader (London:
    Cassell, 1997).
  4 Curiously, he also appears to have been responsible for translating the Spanish anarchist
    concept of the grupo de afinidad into English where, as the “affinity group,” it went on to
    inform much of the left activism of the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s.
  5 Murray Bookchin, “Post-Scarcity Anarchism,” in Post-Scarcity Anarchism (Berkeley, CA:
    Ramparts Press, 1971).
  6 The Anarchist Library: theanarchistlibrary.org; Anarchy Archives: dwardmac.pitzer.edu.
  7 Memorandum from Frank Press, Executive Office of the President, Office of Science and
    Technology Policy, “Release of Fossil CO2 and the Possibility of a Catastrophic Climate
      Change,” July 7, 1977; Bookchin, “Post-Scarcity Anarchism.”
  8   Murray Bookchin (writing as “Lewis Herber”), “Ecology and Revolutionary Thought,” self-
      published in Comment 1, no. 1 (1964).
  9   John Bellamy Foster, Marx’s Ecology: Materialism and Nature (New York: Monthly
      Review Press, 2000); Combahee River Collective, “The Combahee River Collective
      Statement,” April 1977.
 10   Murray Bookchin, “Municipalization: Community Ownership of the Economy,” Green
      Perspectives: Newsletter of the Green Program Project 2 (February 1986).
 11   Geneviève Reday-Mulvey and Walter R. Stahel, The Potential for Substituting Manpower
      for Energy (Geneva: Batelle Geneva Research Center, July 1977). Stahel appears to have
      used the term “closed-loop economy” for the first time in a 1982 paper, “The Product-Life
      Factor.”
 12   Murray Bookchin, “The Communalist Project,” Communalism: International Journal for a
      Rational Society 2 (2002).
 13   Murray Bookchin, “Cities: The Unfolding of Reason in History,” in The Next Revolution:
      Popular Assemblies and the Promise of Direct Democracy (New York: Verso, 2015).
 14   Murray Bookchin, “The Communalist Project,” emphasis in original.
 15   “It is a troubling fact that neither decentralization nor self-sufficiency in itself is necessarily
      democratic.” Murray Bookchin, “The Meaning of Confederalism,” in Murray Bookchin,
      The Next Revolution.
 16   Not the compromised second draft: Students for a Democratic Society, The Port Huron
      Statement (New York, 1962); Dimitrios Roussopoulos, “Preface to the 2005 edition,” in
      Dimitrios Roussopoulos and C. George Benello, eds., Participatory Democracy: Prospects
      for Democratizing Democracy (New York: Black Rose Books, 2005), x.
 17 Francesca Polletta, Freedom Is an Endless Meeting: Democracy in American Social
   Movements (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002), 204.
18 Gísli Pálsson, “Of Althings!,” in Bruno Latour and Peter Weibel, eds., Making Things
   Public: Atmospheres of Democracy (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005); José Barreiro,
   Indian Roots of American Democracy (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1992);
   Roxanne Dunbar-Ortiz, An Indigenous Peoples’ History of the United States (Boston:
   Beacon Press, 2014).
19 John Chapman, Bisserka Gaydarska and Duncan Hale, “Nebelivka: Assembly Houses,
   Ditches, and Social Structure,” in Trypillia Mega-Sites and European Prehistory (London:
   Routledge, 2016); Bisserka Gaydarska, “Fragmenting Trypillian Megasites: A Bottom-Up
   Approach,” in T. L. Thurston and Manuel Fernández-Götz, eds., Power from Below in
   Premodern Societies: The Dynamics of Political Complexity in the Archaeological Record
   (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2021); David Wengrow, lecture at the
   Architectural Association School of Architecture, London, October 14, 2022.
20 Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition, 2nd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
   1998 [1958]); C. L. R. James, “Every Cook Can Govern: A Study of Democracy in Ancient
   Greece—Its Meaning for Today,” Correspondence 2, no. 12 (June 1956).
21 R. K. Sinclair, Democracy and Participation in Athens (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
   University Press, 1988).
22 Peter Kropotkin, The Great French Revolution 1789–1793 (Oakland, CA: PM Press, 2021
   [1909]).
23 Graham Smith, “Popular Assemblies: From New England Town Meetings to Participatory
   Budgeting,” in Democratic Innovations: Designing Institutions for Citizen Participation
   (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2009).
24 Debbie Bookchin, “The Future We Deserve,” in Barcelona en Comú with Debbie Bookchin
   and Ada Colau, Fearless Cities: A Guide to the Global Municipalist Movement (Oxford,
   UK: New Internationalist, 2019).
25 James C. Scott, Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human
   Condition Have Failed (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1998).
26 Laurence Veysey, The Communal Experience: Anarchist and Mystical Counter-Cultures in
   America (New York: Harper and Row, 1973).
27 Murray Bookchin, “The Communalist Project,” emphasis in original.
28 Alberto Corsín Jiménez and Adolfo Estalella, “Assembling Neighbors: The City as
   Hardware, Method, and ‘A Very Messy Kind of Archive,’ ” Common Knowledge 20, no. 1
   (Winter 2014).
29 Elsewhere Estalella does describe a meeting of the Lavapiés assembly’s working group on
   “migration and coexistence” with a “peak attendance [of] at least 80 people, approximately
   30 of them young black Senegalese,” partially conducted in Wolof. Adolfo Estalella and
   Alberto Corsín Jiménez, “Matters of Sense: Preoccupation in Madrid’s Popular Assemblies
   Movement,” in Anders Blok and Ignacio Farías, eds., Urban Cosmopolitics: Agencements,
   Assemblies, Atmospheres (New York: Routledge, 2016).
 30 Jo Freeman (writing as “Joreen”), “The Tyranny of Structurelessness,” self-published, 1970;
   Nancy Fraser, “Rethinking the Public Sphere: A Contribution to the Critique of Actually
   Existing Democracy,” Social Text 25/26 (1990); Lynn M. Sanders, “Against Deliberation,”
   Political Theory 25, no. 3 (June 1997).
31 In a late screed, Bookchin does address some of the issues raised by Sanders. Murray
   Bookchin, “Comments on the International Social Ecology Network Gathering and the
   ‘Deep Social Ecology’ of John Clark,” September 20, 1995.
32 Kali Akuno, “People’s Assembly Overview,” in Kali Akuno and Ajamu Nangwaya with
   Cooperation Jackson, Jackson Rising: The Struggle for Economic Democracy and Black
   Self-Determination in Jackson, Mississippi (Montreal: Daraja Press, 2017).
33 Sherry P. Arnstein, “A Ladder of Citizen Participation,” Journal of the American Institute of
   Planners 35, no. 4 (July 1969).
34 Akuno, “People’s Assembly Overview,” 130.
35 Iris Marion Young, Justice and the Politics of Difference (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
   University Press, 1990).
36 David Harvey, Rebel Cities: From the Right to the City to the Urban Revolution (New York:
   Verso, 2012).
37 Sarah Schulman, Let the Record Show: A Political History of ACT UP New York, 1987–
   1993 (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2021); Richard J. F. Day, Gramsci Is Dead:
   Anarchist Currents in the Newest Social Movements (Ann Arbor: Pluto Press, 2005); Hugh
   D’Andrade et al., “How to Make a Critical Mass: Lessons and Ideas from the San Francisco
   Bay Area Experience,” in Critical Mass: Bicycling’s Defiant Celebration (Oakland, CA: AK
   Press, 2002); Polletta, Freedom Is an Endless Meeting, 189.
38 Mike Gonzalez, “The Zapatistas: The Challenges of Revolution in a New Millennium,” in
   Tom Hayden, ed., The Zapatista Reader (New York: Thunder’s Mouth Press/Nation Books,
   2002); Carne Ross, The Leaderless Revolution: How Ordinary People Will Take Power and
   Change Politics in the 21st Century (London: Penguin, 2011).
39 Marina Sitrin, “Ruptures in Imagination: Horizontalism, Autogestion and Affective Politics
   in Argentina,” Policy and Practice 5 (Autumn 2007).
40 Richard Banégas, Florence Brisset-Foucault and Armando Cutolo, “Street Parliaments:
   Public Spaces for Speech and Citizenship in Africa,” in Anne Davidian and Laurent
   Jeanpierre, eds., What Makes An Assembly? (London: Sternberg Press, 2022).
41 These are of somewhat mysterious origin, though one common folk history attributes them
   to longstanding practice in Quaker meetings. See Polletta, Freedom Is an Endless Meeting,
   190.
42 For a more critical consideration of Indigenous elements in EZLN practice, see Mihalis
   Mentinis, Zapatistas: The Chiapas Revolt and What It Means for Radical Politics (Ann
   Arbor: Pluto Press, 2006).
43 David Graeber, “The New Anarchists,” New Left Review 13 (January/February 2002).
44 Andrew Cornell, “Occupy Wall Street and Consensus Decision Making: Historicizing the
   Preoccupation with Process,” in Social Text Collective, This Is What Democracy Looks
      Like, December 9, 2012.
45   Barcelona en Comú, Fearless Cities, 8.
46   Laura Roth and Kate Shea Baird, “Municipalism and the Feminization of Politics,” ROAR 6
     (Summer 2017).
47   Estalella and Corsín Jiménez, “Matters of Sense.”
48   Marta Junqué, Caren Tepp and Mariano Fernández, “Organizing a Municipalist Platform:
     Structure and Confluence,” in Barcelona en Comú, Fearless Cities.
49   Murray Bookchin, “Municipalization: Community Ownership of the Economy.”
50   Ernesto Laclau and Chantal Mouffe, Hegemony and Socialist Strategy: Towards a Radical
     Democratic Politics (New York: Verso, 1985).
51   Antonio Negri, Insurgencies: Constituent Power and the Modern State (Minneapolis:
     University of Minnesota Press, 2009 [1999]); Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, Assembly
     (New York: Oxford University Press: 2017).
52   Bruno Latour, Aramis, or the Love of Technology, trans. Catherine Porter (Cambridge, MA:
     Harvard University Press, 1996).
53   It is one of the ironies of history that, despite their hewing fairly closely to the tactics he
     prescribed for the acquisition of local power, virtually no one among the participants in
     Spanish municipalism I have spoken with spontaneously identifies Murray Bookchin as an
     inspiration.
54   DifRed, “Guía rápida para la dinamización de asambleas populares,” #Acampadasol, May
     31, 2011, madrid.tomalaplaza.net.
55   Stephen Burgen, “How to Win Back the City: The Barcelona en Comú Guide to
     Overthrowing the Elite,” Guardian, June 22, 2016.
56   Ana Mendéz de Andés, personal communication, July 2023.
57   Oscar Reyes, “Rooted in the Neighbourhood: What Happened to Spain’s Assemblies?,” Red
     Pepper, October 18, 2012.
58   Simon Gareth Thorpe, “Let’s Win Madrid: Radical Democracy and Prefigurative
     Constitutionality in the New Municipalism,” PhD thesis, University of Warwick, 2021.
59   Movimiento de Liberación Gráfica de Madrid, Al final, ganamos las elecciones (Madrid,
     2017).
60   Sixtine van Outryve d’Ydewalle, “Becoming Mayor to Abolish the Position of Mayor?
     Thinking the Line between Reform and Revolution in a Communalist Perspective,”
     Unbound: Harvard Journal of the Legal Left 12 (2019).
61   Sam Jones, “Madrid’s New Rightwing Council Suspends Low-Emissions Zone,” Guardian,
     June 18, 2019.
62   Lavinia Steinfort and Satoko Kishimoto, “From Terrassa to Barcelona: Cities and Citizens
     Reclaim Public Water and Other Essential Services,” Transnational Institute, April 4, 2017,
     tni.org.
63   Hilary Wainwright, Reclaim the State: Experiments in Popular Democracy (New York:
     Verso, 2003).
 64 Staal cites an unattributed 2015 population figure for the three cantons of 4.6 million: Jonas
   Staal, “Theater of the Stateless,” in Renée in der Maur and Jonas Staal, eds., New World
   Academy Reader #5: Stateless Democracy (2015). The lower figure is for October 2017:
   Fabrice Balanche, Sectarianism in Syria’s Civil War (Washington, DC: Washington Institute
   for Near East Policy, 2018).
65 Bill Weinberg, “Syria’s Kurdish Revolution: The Anarchist Element and the Challenge of
   Solidarity,” Fifth Estate 393 (Spring 2015).
66 Michael Taussig, “The Mastery of Non-Mastery: A Report and Reflections from Kobane,”
   Public Seminar, August 7, 2015.
67 Tim Weiner, “U.S. Helped Turkey Find and Capture Kurd Rebel,” New York Times,
   February 20, 1999.
68 Debbie Bookchin, “How My Father’s Ideas Helped the Kurds Create a New Democracy,”
   New York Review of Books, June 15, 2018.
69 Akbar Shahid Ahmed, “America’s Best Allies against ISIS Are Inspired by a Bronx-Born
   Libertarian Socialist,” HuffPost, December 18, 2015; Murray Bookchin, Urbanization
   without Cities: The Rise and Decline of Citizenship (New York: Black Rose Books, 1992).
70 Debbie Bookchin, “How My Father’s Ideas Helped the Kurds.”
71 Abdullah Öcalan, Democratic Confederalism (London: Transmedia Publishing, January 5,
   2015).
72 Damian Gerber and Shannon Brincat, “When Öcalan Met Bookchin: The Kurdish Freedom
   Movement and the Political Theory of Democratic Confederalism,” Geopolitics 26, no. 4
   (2021).
73 Havin Güneşer, The Art of Freedom: A Brief History of the Kurdish Liberation Struggle
   (Oakland, CA: PM Press, 2021).
74 Michael Knapp, Anya Flach and Ercan Ayboga, Revolution in Rojava: Democratic
   Autonomy and Women’s Liberation in Syrian Kurdistan (London: Pluto Press, 2016).
75 Ahmet Hamdi Akkaya and Joost Jongerden, “Reassembling the Political: The PKK and the
   Project of Radical Democracy,” European Journal of Turkish Studies 14 (2012).
76 Abdullah Öcalan, “Declaration of Democratic Confederalism in Kurdistan,” March 20,
   2005.
77 Dilar Dirik, “Rojava: To Dare Imagining,” in Dilar Dirik et al., eds., To Dare Imagining:
   Rojava Revolution, (New York: Autonomedia, 2016).
78 Gulîstan, Land of Roses, directed by Zaynê Akyol (Canada and Germany, 2016).
79 Knapp, Flack, and Ayboga, Revolution in Rojava, 86.
80 Janet Biehl, “Rojava’s Communes and Councils,” New Compass, January 31, 2015.
81 Committee of Diplomacy of Kongreya Star, Kongreya Star: About the Work and Ideas of
   Kongreya Star, the Women’s Movement in Rojava (August 2016), 6.
82 Fabrice Balanche, “From Qamishli to Qamishlo: A Trip to Rojava’s New Capital,” Fikra
   Forum, May 8, 2017, washingtoninstitute.org.
83 Dilar Dirik, The Kurdish Women’s Movement: History, Theory, Practice (London: Pluto
   Press, 2022); Havin Güneşer, “The Rebellion of the Oldest Colony: Jineology—the Science
       of Women,” in The Art of Freedom: A Brief History of the Kurdish Liberation Struggle
      (Oakland, CA: PM Press, 2021).
84    The word jin has since become somewhat familiar to audiences in the West in the context of
      jin, jiyan, azadi, or “woman, life, freedom,” an Öcalan coinage that later became the
      primary slogan of the 2022 uprisings against the theocracy in Iran. Gönül Kaya, “Why
      Jineology? Re-Constructing the Sciences Towards a Communal and Free Life,” in In der
      Maur and Staal, New World Academy Reader #5; Abdullah Öcalan, The Sociology of
      Freedom: Manifesto of the Democratic Civilization, vol. 3 (Oakland, CA: PM Press, 2020
      [2003]).
85    Harriet Allsop and Wladimir van Wilgenburg, The Kurds of Northern Syria: Governance,
      Diversity and Conflicts (London: I.B. Tauris, 2019).
86    Abdullah Öcalan, Liberating Life: Women’s Revolution (Cologne: International Initiative
      Edition, 2013).
87    Janet Biehl, “Revolutionary Education: Two Academies in Rojava,” in In der Maur and
      Staal, New World Academy Reader #5. Despite the essentialism he displayed elsewhere,
      Öcalan himself was capable of acknowledging that the “female and male gender identities
      that we know today are constructs”: Öcalan, Liberating Life.
88    David Graeber, interviewed by Pinar Öğünç; “No, This Is a Genuine Revolution,” in Dirik
      et al., To Dare Imagining.
89    The Kurdish word for “Congress” is variously transliterated into English as both
      “Kongreya” and “Kongra.” The organization itself has published documents under both
      spellings.
90    Güneşer, “Rebellion of the Oldest Colony,” 37.
91    Committee of Diplomacy of Kongreya Star, Kongreya Star, 7.
92    Kongra Star, Mala Jin: Empowering Women, Strengthening Society (January 2021), 3.
93    Zîlan Diyar, “The Whole World Is Talking about Us, Kurdish Women,” in In der Maur and
      Staal, New World Academy Reader #5.
94    Knapp, Flach and Ayboga, Revolution in Rojava, 171.
95    Katherine Finn, “Rojava Is an Unexpected Oasis of Progress in Syria,” Law Society
      Gazette, November 23, 2018.
96    Knapp, Flach and Ayboga, Revolution in Rojava, 168.
97    Ibid., 170.
98    TATORT Kurdistan, Democratic Autonomy in North Kurdistan: The Council Movement,
      Gender Liberation, and Ecology—in Practice, a Reconnaissance into Southeastern Turkey,
      trans. Janet Biehl (Porsgrunn, Norway: New Compass, 2013), 60.
 99   Kongreya Star, Mala Jin, 10.
100   Abir Khaled, “Rojava’s Prisional Systems,” Periferias 7 (2022).
101   Graeber interviewed by Pinar Öğünç.
102   Knapp, Flach and Ayboga, Revolution in Rojava, 74.
103   Dirik, “Rojava: To Dare Imagining.”
104   Knapp, Flach and Ayboga, Revolution in Rojava, 88.
 105 Carol E. Lee and Courtney Kube, “Chaos in Syria, Washington after Trump Call with
    Erdogan Unleashed Turkish Military,” NBC News, October 7, 2019.
106 Bethan McKernan, Julian Borger and Dan Sabbagh, “Turkey Unleashes Airstrikes against
    Kurds in North-east Syria,” Guardian, October 9, 2019.
107 Bethan McKernan and Julian Borger, “Turkey and Russia Agree on Deal over Buffer Zone
    in Northern Syria,” Guardian, October 22, 2019.
108 Rojava Information Center, “Incessant War: Turkey’s Drone Campaign in North and East
    Syria, 2022,” March 2023, rojavainformationcenter.com.
109 Knapp, Flach and Ayboga, Revolution in Rojava, 85.


4. Beyond Hope
  1 Amy Starecheski, Ours to Lose: When Squatters Became Homeowners in New York City
    (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2016). You can see the actual bike for yourself at
    the Museum of Reclaimed Urban Space (MoRUS), at 155 Avenue C between Ninth and
    Tenth Streets. As MoRUS is co-located with the still very much active C-Squat, hours may,
    uh, vary (and access to the bike in particular may be subject to negotiation with residents).
  2 Margaret Kohn, “The Power of Place: The House of the People as Counterpublic,” Polity
    33, no. 4 (Summer 2001). See also Michel Foucault, “Of Other Spaces, Heterotopias,”
    trans. Jay Miskowiec, Architecture, Mouvement, Continuité 5 (1984 [1967]).
  3 Thomas C. Schelling, The Strategy of Conflict (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
    1960).
  4 Samaneh Moafi, “Negative Commons,” interview by Institute for Postnatural Studies, June
    18, 2020, instituteforpostnaturalstudies.org.
  5 Benjamin Foerster-Baldenius and Florian Stirnemann, Floating University Berlin 2018—An
    Illustrated Report (Berlin: raumlaborberlin, 2019). For more on raumlaborberlin’s practice
    of building structures from recovered, upcycled or commodity materials on wastegrounds
    and urban sacrifice zones, see Markus Bader and Jan Liesegang, eds., Building the City
    Together: The Osthang Project (Berlin: raumlaborberlin, 2014).
  6 The unusual degree of flexibility built into its conception allowed Floating University to set
    structures farther apart and deconcentrate seating areas during the COVID summers of 2021
    and 2022. George Kafka, “Floating University in Berlin, Germany by Raumlabor,”
    Architectural Review, September 26, 2022.
  7 Charlotte Malterre-Barthes, A Moratorium on New Construction (London: Sternberg Press,
    2024).
  8 Elaine Brown interviewed by George Luke, July 2, 2022.
  9 Sometimes no breaking and entering is necessary, because the occupiers of a derelict site
    are already on the premises—as at the VIO.ME factory in Thessaloniki, Greece, occupied,
    operated and managed by its workers since 2013 under the wonderful slogan “Occupy,
    Resist, Produce.” Niko Georgiades, “Occupy, Resist, Produce: Inside the Self-Managed
    Factory of Vio.Me,” Unicorn Riot, April 16, 2019.
 10 Mutual Aid Disaster Relief, Workshop Facilitation Guide (2018).
11 Michel de Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life, trans. Steven Rendall (Berkeley:
   University of California Press, 1984), 37.
12 Paul Baran, “On Distributed Communications Networks,” RAND Corporation Document
   P-2626, September 1962.
13 Attempts to disrupt power grids, telecommunication networks and other physical
   infrastructure have increased considerably in the United States over the decade from 2013.
   While responsibility for these attacks was split more or less evenly between jihadi Salafist
   and white-supremacist groups in the early part of this period, virtually all of the increase
   since 2019 can be traced to groups of the extreme right. Ilana Krill and Bennett Clifford,
   Mayhem, Murder, and Misdirection: Violent Extremist Attack Plots Against Critical
   Infrastructure in the United States, 2016–2022 (Washington, DC: Program on Extremism at
   George Washington University, August 2022). See also Colin Clarke et al., “The Targeting
   of Infrastructure by America’s Violent Far-Right,” CTC Sentinel 16, no. 5 (May 2023).
14 Federal Communications Commission, “Communications Status Report for Areas Impacted
   by Hurricane Maria,” October 4, 2017, fcc.gov.
15 scott crow, Black Flags and Windmills: Hope, Anarchy, and the Common Ground Collective
   (Oakland, CA: PM Press, 2014), 100–1.
16 Joe Sacco, Safe Area Goražde: The War in Eastern Bosnia 1992–95 (Seattle: Fantagraphics,
   2000).
17 Defined as “use of hydro power on a very small scale to provide electricity for lighting,
   battery and mobile phone charging” in a now-lost Intermediate Technology Development
   Group document, “Pico Hydro Power,” undated. Other, more technical definitions specify
   systems with a maximum output of five kilowatts or less. See Phillip Maher and Nigel
   Smith, Pico Hydro for Village Power: A Practical Manual for Schemes up to 5 kW in Hilly
   Areas (Department for International Development, 2001).
18 José Juan Terrasa-Soler and Daniela Lloveras-Marxuach, “Community Power as
   Provocation: Local Control for Resilience and Equity,” Scenario 7 (Winter 2020); Resilient
   Power Puerto Rico, Program Lookbook 2017–2022 (January 2023).
19 Arturo Massol-Deyá, “Our Energy for Our Country,” Scenario 7 (Winter 2020).
20 “What Will Be the Impact of India’s Rice-Export Ban?,” Economist, July 26, 2023;
   Christina Lu and Amy Mackinnon, “Russia Declares War on Wheat, Peas, and Barley,”
   Foreign Policy, July 21, 2023.
21 Michelle L. Colgrave et al., “Perspectives on Future Protein Production,” Journal of
   Agricultural and Food Chemistry 69, no. 50 (December 22, 2021).
22 George Monbiot, Regenesis: Feeding the World without Devouring the Planet (London:
   Penguin, 2022).
23 Chris Smaje, Saying NO to a Farm-Free Future: The Case for an Ecological Food System
   and against Manufactured Foods (London: Chelsea Green Publishing, 2023), 53.
24 Ibid.
 25 Helena K. Rene, China’s Sent-Down Generation: Public Administration and the Legacies of
   Mao’s Rustication Program (Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press, 2013).
26 Andrew Zumkehr and J. Elliott Campbell, “The Potential for Local Croplands to Meet US
   Food Demand,” Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 13, no. 5 (June 2015). But see
   Pierre Desrochers and Jayson L. Lusk, “The Inability and Undesirability of Local Croplands
   to Meet Food Demand,” Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 13, no. 8 (October
   2015).
27 Zheng Zhangxin, “Tampines Blk 146 Vertical Farm Successfully Grows and Harvests
   Made-in-S’pore Rice,” Mothership, February 12, 2022.
28 Alberto Corsín Jiménez, “The Right to Infrastructure: A Prototype for Open Source
   Urbanism,” Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 32, no. 2 (April 2014).
29 Karl Hess, Community Technology (Port Townsend, WA: Breakout Productions, 1995
   [1979]), 44–5.
30 “Researchers have successfully grown aloe vera, tomatoes, biogas maize, pasture grass, and
   lettuce in agrivoltaic experiments. Some varieties of lettuce produce greater yields in shade
   than under full sunlight; other varieties produce essentially the same yield under an open
   sky and under PV panels. Semi-transparent PV panels open additional opportunities for
   colocation and greenhouse production.” Elnaz H. Adeh et al., “Solar PV Power Potential Is
   Greatest over Croplands,” Scientific Reports 9, Article 11442 (2019).
31 International Energy Agency, Special Report on Solar PV Global Supply Chains (August
   2022).
32 The environmental-maintenance requirements of indoor agriculture in particular introduce a
   new order of complexity into the growing of food, as well as all the vulnerability that
   attends it: as the essayist and pioneering agroecological activist Wendell Berry put it, “The
   control by which a tomato plant lives through January is much more problematic than the
   natural order by which an oak tree or a titmouse lives through January.” Wendell Berry, The
   Unsettling of America: Culture and Agriculture (San Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 1977).
33 Smaje, Saying NO to a Farm-Free Future, 133.
34 Stephen E. Hunt, The Revolutionary Urbanism of Street Farm (Bristol, UK: Tangent Books,
   2014).
35 Fukuoka Masanobu, The One-Straw Revolution: An Introduction to Natural Farming, trans.
   Chris Pearce, Tsune Kurosawa and Larry Korn (Emmaus, PA: Rodale Press, 1978).
36 Jason Adams, “The Constellation of Opposition,” in Duane Rousselle and Süreyyya Evren,
   eds., Post-Anarchism: A Reader (London: Pluto Press, 2011).
37 Adam Greenfield, Radical Technologies: The Design of Everyday Life (New York: Verso,
   2017), 93–6.
38 See, for example, “Open Source Hardware (OSHW) Definition 1.0,” Open Source
   Hardware Association, oshwa.org.
39 Rachael Dal Porto et al., “Characterizing the Performance of a Do-It-Yourself (DIY) Box
   Fan Air Filter,” Aerosol Science and Technology 56, no. 6 (April 2022); Jim Rosenthal, “A
      Variation on the ‘Box Fan with MERV 13 Filter’ Air Cleaner,” Tex-Air Filters, August 22,
     2020, texairfilters.com.
40   Liam Grace-Flood, “Open World: Habibi Works,” Make:, May 9, 2018, make.co.
41   Greenfield, Radical Technologies, 109–10.
42   King et al. offer a list of energy systems encountered “throughout the developing world”
     that they found hobbled by “for want of a nail”–style critical-path dependencies: “broken
     windmills and micro-hydropower installations, empty biogas pits, rusting charcoal kilns,
     and unused solar cookers or tractors and water pumps in poor condition,” many if not all of
     which could be restored to full operation were they but furnished with replacements for
     missing or broken components. Debbie L. King et al., “Mobile Open-Source Solar-Powered
     3-D Printers for Distributed Manufacturing in Off-Grid Communities,” Challenges in
     Sustainability 2, no. 1 (2014).
43   Eric Verploegen, Peter Rinker and Kukom Edoh Ognakossan, “Evaporative Cooling Best
     Practices: Producing and Using Evaporative Cooling Chambers and Clay Pot Coolers,”
     MIT D-Lab, June 2018, d-lab. mit.edu; “Technical Sheet A23—Sand Filtration for Raw
     Water or Wastewater Treatment,” Wikiwater, wikiwater.fr.
44   crow, Black Flags and Windmills, 104.
45   Ivan Illich, Tools for Conviviality (New York: Harper and Row, 1973). See also Andrea
     Vetter, “The Matrix of Convivial Technology—Assessing Technologies for Degrowth,”
     Journal of Cleaner Production 197, part 2 (October 1, 2018).
46   Hess, Community Technology, 36.
47   “The Growing Traction of Climate Citizens Assemblies,” European Climate Foundation,
     October 12, 2021, europeanclimate.org.
48   Quoted in Kelly Hayes and Mariame Kaba, Let This Radicalize You: Organizing and the
     Revolution of Reciprocal Care (Chicago: Haymarket Books, 2023), 61.
49   Brian Aldiss, Billion Year Spree: The History of Science Fiction (London: Weidenfeld &
     Nicolson, 1973), 293.
50   Kristin Ross, Communal Luxury: The Political Imaginary of the Paris Commune (New
     York: Verso, 2016).
51   Aaron Vansintjan, “Urbanisation as the Death of Politics: Sketches of Degrowth
     Municipalism,” in Anitra Nelson and François Schneider, eds., Housing for Degrowth:
     Principles, Models, Challenges and Opportunities (New York: Routledge, 2019).
52   Alberto Corsín Jiménez and Adolfo Estalella, Free Culture and the City: Hackers,
     Commoners, and Neighbors in Madrid, 1997–2017 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
     2023), 25.
53   “Pine Tree Gang (PTG)—White Nationalist Separatist/Cascadian Region,” Terrorism
     Research and Analysis Consortium, trackingterrorism.org. See also Jason Luger,
     “Celebrations, Exaltations and Alpha Lands: Everyday Geographies of the Far-Right,”
     Political Geography 96 (June 2022).
54   Ursula K. Le Guin, The Dispossessed: An Ambiguous Utopia (New York: HarperCollins,
     1974).
 55 Jem Bendell, “Deep Adaptation: A Map for Navigating Climate Tragedy,” IFLAS
   Occasional Paper 2, July 27, 2018.
56 Prosper-Olivier Lissagaray, History of the Paris Commune of 1871, trans. Eleanor Marx
   (New York: Verso, 2012).
57 Wilton A. Gardner, “Cannon Destroy Workers’ Homes,” New York Times, February 13,
   1934; “February 1934—History of Vienna,” City of Vienna, wien.gv.at; Antony Beevor, The
   Battle for Spain: The Spanish Civil War 1936–1939 (London: Penguin, 2006). Only the
   ongoing experience of the Municipios Autónomos Rebeldes Zapatistas seems to furnish a
   genuine exception: in Chiapas a population in excess of 350,000 has continuously self-
   managed by participatory assembly since December 1994.
58 Memorandum to FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover from Charles Bates, Special Agent in
   Charge, San Francisco Field Office, “COINTELPRO—Black Nationalist Hate Group—
   Racial Matters,” November 30, 1970.
59 Justin Laurence, “The Chicago Freedom School Offered Food, Water and Rest to Weary
   Protesters Trapped Downtown—and the City Cited Them for It,” Block Club Chicago, June
   8, 2020.
60 Amanda Holpuch, “Houston Volunteers Fight Tickets for Serving Meals to Homeless
   People,” New York Times, August 6, 2023.
61 State of Georgia v. Beamon, Biederman, Bilodeau et al., Fulton County Superior Court
   Criminal Indictment 23SC189192, August 29, 2023.
62 “New Documents Show FBI Targeting Environmental and Animal Rights Groups Activities
   as ‘Domestic Terrorism,’ ” American Civil Liberties Union, December 20, 2005, aclu.org;
   HM Inspectorate of Constabulary, A Review of National Police Units Which Provide
   Intelligence on Criminality Associated with Protest (Birmingham, UK: HMIC, 2012);
   Undercover Policing Inquiry: Tranche 1 Interim Report (London: Undercover Policing
   Inquiry, June 2023); Gary T. Marx, “Thoughts on a Neglected Category of Social
   Movement Participant: The Agent Provocateur and the Informant,” American Journal of
   Sociology 80, no. 2 (September 1974).
63 Colin Moynihan, “Activist Unmasks Himself as Federal Informant in G.O.P. Convention
   Case,” New York Times, January 4, 2009.
64 Alexander Vasudevan, The Autonomous City: A History of Urban Squatting (New York:
   Verso, 2017), 225.
65 Forbidden Stories, “The Pegasus Project,” July 2021, forbiddenstories. org; Ronen Bergman
   and Mark Mazzetti, “The Battle for the World’s Most Powerful Cyberweapon,” New York
   Times, January 28, 2022; Nicol Turner Lee and Caitlin Chin, “Police Surveillance and
   Facial Recognition: Why Data Privacy Is Imperative for Communities of Color,” Brookings
   Institution, April 12, 2022, brookings.edu; Manal Mostafa Ali, “Real-Time Video Anomaly
   Detection for Smart Surveillance,” IET Image Processing, 17, no. 5 (April 17, 2023);
   Eleanor Drage and Federica Frabetti, “The Performativity of AI-powered Event Detection,”
   Science, Technology, and Human Values, March 27, 2023; Kaelynn Narita, “Smart Borders:
       Silicon Valley and Border Policing,” Political Economy Research Centre, March 27, 2023,
      perc.org.uk.
 66   Vikram Dodd and Jamie Grierson, “Greenpeace Included with Neo-Nazis on UK Counter-
      terror List,” Guardian, January 17, 2020; “Terrorism Police List Extinction Rebellion as
      Extremist Ideology,” Guardian, January 10, 2020.
 67   “Our Focus Is Countering Terrorism, Not Lawful Protest,” Counter Terrorism Policing,
      January 17, 2020, counterterrorism.police.uk.
 68   Gianluca Mezzofiore, “Golden Dawn Mob Threatens NGO for Treating Migrants in Perama
      Clinic,” International Business Times, April 11, 2014; Yannis Palaiologos, “Greece’s Neo-
      Nazi Politicians Are Awaiting Trial—and as Popular as Ever,” New Republic, September 23,
      2014; “Far-Right Group Attacks Refugee Camp on Greek Island of Chios,” Guardian,
      November 18, 2016; zb, “Five Injured after Attack on Greek Anti-fascist Center,” Freedom,
      February 28, 2018, freedomnews.org.uk.
 69   This is perfectly expressed in an April 2013 statement issued by the self-proclaimed “Green
      Wing” of Golden Dawn. “The leftists and the hippies tried to claim the ecologist movement
      as their own, but [our] love for nature is different than theirs: The environment is the cradle
      of our Race, it mirrors our culture and civilization, making it our duty to protect it.” Golden
      Dawn, “The Green Wing and the Volksland Project,” April 6, 2013.
 70   In this regard, the same community production workshop that pops out wind-turbine blades
      or supports for aquaponics tanks in relatively peaceful times can be rapidly retooled for the
      manufacture of increasingly sophisticated weaponry, like the 3D-printed FGC-9 carbines
      used at scale by the insurgent People’s Defense Forces in Myanmar. (Do note that this is, of
      course, wildly illegal in many jurisdictions.) Travis Pike, “The FGC-9 in Myanmar: 3D
      Guns and the Future of Guerrilla Warfare,” Sandboxx, January 7, 2022.


Conclusion
  1 David Mitchell, The Bone Clocks (New York: Random House, 2014).
  2 You may be familiar with the Benedictine monk David Steindl-Rast’s gloss of Tarfon,
    which circulates widely on social media, if generally without attribution. Entirely apropos
    to our considerations here, it begins by commanding that we “not be daunted by the
    enormity of the world’s grief.”
  3 Mike Davis, “Who Will Build the Ark?,” New Left Review 61 (January/February 2010).


                                        OceanofPDF.com
                                          Index


A Paradise Built in Hell (Solnit) 10–11
AANES see Rojava
abundance, politics of 119
accountability 201
action, courses of 165–6
ACT/UP 131
Adams, Jason 184–5
Adams Morgan (Washington, DC) 183
adaptability 101
Adriana incident 35
Afrin, Silvan 160
Aganaktisménoi 98–9, 133
agrarian localism 181–2
agriculture 29–30, 182–5
agrivoltaic installations 184
Ahora Madrid 135–8, 140, 140–2, 143–4
air freight 38
airships 212
Akîf, Dors¸in 155
Akuno, Kali 129, 171
Aldiss, Brian 194
Alexandras Prosfygika housing complex, Athens 101
Algiers Point, Louisiana 206
alienation 121
Amazon wedding-registry hack, Occupy Sandy 67
American Red Cross 4, 5, 63, 65, 68–9, 72, 73
anarchism 23, 60, 72, 121
Anarchist Library 120
Anarchy Archives 120
Animal Liberation Front 203
anomaly-detection algorithms 204
aquifers, salinization of 31
 Arab Spring 133, 134
Aramis, or the Love of Technology (Latour) 138–9
Arendt, Hannah 78, 125
Argentina 131–5
artificial intelligence 212
asambleas populares 136–7
assembly, the 124–7
    communes 152–4
    cringe factor 191
    irrelevance 192
    Lifehouses 191–4
    limitations and drawbacks 127–31
    power 192–3
    representative legitimacy 129
    Rojava women’s assemblies 156
    rules 128
asset exposure 32
asylum seekers 205
Atelier Populaire 130
Athens, ancient 125–6
Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation 49
atmospheric warming 5
autarky 174
autonomous production 184–8
autonomy 72, 73–4, 174, 191
Avakian, Bob 91–2

Bangladesh 38
Barcelona en Comú 139–40, 142–3, 144, 196
BDS movement 199
Beijing, PRC 31
Berkeley Free Clinic 104
Bethymouti, Ilektra 109
Big Door Brigade, Seattle 57
bioreactors 181
Black Americans
   malign neglect 80–1
   permanent emergency 95
   self-determination 82, 86
   vulnerability to premature death 80, 85
   see also Black Panther Party for Self-Defense
 Black Panther Party for Self-Defense 60, 61, 209
   achievement 90–5
   ambition 91
   Breakfast for Children program 80, 87–8, 90, 91–2, 93
   emergence 81–5
   growth 84
   leadership failings 93
   Oakland Community Learning Center 80, 89–90
   People’s Free Food Program 87, 88, 179
   People’s Free Medical Clinics 88–9, 90, 93–4
   property use 173
   revenue 92
   revolutionary strategies 85, 86–7
   sexism of 92–3
   surveillance and repression of 85–6
   survival programs 14, 80, 80–96, 96, 115
   tactics 83–4, 92
   Ten-Point Platform and Program 82–3, 84, 88, 89
Black Sea Grain Initiative 39–40
blockchains 212
bodily needs 76–7, 79
body, the, heat exposure impacts 28–9
The Bone Clocks (Mitchell) 207
Bookchin, Murray 14, 118, 118–24, 137, 139, 140–1, 143, 144, 147, 192, 196, 209
   Communalism 120, 122–4, 124
   ideological journey 118–20
   libertarian municipalism 120, 122–3, 124–31
   Öcalan and 148–9
   “Post-Scarcity Anarchism” 119
   social ecology 120–2, 162
   “The Problem of Chemicals in Food” 119
   Urbanization without Cities 148
borders 34–5, 37
borderwork 35
Breakfast for Children program see Black Panther Party for Self-Defense
Brown, Elaine 92–3, 173
built environment 21
Burley, Shane 194
burnout 211
Butler, Judith 155
 C40 Cities climate initiative 33
California 33, 83–4
cancer care 107
capacity-building 125
cap-and-trade schemes 8
capital flight 124
capital investment, cities 32
capitalism 53, 121
carbon credits 212
carbon capture 49–50, 210
carbon emissions 19, 30, 48
carbon offsets 8
care 77–9, 208–9, 211
care-driven organizing 79
CareNotes 108, 110
carework 78–9, 205
cargo bikes 212
Carmena, Manuela 141–2, 143–4
Carson, Rachel 120
Casa Pueblo (Puerto Rico) 179
Cascadia (region) 198
cascading disruptions 26–7
catastrophe response 22–7
catastrophic events 77
catastrophist literature 50–1
centralized institutions 175
Centros de Apoyo Mutuo (Puerto Rico) 77
cereal crops 180
Certeau, Michel de 174
charity 58, 60, 79, 102
Chicago Freedom School 203
chicken-keeping 183
China
    Cultural Revolution 182
    recommitment to coal-fired energy generation 47
    source of photovoltaic panels 184
church buildings 171–2
circular economy 122–4
cities 30–3
civil disobedience 165
Civil Rights 125
 Clark, John P. 11, 12
Clark, Mark 86
Cleaver, Eldridge 85, 86–7
climate crisis 5, 7, 13
climate shock 113
COINTELPRO 86, 91, 206
Colau, Ada 141, 142–3
collective action 54
   coordination of 131–5
collective decision-making 100
collective power 14, 163
   exercising 201
   as positive pressure 209
   site of 169
   theory of 117
collective resilience 158
collective self-provision 79–80
Combahee River Collective 121
Common Ground Collective (New Orleans) 11, 59–61, 65, 66, 77, 96, 102, 105, 177–8, 189, 201,
    203, 209
common knowledge 189
common purpose, sense of 23
communal imagination 196
Communalism see Bookchin, Murray
communes 152–4, 156, 201
communication technologies 132
Community Action Programs 81
community infrastructure 166–7
community needs 61
community resilience hubs 198
community skills inventory 190–1
complex systems
   points of risk 51–2
   robustness 52–3
confederation 118, 198–9
conflict resolution 156–60
conflict risk, enhanced 40
confluences 136, 140–1
Congo, Democratic Republic of 47–8
Coningsby, UK 17
conscientization 112
 consciousness-raising 125, 131–5
consensual governance 128
conspiracy theories, COVID-19 pandemic 24
constituent power 138
construction process, carbon release thereof 173
consumption 27
Contemporary Issues (journal) 119
conviviality 189–90
Cook, Richard 51–2
cooperation 58, 59
Cooperation Jackson 129, 171
“Cop City” (Atlanta) 203
Corbin, Samantha 66, 78–9
Corsín Jiménez, Alberto 128–9
Corsi-Rosenthal boxes (DIY air filtration device) 187
Counter Terrorism Policing (UK) 204
COVID-19 pandemic 22–7, 40, 74, 77, 185–6
   conspiracy theories 24
   deaths 26
   knock-on effects 24
   lifeworld contraction 23
   lockdown 23, 24, 26
   mutual aid 193–4
   official response to 23, 25
cozy catastrophe, the 194
Critical Mass (distributed organization) 131
crow, scott 60, 94, 105
C-Squat (New York City) 166, 176
cyanobacteria 212

Daesh 147, 150–1, 206
Davis, Mike 212
The Dawn of Everything (Graeber and Wengrow) 116
deaths
   COVID-19 pandemic 26
   heat 17
   refugees 35
   Superstorm Sandy 62
debility (Puar concept) 40
decarbonization 47, 49–50, 165, 210
decency, failures of 208
 decentralized organization 175
Decidim 196
decision power 117
decision-making 100, 124–31, 191–4
deglobalization 38–9
Deleuze, Gilles 136
Delhi, India 31
deliberative assembly 118
democracy 124
Democratic Autonomy (Rojava) 151–2
   assessment of 162–4
   communes 152–4
   public safety and conflict resolution 156–60
   social architecture 160–2
democratic confederalism 148–52, 196
Democratic Confederalism (Öcalan) 162–3
Den Pliróno (“I Do Not Pay”) movement 100
digital fabrication 185–6, 187
dignity 88
direct action 60
direct air capture 49–50, 172
direct democracy 123
Dirik, Dilar 152, 154, 160
disaster relief 67–71, 72–5
disinvestment 21, 43–6
The Dispossessed (Le Guin) 200–1
distributed organization 174–6
doing something 5, 8, 9, 13, 15, 144, 152, 162, 165–6, 201, 212, 212–13
drought 30, 31

Earth First! 131
Earth Liberation Front 203
Earth system collapse 167
Ecclesia, the (Greek institution) 125–6
ecoanarchism 204
ecological accountability 170
ecological balance 149
ecomodernists 180–1, 184
economic order, fluctuations of 112
ecosystemic collapse 50–1, 54, 163–4
education 89–90, 94
 Eemian interglacial period 163
elections, public action 6–7
electoral politics 140–1
electoral representation 6–7
electoral sentiment, shifting winds of 145, 163
electricity supply and generation 176–9
empathy, failures of 208
empire, slow violence of 43
empowerment 12
energy
   access 47
   prices 47
   strategy 5–7
environmental movement 120–1
environmental stress factors 51
Erdog˘an, Recep Tayyip 161, 162
European Central Bank 97
European Commission 97
Extinction Rebellion 204
extinctions 15
extractive industries
   influence of 6
   sabotage of 165

fablabs 185–6
factionalism 199–200
famine 30
farmers’ markets 108
fascists 205
Fearless Cities events 195
Federal Bureau of Investigation (US) 86, 91
Federici, Silvia 78, 106
feedback loops 19
FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency, US) 4, 63, 69, 72
feminism, Rojavan commitment to 154–6
feminization of politics 155–6
financialization 133
Finn, Katherine 157–8
fishing cooperatives 108
Floating University, Berlin 172
Floyd, George 203
 food and food production 39–40, 179–85
food banks 179
food deserts 108
food insecurity 39–40
Food Not Bombs (Houston, Texas) 203
food security 180
fossil fuel dependency 5
Fox, Josh 66
Fraser, Nancy 129
Free Syrian Army 150
Freeman, Jo 129
Freire, Paulo 112
Frey, John 84–5
Fritz, Charles 11, 12
Fukuoka, Masanobu 184
fungi 180

gender equity 154–6
gender relation 149
generators (electric) 177–8
geoengineering 47, 48–9, 50, 165, 210
Germany, return to coal-fired energy generation 47
Gilmore, Ruth Wilson 43–5, 80, 112
global heating 14
   aftermath 20
   agricultural impacts 29–30
   challenge 19–20
   extent 18–19
   heat exposure impacts 28–9, 40
   and humidity 29
   impacts 27–33
   impacts on cities 30–3
   latitudes in greatest peril 28–9
   past 1.5°C 19
   and violence 36
globalization 38
Golden Dawn (Greek fascist formation) 198, 205, 206
Goodman, Robert 82
Goražde, Bosnia and Herzegovina 178
government 123
Graeber, David 116–17, 125, 137, 155, 159
 Greece 11, 14, 133, 205
   10-Point Charter of Constitution of Solidarity Clinics and Pharmacies 102–3
   activist spatial practice 101
   Aganaktisménoi 98–9
   ancient, 125–6
   anti-austerity protest participation 100
   austerity 97–9, 110
   balance of trade deficit 97
   deinstitutionalization of medical care 103–7
   Den Pliróno (“I Do Not Pay”) movement 100
   economic adjustment 110
   elections, 2019 110
   elections, 2015 109
   healthcare capacity reduced 98
   Katsikas refugee camp 186
   living standards 99–100
   national health system 105
   rationalization of state services 100–1
   social kitchens 102
   solidarity clinic dissolution 108–10
   solidarity clinics 102–10, 116, 169, 195, 197, 201, 209
   Solidarity for All network 108–10
   solidarity networks 96, 96–112
   sovereign debt crisis 96–9
   spread of solidarity networks 100–3
   Syntagma Square occupation 98–9
   Thessaloniki Workers’ Medical Center 104
   the undocumented 105
   values 102
   wave of abandonment 100–1
green energy transition 47, 47–8
Green New Deal 8, 212
greenhouse effect 120–1
Greenpeace 204
grief 22
guerrilla healthcare 104

Habibi.Works (Greece) 186
habitability 31
hackspaces see makerspaces
Haiti 42
 Hampton, Fred 86
Harvey, David 43–4, 46, 131
Hasa, Elisavet 197
Haudenosaunee Confederacy 125
Hayes, Kelly 57, 79
healing 211
healthcare 88–9, 93–4
   deinstitutionalization 102–10
   gating mechanism 103
   integrated 108
   mixed ecology 109
   and patient outcomes 107
   radical providers 107–8
   sites of 103
   withdrawal from public provision 98
   see also solidarity clinics
heat
   agricultural impacts 29–30
   effects 17
   exposure 28–9, 40
   impacts on cities 30–3
   survivability threshold 28
helplessness, sense of 5–7
Hess, Karl 183, 190
holism 90
hologram (Thornton concept) 104, 168
homesteaders 184, 187
Hoover, J. Edgar 86
hope, trust in 8–9
horizontal turn 131, 131–5
horizontalidad 132
horizontality 58
“hostile environment” policy (UK) 35
Houston, Texas 32
Huggins, Ericka 89–90, 92
humidity 29
hunger 30, 179
Hurricane Harvey 32
Hurricane Katrina 11, 32, 59–61, 65, 66, 113, 177–8
Hurricane María 177, 179
 ideological purity 144
Illich, Ivan 189
immigrants 35
India 37, 47, 180
Indigenous practice 133
indignados 133
indirect action 165–6
individualist responses 54
inequality, risk 58
informed consent 55
infrastructural failure 62–75
infrastructural systems 166–7
infrastructure 43
institutional state power 138
institutions, failing 8–9
insurance 32–3
insurgent counterpower 202
intercambiadero (Spanish institution) 197–8
interdependence, feeling of 11–12
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 19–20
    Representative Concentration Pathway 31
International Monetary Fund 97
investment risk 33
invitationality 70–1
ISIS see Daesh
isolation 57, 210
Italy 23

James, C. L. R. 125
Jewish ethical tradition 211–12
jineology 154–6
Johnson, Lyndon B. 81
Johnson, Sharon 60
justice 131, 153, 158–9, 170
just-in-time logistics 39

Kaba, Mariame 57, 79
Karl-Marx-Hof, Vienna see Red Vienna
Khartoum, Sudan 42–3
killing degree days 30
knock-on effects, COVID-19 pandemic 24
 Kobane, Rojava 146–7
  siege of 151
Kolbert, Elizabeth 48
Kongra Star (Rojava) 155–6
Kropotkin, Peter 58, 59, 117, 194
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 31
Kurdish Workers’ Party see PKK
Kurds 146–52, 209

labor, Marxian definition of 78
labor system 37
Laclau, Ernesto 138
lassitude 54–5
late-capitalist normalcy, resilience of 22
Latour, Bruno 138–9
Lavapiés (Madrid) 128
Le Guin, Ursula K. 200–1
left-libertarian tradition 117–18
liberation 73–4
libertarian municipalism 120, 122–3, 124–31, 135, 137, 139, 144, 196
life, parameters of 27
Lifehouses 14
    buildings 171–4
    central reservation 170
    conceptualization 167–9
    confederation 198–9
    decision-making 191–4
    establishing 170, 171–4
    food program 179–85
    greatest threat facing 198
    implications 174–6
    limitations and drawbacks 169–71
    location 171
    maintenance and repair 187–91
    neighborhood assemblies 191–4
    network 169–70
    network organization 174–6, 194–200
    power supply and generation 176–9
    pragmas 199–200
    production facilities 184–8
    resource sharing 197–8
     shared technical infrastructure 196
    state threat to 201–6
    value of 168–9
    vision 200–1
lifesystems 112
local government 140–1
local power 117–18
local state, occupation of 143
localism 23
logistical systems 22, 38–42
Long Emergency, the 14
    agricultural impacts 29–30
    as great undoing 20–1
    conceptualization 20–2
    COVID-19 pandemic example 22–7
    deeper lesson of 112
    impacts 21, 27–33
    latitudes in greatest peril 28–9
    refugees 33–7
    scale of devastation 169
    scenarios 22
    the state in 42–6
López, Marina 139–40
losses 15
Lumumba, Chokwe 130
luxury beliefs 151

Madrid, Spain 128–9
maize (grain) 30
maker community 185–6
makerspaces 185–7
Malacca Strait 39
Malik, Nesrine 42–3
Malm, Andreas 50–1
malnutrition 41, 80
market logics 116
Marx, Karl 78
Marxist economics 121
May 1968, Paris events of 130
Meatless Mondays 212
medical care see healthcare
 medicines and medical devices 40, 41
Mediterranean migration crisis 37
megacities 33
metabolic rift 121
methane 48
mêtis (Scott concept) 126
microgrids 178–9
migration, magnitude of 35–6
mindfulness 212
Mitchell, David 207
Moafi, Samaneh 172
Monobloc chairs 132, 156
Mouffe, Chantal 138
MOVE (US) 204
movement, restriction of 36
Movement for a Democratic Society see TEV-DEM
movement of the squares 134, 137, 147
Mt. Sinjar massacre 151
municipalist theory 139–40
mutual aid 9–13, 57–113, 111, 115–16
  accountability 75
  backlash against 61
  capacity for cooperation 58
  and care 77–9
  challenge to 111
  commitment 57–8, 59
  community needs 61
  conceptualization 57–8
  COVID-19 pandemic 193–4
  disaster relief 67–71, 72–5
  dormant 64
  effectiveness 76–80
  evaluation criteria 73
  feeling of interdependence 11–12
  horizontality 58
  hybridization 66
  infrastructural systems 62–75
  instinct toward 59
  invitationality 70–1
  joy of 11
  limitations and drawbacks 75–6, 96
   nonjudgmentality 69
  opposition to 10
  self-organization 59–61, 70–1, 112
  sense of empowerment 12
  solidarity networks 79–80, 80–96, 96–112
  value 75
  values 60, 66, 71, 102
Mutual Aid Disaster Relief network (US) 195
mutual aid groups 23
mutual care 79, 211
  site of 169
  state threat to 201–6

National Guard (US) 68
National Health Service (UK) 110
negative commons (Moafi concept) 172
Negri, Antonio 138
neoliberalism 130
   and austerity 168
network organization 174–6
networked organizing tactics 132
networked services, dependence on 41–2
New Democracy (Greece) 110
new municipalism 134–5, 135–8, 139, 149, 196, 209
“new normal,” ostensible 54
New Orleans, Louisiana 11, 32, 59–61, 65, 66, 177–8
New York City
   blackout 2, 63
   COVID-19 pandemic 74
   public-sector response 63
   revolutionary strategies 85
   Sandy deaths 62
   Special Initiative for Rebuilding and Recovery 73
   storm surge 1, 1–2
   Superstorm Sandy 1–4, 62–4, 166–7, 178
   Zuccotti Park 64
   see also Occupy Sandy
Newton, Huey P. 82–3, 92, 94
   arrest and conviction 84–5
   revolutionary strategies 86–7
nonrepressive government 123
 nonstate society 193, 197
North Oakland Neighborhood Anti-Poverty Center 82

Oakland Community Learning Center see Black Panther Party for Self-Defense
Öcalan, Abdullah 147–50, 151, 196
   Democratic Confederalism 148–50, 162–3
   The Sociology of Freedom 154–5
Occupy moment 134–5
Occupy Sandy 3–5, 9, 10, 12, 14, 62, 62–4, 62–75, 77, 96, 102, 115–16, 147, 196, 201, 209
   achievement 72–5
   Amazon wedding-registry hack 67
   attack on 205
   banner 65, 66
   budget 73
   carework 78–9
   commitment 72
   disaster relief 67–8, 72–5
   effectiveness 66
   intake team 67
   invitationality 70–1
   logistics 67–8
   nonjudgmentality 69
   origins 62–4
   outreach 69
   recruitment 65–6
   scale 71–2
   self-organization 70–1
   shared ethos 70
   values 66, 71
Occupy Wall Street 62, 64, 66
ocean currents see Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation
offshoring 38
omnicrisis, permanent condition of 46
oppression 149
ordinary people, wisdom of 122–4
organized abandonment (Gilmore concept) 43–6
Ours to Lose (Starecheski) 166–7

Panama Canal 38
Paris Commune 1871 122, 124, 196, 202
parliamentary politics 140–1
 participation 117, 140–1
participatory democracy 124–7
   limitations and drawbacks 127–31
Partido Popular (Spain) 143–4
patriarchy 121, 149
pavement burns 29
peace committees 157–8
peatlands 47–8
People’s Free Food Program (BPP) 87, 88, 179
People’s Free Medical Clinics (BPP) 88–9, 90, 93–4
permafrost thawing 19
Philippines, the 38
Phoenix, Arizona 29
pirates 39
Pirkei Avot 212
PKK (Kurdistan Workers’ Party) 147–8, 149, 154
Podemos (Spain) 138, 145
police and policing 83, 84–5, 86
policy decisions 123
political arrangements, flexibility 117
political economy 116
political order, fluctuations of 112
political projects 138–9
politics, feminization of 155–6
Polletta, Francesca 124–5
populist parties 40
Port Huron Statement 124–5, 133
possibility 211
post-Emergency world 14
power and power structures 14, 21, 211
   seizure of 165
power supply and generation 176–9
powerlessness, sense of 10
pragmas 199–200
precision fermentation 181, 182, 212
predictions 54
price instability, food and food production 39–40
production 27, 38, 182
protectionism 40
protein 181
protest 165, 212
 psychic needs 79
Puar, Jasbir K. 40
public action, elections 6–7
public health 23
public investment, hollowing-out of 44
public order 46
public reason 122–4
public safety 156–60
public services, disinvestment 21
public-sector response 63
purchase signals 165
purpose, sense of 211
Putin, Vladimir Vladimirovich 162

racism 80
Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (Georgia) 203
radicalization 112–13
Rahim, Malik 60
Ramadan 200
raumlaborberlin 172
Reagan, Ronald 84
recruitment 138–9, 144
Red Cross see American Red Cross
Red Vienna 202
refugees 8, 33–7, 105, 108, 186, 205
   from armed conflict 36
   border crossings 34–5
   deaths 35
   exploitation 37
   “hostile environment” policies 35
   internal 34
   magnitude 35–6
   popular image 33–4
   restriction of movement 36
   terminology appertaining thereto 33
   working conditions 37
reinsurance firms 32
renewable energy 47, 178
representative legitimacy 129
resettlement 37
resilience 195
 Resilient Power Puerto Rico 178–9
resourcefulness 192
resources, competition for 205
respect 73
responsibility 21, 115, 200–1
restorative justice 158–9, 159–60
rice (grain) 30
risk 51–2
    drivers of 20
    exposure to 58
Rojava 14, 145, 146–63, 193, 209
    achievement 162–3
    antistatism 154
    background 146–52
    commitment to feminism 154–6
    communes 152–4, 156, 201
    jineology 154–6
    justice system 157–60
    peace committees 157–8
    prison system 159–60
    public safety and conflict resolution 156–60
    restorative justice 158–9, 159–60
    security formation 156–7
    social architecture 160–2
    Turkish invasion of 161
    withdrawal of US special operations forces from 161
    women-only governance structures 156
    women’s assemblies 156
Ross, Kristin 196
Russia see Ukraine: Russian invasion of

Sacramento, California 83
sacrifice zones 44–5
salvage 189
Sanders, Lynn 129
savior/saved dynamic 58
scarcity 22
Schelling Point 171
Scott, James C. 126–7
seaborne cargo 38–9
Seale, Bobby 82, 88, 93, 116
 Seattle, Washington
   Big Door Brigade 57
   WTO protests 1999 132
seawater rise 31
Second World War 37
self-care 211–12
self-determination 61, 161, 191
selflessness 27
self-organization 9–13, 59–61, 70–1, 112
self-reliance 23, 174
   state threat to 201–6
self-sufficiency 174
September 11 attacks 66
sexism 92–3
sheltered environments 54
shipping 38–9
Shriver, Sargent 82
Silvers, Cleo 89
Singapore 31, 182–3
skills inventory 190–1
Smaje, Chris 181–2, 184
Sniffen, Rev. Michael 63, 65
social arrangements, flexibility 117
social breakdown 54
social ecology 162, 163, 170
social fabric, fraying of 46
social justice 149
social kitchens 102
social pathologies 121
social reproduction 205
Socialist Workers Party (US) 118
soft mitigation 8
solar power 47
solar radiation management 48–9
Solar Radiation Management Governance Initiative 49
solidarity 54, 60, 194
solidarity clinics (Greece) 11, 14, 102–10, 116, 169, 195, 197, 201, 209
   10-Point Charter of Constitution of Solidarity Clinics and Pharmacies 102–3
   ambition 103
   archives 106
   dissolution 108–10
     egalitarian sensibility 103
    healthcare provision 103–7
    integrated healthcare 108
    shortfalls 106–7
Solidarity for All network, Greece 108–10
solidarity networks 79–80, 80–96, 96–112, 115
Solnit, Rebecca 10–11, 66
Somalia 42
Soviet Union 52–3, 132
Spade, Dean 73
Spain 14, 133, 139–40, 209
    Ahora Madrid 135–8, 140, 140–2, 143–4
    asambleas populares 136–7
    Barcelona en Comú 139–40, 142–3, 144, 196
    Ciutat Meridiana fablab 186
    confluences 135–8, 140–1
    elections of May 24, 2015 142, 143
    intercambiadero 197–8
    local government 140–1
    Partido Popular 143–4
    Podemos 138, 145
Spanish Civil War 60, 118
spyware 204
stability 207–8
Starecheski, Amy 166–7
state, the 123, 144–5
    absence of 146–52
    failure 42–3, 96–112
    in the Long Emergency 42–6
    organized abandonment and 43–6
    responsibility 116
    violence 202–4
State Farm (insurance company) 33
state services, rationalization 100–1
statism 121
Strait of Hormuz 38
stratospheric aerosol injection 48–9, 50, 210
Street Farm 185
Students for a Democratic Society (US) 124–5
Sudan 42–3
Suez Canal 38
 Sunak, Rishi 47
Superstorm Sandy 1–4, 62, 62–4, 112–13
   blackout 2, 63
   damage 2
   deaths 62
   disaster relief 67–71
   electricity-generating stationary bicycle 166–7
   power supply and generation 178
   public-sector response 63
   as rupture 3
   storm surge 1, 1–2
   see also Occupy Sandy
superstorms 1
supply chains 22, 38–42
   disruption 180, 184, 187
   terminology 40
survivability, heat threshold 28–9
survival programs see Black Panther Party for Self-Defense
syndicates of initiative 200–1
Syrian Civil War 146–7, 150, 150–1
Syrian Democratic Forces 150
SYRIZA (Greece) 102, 108–10, 111

Tampines Block 146, Singapore 182–3
Tarfon (first-century CE rabbi) 211–12
Taussig, Mick 147
technologies of permanent recourse 188–9, 191
Tempelhof Airport (Berlin) 172
temperature
   UK record 17–18
   and violence 36
TEV-DEM (Movement for a Democratic Society, Rojava) 151, 153, 155
Thessaloniki, Greece 98–9, 104
Thornton, Cassie 11, 104, 168–9
Thunberg, Greta 212
tools, convivial 189–90
Traficantes de Sueños bookstore (Madrid) 138
translation (Latour concept) 139, 143, 144
trauma care 107
tree die-offs 19
tropical storms 32
 trout farming 183
Trump, Donald, wet congeries that serve as brain of 161
Tsipras, Alex 110
Turkey 147–8
“The Tyranny of Structurelessness” (Freeman) 129

universal basic income (UBI) 212
Ukraine
   archaeological “megasites” 125
   Russian invasion of 24–5, 39–40, 180
unconscious coordination 171
undocumented, the 105
unease, sense of 7
uneven development 53
Union of the Patriotic Women of Kurdistan (YJWK) 154
United Kingdom
   Counter Terrorism Policing 204
   COVID-19 pandemic 24, 25, 40
   Eat Out to Help Out program 25
   food security 180
   green energy transition 47
   National Health Service 24, 110
   temperature record 17–18
United States of America 133
   Black experience in 44–5, 81–5
   borders 34–5
   Community Action Programs 81
   Department of Homeland Security 73
Economic Opportunity Act 81
   government expenditure 81
   healthcare provision 110
   Job Corps vocational training initiative 81
   Mulford Act 83–4
   Office of Economic Opportunity 81
   organized abandonment 44–5
   pavement burns 29
   state violence 202–4
   War on Poverty 81–2, 91
   see also Black Panther Party for Self-Defense

values 115–16
 Vansintjan, Aaron 196, 198
Venezuela 42
vertical farming 182–3, 212
Veysey, Laurence 127
Vietnam 38
violence, and temperature 36
voluntarism and volunteers 3–5, 11, 76
voting 165, 212

Wallace-Wells, David 28–9
War on Poverty (US) 81–2, 91
Ward, Dana 120
Wengrow, David 116–17, 125
wet-bulb temperature 28–9, 169
wheat (grain) 30
wildfires 17
women, gender equity 154–6
women’s voices 153
Workers’ Medical Center, Thessaloniki 104
workshops 185
World Congress of Mayors 212
World Trade Organization 132

“year without a summer,” 1815 48
Yemen 42
Young, Iris Marion 131
Young Pioneers (US) 118
YPJ (Rojava) 147

Zapatistas 60, 61, 132, 133, 147


                                         OceanofPDF.com
 