  OceanofPDF.com
                        Praise for Health Communism

“This book changed the way I think about health, power, state capacity,
extraction, social welfare, and resistance. It is an immensely useful tool for
wrestling with the most urgent questions facing our movements in these
terrifying times. Readable and filled with concise histories and clear
examples to illustrate nuanced analysis, it will no doubt become required
reading among those struggling against the death cult that is racial
capitalism.”
                                            Dean Spade, author of Mutual Aid

“Beatrice Adler-Bolton and Artie Vierkant bring us a galvanizing
proposition: Unlike the rest of us, capital is not alive; it merely animates
itself through our host bodies. This book shares the impressive truth that we
are all surplus in the political economy of health, whether we are presently
‘healthy’ or ‘sick.’ Adler-Bolton and Vierkant teach that our shared
condition of vulnerability is ever ready to transform into our collective
strength.”
            Jules Gill-Peterson, author of Histories of the Transgender Child

“Health Communism makes a direct assault on the idea that health can
survive under capitalism, where the sick are simply disposable, while the
system makes a killing along the way. No one talks like Adler-Bolton and
Vierkant do—those in public health and medicine are too deeply embedded
in the status quo to even acknowledge the searing logic of their words. They
stake out the far edge of what is possible and remind us that only the
journey towards that horizon will make us free.”
        Gregg Gonsalves, Yale School of Public Health and Yale Law School

“I can’t remember the last time I learned so much in under 200 pages.
Everyone new to disability liberation should read this text. Here is deep
wisdom to arm a struggle towards forms of human embodiment as yet
undreamed of; inspiration for a million insurgencies of communist health.”
                                Sophie Lewis, author of Abolish the Family
 “I could not help but cheer as I read Health Communism. The most
analytically sharp analysis of the relations between capitalism and disability
since the pioneering work of Marta Russell, this powerfully explicative
work is a rousing manifesto for the sick and becoming-surplus to unite.”
                                     Jasbir Puar, author of The Right to Maim
                             OceanofPDF.com
 Health Communism




Beatrice Adler-Bolton
 and Artie Vierkant
 OceanofPDF.com
                     First published by Verso 2022
           © Beatrice Adler-Bolton and Artie Vierkant 2022

                          All rights reserved

     The moral rights of the editor and authors have been asserted

                          1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2

                                Verso
               UK: 6 Meard Street, London W1F 0EG
            US: 388 Atlantic Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11217
                           versobooks.com

                Verso is the imprint of New Left Books

                   ISBN-13: 978-1-83976-516-2
               ISBN-13: 978-1-83976-518-6 (UK EBK)
               ISBN-13: 978-1-83976-519-3 (US EBK)

         British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
 A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library

        Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress

        Typeset in Sabon LT by Hewer Text UK Ltd, Edinburgh
    Printed and bound by CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon CR0 4YY

                        OceanofPDF.com
    For SPK
OceanofPDF.com
                   Contents

Introduction

SURPLUS
WASTE
LABOR
MADNESS
PHARMACOLOGY
BORDER
CARE
CURE
HOST

Acknowledgments
Notes
Index
                  OceanofPDF.com
 Illness—you point out—is the only possible form of life in
capitalism. In fact, the psychiatrist, who is wage dependent,
is a sick person like each of us. The ruling classes merely
give him the power to “cure” or to hospitalize. Cure—this is
self-evident—can’t be understood in our system to mean the
elimination of illness: it serves exclusively as the
maintenance of the ability to go to work where one stays
sick.
                  —Sozialistisches Patientenkollektiv (SPK)1
                     OceanofPDF.com
                             Introduction

Health is capitalism’s vulnerability. There is no capital without health—it is
capital’s host. And capitalism’s greatest trick is convincing us that it exists
independent of this parasitic grasp. That it is indifferent.
    Health has no fixed meaning. It is fluid. Under capitalism health has
been defined to embody many meanings at once: from the hyper-
individualistic, biological “health” any one person possesses—always a
possession, not an ontology—to global society-level constructs which
attempt to give language to chances for survival at the population level.
Health is a vulgar phenomenon. A race-and-class-stratified matrix of
constantly intersecting regimes of artificial scarcity. A destination,
something one must always orient one’s life toward. Healthy physically,
socially, economically, and metaphysically. More than a thing, and so often
difficult or impossible to describe, health becomes defined by the things it
is not. Non-cancerous, dis-abled—as though the purest state of health is to
simply not exist.
    Health under capitalism is an impossibility. Under capitalism, to attain
health you must work, you must be productive and normative, and only
then are you entitled to the health you can buy. This fantasy of individual
health under the political-economic conditions of capitalism only ever
exists as a state one cannot be, to which one must always strive.
    The Sozialistisches Patientenkollektiv (Socialist Patients’ Collective, or
SPK) called this cultural imaginary of health a “biological, fascist fantasy”
because it obscures the true and violent architecture of economic systems of
extraction underneath the shadow of a capitalist-realist depiction of the
perfect worker. The biological, fascist fantasy of health is not unique to
capitalism, but instead one of the keystones of a vast network of institutions
“whose function … is the concealment of the social conditions and social
 functions of illness.” For this reason SPK felt that no version of “health”
could be reassimilated toward an anti-capitalist, pro-illness framework.
While we are indebted to SPK’s work, we disagree. We propose our own
lens, by which health is reclaimed not just for workers but also for those
marked as surplus, for all people: “health communism.”
    Capital has been allowed to define the meanings, terms, and
consequences of “health” for long enough. In these pages we propose a
radical reevaluation of our political economy that seeks to undo capitalism’s
definitions of health by laying bare the violent and eugenic assumptions at
its foundations. We articulate how health is wielded by capital to cleave
apart populations, separating the deserving from the undeserving, the
redeemable from the irredeemable, those who would consider themselves
“workers” from the vast, spoiled “surplus” classes. We assert that only
through shattering these deeply sociologically ingrained binaries is the
abolition of capitalism possible. The contours of capitalism have formed
around health, to the point that they have come to appear inextricable from
each other. Health Communism aims to sever these bonds. As we will
discuss, to do so is not only to remove one of capital’s principal tools, but
also to separate capital from its host.
    Health Communism also attempts to give shape to a broader political
philosophy that can guide left movements demanding universal care
structures, a dramatic expansion of social welfare supports, or socialized
medicine. Centuries have elapsed in the fight for and against socialized
medicine. And yet the arguments and tactics of either side have rarely
changed: an invective against an American national health insurance reform
in the twenty-first century sounds much like its predecessors from the late
nineteenth century. In this same period, however, significant developments
have transpired in the relationship between health and capital, and it is
crucial that our movements can recognize and target them.
    It is important however to specify what we mean by “socialized
medicine,” and how it differs from the larger project presented here. There
are many competing definitions of socialized medicine, but the term is
generally understood to incorporate a number of common characteristics.
First, from a liberatory standpoint, socialized medicine is principally
understood as a more equitable distribution of medical care, or healthcare,
in which this distribution ceases to be a matter of whether an individual’s
class, finances, race, ability, or gender preclude them from receiving needed
 care. Second, socialized medicine is understood to be a program taken up
by the state and provided to those recognized within its borders as its
citizens, though not always to those the state does not recognize as its own.
Finally, socialized medicine is often thought of as a state welfare program
that can capably be situated within an otherwise capitalist state.
     We take issue with these definitions, as they can serve to limit our
imaginary for what is possible under health communism. Equitable
distribution, or redistribution, is an important goal, but what is necessary is
to move categorically further. We share the sentiments expressed by others
in international health justice fights: health communism means all care for
all people.2 While this is often expressed through appeals of need—that
“everyone should receive the care they need”—we advocate for a more
expansive approach than this. As we will discuss, the determination of need
has become inculcated within capitalist logics and what we will describe, in
WASTE, as a determination of an individual’s “debt/eugenic burden”
relative to social provision of care, treatment, or support a state deigns to
provide. Similarly, our project advocates for an essentially internationalist
approach to health communism. We will not separate health from capital by
fighting for minor reforms that perpetuate the segmentation and policing of
state borders and boundaries. We call for a radical abundance of care that
functionally casts off centuries of ideologies of austerity, subjection, and
extraction.
     It is therefore important to recognize that, even as we fight within the
US for policies like Medicare for All, the task at hand is much greater than
one program could capture. It is the total reformation of the political
economy of health, and in so doing, the total reformation of the political
economy. This is why, we argue, while many states may have systems that
are referred to as “socialized medicine”—like the United Kingdom’s
National Health Service (NHS)—in reality no such system of truly
socialized medicine exists, or can exist, within the capitalist state. Perhaps
this is why, among all the social democracies that have instituted some form
of socialized medicine, none have achieved communism. Countries with
broad socialized medicine and social welfare programs routinely still
maintain their surplus populations with overt antagonism. Our trans
comrades have fled the UK to continue their hormone therapy, in the face of
artificial barriers imposed by the NHS’s Gender Identity Clinic system. Our
disabled comrades in Canada hold disdain for the social democratic
 politicians in the US who point to the Canadian Medicare system as a
panacea that should be reproduced, rather than the engine of austerity and
repression they experience it as. Despite having “socialized medicine,”
these social democracies are still, at their heart, imperialist and capitalist
states. As Vicente Navarro has written, “The British National Health
Service is not a socialist island within a capitalist state.”3
    Some readers may therefore be surprised to find little attention devoted
in Health Communism to the question of health insurance. We understand
health insurance companies for what they are: principally, they are financial
institutions, concerned as they are only with payments for services rendered
and the endless, bureaucratic, deadening, management of risk. An entire
account could be devoted to the study of these financial institutions from a
perspective of health communism, using an analysis of the political
economy of health. But our movements do not have time to seriously
consider retaining these institutions. There is no place for them in society.4
    Some readers may additionally be surprised to find no mention of the
coronavirus pandemic in Health Communism, even as it was written in its
throes. This omission is intentional. For all of the horrors of the pandemic,
we are aware of no actions taken during it by states or private industry that
are not explained in full by the preexisting health-capitalist framework
articulated in these pages. While it may be tempting to say that we have
“learned from the pandemic,” it is clear that none of its lessons were
previously unknown, and we are unconvinced that any such learning has
taken place. Just ask anyone who lived through the dawn of the ongoing
AIDS crisis.
    It is also important to foreground why our conception of health
communism directly concerns many things that are not typically regarded
as components of “health.” While this will become evident in the first few
chapters of the book, which sketch the delineation of populations as
“surplus” and how health has come to be defined under—and by—capital, it
is necessary as well to define our project as one that makes interventions
into the lineage of scholarship on what are called the social determinants of
health. The concept of the “social determinants of health” is most widely
used in critical public health literature, focusing on the wide confluence of
factors that do and can impact an individual’s, or a population’s, health.
Activists have summarized the meaning of this term best: to understand
health as socially determined is to understand that, among other factors,
 housing is healthcare. So, too, is clean air healthcare. These social-
infrastructural aspects of life—not just housing and clean air, but food,
clean water, public sanitation, social supports, in-home aid, a planet not
burned and destroyed by capital—all have an impact on an individual’s
health and life chances, just as all of the things we traditionally think of as
“healthcare” do. Importantly, this does not mean that the social
determinants of health take primacy over what is more traditionally
understood as care: health communism, as a project and as a political goal,
is definitionally focused on both.
     Health Communism therefore proceeds through an attempt to
disentangle the above factors that constitute the political economy of health
in order to provide a framework for seeking greater demands and thinking
more expansively of how broad our transformations of the political
economy must be if we are to defeat capitalism. Central to this is our
assertion that if we are to win health communism, our political projects
must center the populations capital has marked as “surplus”: unwanted,
discarded bodies viewed as waste that nevertheless have become the subject
of capital accumulation.
     In the first chapter, SURPLUS, we define what this surplus population
is and how it is ultimately employed by the state and capital. The surplus
populations, we argue, constitute a broad array of categorizations and are
united in their degrees of being, for one reason or another, certified
biologically, socially, and politically as surplus, and marked for what we
call “extractive abandonment”—the process by which these populations are
made profitable to capital. In WASTE, the second chapter, we look at how,
once certified as surplus, these populations are then used to stave off broad
reforms that would otherwise be destabilizing to capitalism, usually through
an argument that the surplus constitutes a burden to society in two ways:
first as eugenic burden, then as debt burden. We then give a brief overview
of how the movements for and against socialized medicine in the United
States have been shaped by this rhetoric, and how failure to resist these
calls has shaped the growth of the health industries. In LABOR, the third
chapter, we turn to how the certification of the surplus populations
developed sociologically, and in law and policy. We look to the English
Poor Laws as the root of our contemporary distinction between workers—
the productive and deserving members of the body politic—and the surplus
 —unproductive, undeserving—and how the policing of this distinction has
developed as one of the central imbrications of health and capital.
    MADNESS, the fourth chapter, describes the asylum system as a
paradigmatic example of the intersection of health, capital, and the carceral
logics that must be understood in order to resist health-capitalism. We look
at how and why the asylum system began and trace the relationship
between the institutionalization of the surplus populations and their value to
society: first as a problem to be managed through their separation from the
productive working class, and later as a source of value in and of
themselves, marked for extraction.
    In PHARMACOLOGY, the fifth chapter, we turn to the rise of the
global pharmaceutical industry in the second half of the twentieth century
and its direct involvement in crafting imperialist international trade policies,
constituting the ascendance of global health-capitalism and marking capital
as a severe global public health threat. In this context we then look to the
split over professionalization and industry collusion within the radical
group ACT UP in the late 1980s and early 1990s, leading to the formation
of the splinter group Treatment Action Group (TAG), as an example of the
difficulties coalitions must face in embracing the surplus and holding
capitalism to account.
    In BORDER, the sixth chapter, we show how the rise of global financial
capital and international trade agreements at the end of the twentieth
century precipitated the mass privatization of social welfare systems
internationally, and in Latin America in particular. We argue that this
expansion marks the moment when health industries and health-capitalism
had successfully matured in their host countries (the US in particular) and
demonstrate why internationalism must be an essential part of health
communism if we are to achieve the end of capitalism.
    The seventh and eighth chapters, CARE and CURE, form what is, to
our knowledge, one of the most comprehensive accounts in the English
language of the Sozialistisches Patientenkollektiv, a radical patients’ group
arising in Germany in the 1970s whose ideas have been highly influential
on Health Communism, and who were the subject of a sustained campaign
of public erasure that has left them largely forgotten. In CARE, we set up
the conditions in which SPK arose, notably in the context of the anti-
psychiatry movement and competing visions in the period of how medical
and psychiatric practice should evolve. We then begin an account of SPK’s
 radical political philosophy and the ideas that made them appear so
dangerous to capital and the state. In CURE, we present a thorough account
of how SPK were ultimately silenced and largely erased from history,
marked as “insane terrorists” to explicitly remove a threat to capital and
prevent their influence on future patient groups.
    In HOST, the final chapter, we assert that capitalism will only be
defeated through a movement that centers the surplus populations and
resists the eugenic and debt ideologies perpetuated by capital to function.
Health is so policed by capital because health is so necessary to each of
capital’s functions. This is why capital only fears health.
    It is our hope that Health Communism can be used by movements
against capitalism and for liberation that can move us far beyond the scraps
we have been fighting for in left health movements for over a century. The
systems and capacities of health and capital that we describe in this account
have, as will be made clear, only grown worse and more violent with time.
There is nothing to wait for. There will be no better time.
                             OceanofPDF.com
                                     SURPLUS

   Death comes all the more from without as it is coded from within. This is especially true of
   the system of cruelty, where death is inscribed in the primitive mechanism of surplus value as
   well as in the movement of the finite blocks of debt.
                                                              —Gilles Deleuze & Félix Guattari1

The production of death under capitalism is well understood. Innumerable
terms and theoretical formulations exist to define the endpoint of capital’s
immiseration, the one constant to human life that our political economy is
particularly adept at expediting. “Social murder” is the term used by Engels
and his contemporaries. “Its deed is murder just as surely as the deed of the
single individual; disguised, malicious murder, murder against which none
can defend himself, which does not seem what it is, because no man sees
the murderer, because the death of the victim seems a natural one, since the
offence is more one of omission than of commission.”2 Likewise “statistical
genocide,” or “democide.” Lauren Berlant called this “slow death”—“mass
physical attenuation under global/national regimes of capitalist structural
subordination.”3
    The finality of death in the social imaginary as the ultimate conclusion
of capital’s violence can produce fantasies of a moral or ethical capitalism.
This is arguably the dream chased by capital’s true believers: with
modifications to its systems, we can slow slow death to a crawl, render
statistical genocide statistically insignificant. With “premature” death the
imagined enemy of capital’s internal narrative of its own beneficence,
minor reforms become enshrined as a legible mirage. But the primary sites
of violence under capitalism are not those that lead directly to death. They
are instead the quotidian forms that situate capitalist belonging; the
reproduction of norms socially as well as legally and administratively,
 abetted by a “cynical din of knowledge production” that institutionalizes
logics of eugenics and austerity.4
    For this reason, we focus not on how capitalism reproduces death but on
how and why capital keeps you alive. We consider what is elsewhere called
administrative violence; in the words of Dean Spade, “how law structures
and reproduces vulnerability.”5 We follow how those marked as vulnerable
by administrative violence are not only immiserated, but also become the
object of capital accumulation.
    Central to this is the figure of the surplus population(s), the necessarily
amorphous and indefinable category that is the focus of our project. How
the political economy has evolved in the last century to maximize its
exploitation of the surplus populations—pathologizing with one hand while
generating capital with the other—is a process that must be understood by
those mobilizing for health justice or health communism, and to begin to
imagine a world free of the eugenic philosophy of capitalism. It is toward
this understanding that Health Communism begins.
    The surplus population was initially defined in economic terms in
separate writings by Engels and Marx in response to the moralizing,
demographic panics of industrial capitalism’s early philosophers, among
them Adam Smith and Thomas Malthus.6 (Smith: “The demand for men,
like that for any other commodity, necessarily regulates the production of
men”; Malthus: “A distinction will in this case occur, between the number
of hands which the stock of society could employ, and the number which its
territory can maintain.”7) Both Engels and Marx, in referring to the surplus
populations as capital’s “general reserve army,” make clear that their
formulation has to do in large part with the population of unemployed
people who could otherwise be a part of the labor force. Engels refers to the
surplus populations as “keep[ing] body and soul together by begging,
stealing, street-sweeping … It is astonishing in what devices this ‘surplus
population’ takes refuge.”8
    Health, disability, and debility are largely absent from early discourses
around the surplus populations that Marx and Engels responded to, except
in cases of characteristic pathologizing of the poor. (Malthus again: “The
labouring poor … seem always to live from hand to mouth. Their present
wants employ their whole attention, and they seldom think of the future.”9)
Engels and Marx do, however, share concerns for the public health of the
 surplus population and the disablement wrought by industrial production.
Engels’s The Condition of the Working Class in England can be regarded as
an early work of “social” epidemiology, locating capital’s impact on the
social determinants of health just as the idea of public health was at its
formation. Marx notes of the relationship between health, private sector
industrialization, and the state, that
   health officers, the industrial inquiry commissioners, the factory inspectors, all repeat, over
   and over again, that it is both necessary for [factory] workers to have these 500 cubic feet [of
   space per person], and impossible to impose this rule on capital. They are, in reality,
   declaring that consumption and the other pulmonary diseases of the workers are conditions
   necessary to the existence of capital.10

    A contemporary understanding of what it is to be “surplus” is
necessarily more expansive. Major societal shifts in the late modern period,
discussed at length in our chapter LABOR, solidified the worker/surplus
binary in public consciousness in part by incorporating a conception of
workers’ health or disability as a central facet in their certification as
surplus.
    The surplus, or surplus populations, can therefore be defined as a
collective of those who fall outside of the normative principles for which
state policies are designed, as well as those who are excluded from the
attendant entitlements of capital. It is a fluid and uncertifiable population
who in fact should not be rigidly defined, for reasons we discuss below.
Crucially, this definition also elides traditional left conceptions of the
working class or the “worker.” As we will describe at length throughout
Health Communism, the idea that the worker is not a part of the surplus
populations, yet faces constant threat of becoming certified as surplus, is
one of the central social constructions wielded in support of capitalist
hegemony. Similarly, the methods the state employs to certify delineations
between surplus populations constitute effective tactics in maintaining this
hegemony. An understanding of the intersectional demands of those
subjected or excluded by capital constitutes the potential for building
solidarity, which is definitionally a threat to capital. An understanding that
the marking and biocertification of bodies as non-normative or surplus
constitutes a false, socially constructed imposition of negative value is also
a threat to capital. An understanding that illness, disability, and debility are
driven by the social determinants of health, with capital as the central social
determinant, itself constitutes such a threat. We argue therefore that in order
 to truly mount a challenge to capitalism it is necessary that our political
projects have and maintain the surplus at their center.
     While the surplus population does contain those who are disabled,
impaired, sick, mad, or chronically ill, the characteristic vulnerability of the
surplus is not inherent to their existence—that is, it is not any illness,
disability, or pathologized characteristic that itself makes the surplus
vulnerable. Their vulnerability is instead constructed by the operations of
the capitalist state. The precarity of the surplus population is made through
what Ruth Wilson Gilmore calls “organized abandonment,” the deliberate
manipulation and disproportionate dispossession of resources from Black,
Brown, Indigenous, disabled, and poor communities, rendering them more
vulnerable to adverse health.
     Understanding the shifting social constructions of surplus under
capitalism, and the organization of this “organized abandonment,” is
uniquely illustrative of the imbrication of health and capital. At the time of
its initial formulation, surplus populations are largely discussed in the sense
of surplus constituting “superfluous” (another term wielded synonymously
for this population at the time) or otherwise irrelevance, waste. We can see
this literalized in early American labor benefits: the few national unions that
offered a permanent disability benefit paid a sum equal to the meager
benefit a worker’s family would receive on the worker’s death. A worker
becoming disabled thus not only constitutively passed the boundary from
“worker” to “surplus”—their social value following disablement was,
effectively, as good as dead.11
     This categorization and certification of surplus has become a focal
struggle in the history of capitalism, socially reproducing a collective
imaginary of who is a worker, who is property, and who is surplus—and to
what degree of personhood each category is “entitled” under the scope of
law. Those who are deemed to be surplus are rendered excess by the
systems of capitalist production and have been consequently framed as a
drain or a burden on society. But the surplus population has become an
essential component of capitalist society, with many industries built on the
maintenance, supervision, surveillance, policing, data extraction,
confinement, study, cure, measurement, treatment, extermination, housing,
transportation, and care of the surplus. In this way, those discarded as non-
valuable life are maintained as a source of extraction and profit for capital.
     This rather hypocritical stance—the surplus are at once nothing and
everything to capitalism—is an essential contradiction. Liat Ben-Moshe
identifies this characteristic through the intersection of disability and
incarceration: “Surplus populations are spun into gold. Disability is
commodified through [a] matrix of incarceration (prisons, hospitals, nursing
homes).”12 Jasbir Puar, in The Right to Maim: “Debilitation and the
production of disability are in fact biopolitical ends unto themselves …
Maiming is a source of value extraction from populations that would
otherwise be disposable.”13

                                      —

In much of the following, we situate our analysis of the social construction
of surplus through the lens of disability, as one of the many contingent
embodiments of surplus identities. Disability not only operates as one
perceived extreme of the worker/surplus binary but is also understood
within the capitalist political economy as constituting, or at least including,
a state of being irremediably ill or unwell. In this sense, it is a total
ideological reduction of the subject into a valuation of what role they are
certified as “capable” to adopt under capitalism. Far from being left as an
abstract category, the state, including the constituent social-reproductive
apparatuses upholding it, has developed over time an array of tools to
certify the exact boundaries of what qualifies an individual as “surplus.”
For the surplus, this regime of biocertification shapes both how the state
interacts with them and the boundaries of their participation in social life. In
Fantasies of Identification, Ellen Samuels analyzes how certain forms of
state assistance, resource allocation, or support are often understood within
the popular imaginary as a “kind of currency.” These benefits are gatekept
by abstract bureaucratic systems of eligibility predicated on the verifiability
of someone’s biological state and identity. As such, Samuels argues, the role
of biocertification, namely the process of assuring that only “legitimate”
claimants receive this “currency”-in-kind, is reinscribed with a simulated
social “banking function,” reinforcing the idea that the process of
biocertification itself is an efficient means of allocating economic resources.
Biocertification is assumed to be a necessary gatekeeping mechanism or
checkpoint to prevent the “wasting” of resources on fakers, cheats,
imposters, and malingerers: “invoking both a model of scarcity, in which
 resources must be reserved for those who truly deserve them, and a distrust
of self-identification, in which statements of identity are automatically
suspect unless and until validated by an outside authority.”14
     The generosity of these currencies-in-kind is often extraordinarily
overstated in the social-reproductive imaginary. Cultural perceptions dictate
a picture of disability, illness, and marginalization which is not reflective of
the material “gains” that come as a result of being biocertified for social
welfare supports like the United States’ Social Security Disability Insurance
(SSDI) or Medicare/Medicaid. This is what Samuels describes as a
tendency to commonly perceive “these [eligible] identities as lucrative
commodities.” The boundaries and borders of qualification are guarded by a
combined medical-legal authority and rest on the understanding that
identities are readily measurable, verifiable, and fixed, ascribing meaning to
biological observation and institutions of authority which seek to
standardize the line between social citizenship and exclusion.
     This constructed preference for standardization and biocertification
arises out of the imbrication of health and capital. If the economy of health
is to be bled for excess profit, then the fundamentally inefficient process of
facilitating our mutual survival must be made to be efficient. The modern
welfare state measures and quantifies metrics of individual health against a
picture of the individual’s economic resources and labor power in order to
restrict the administration of aid. To determine eligibility for SSDI in the
United States, for example, the Social Security Administration (SSA) “uses
formulas and charts to transform bodily conditions into percentages of
ability.” Physical conditions of the body and its organs are clinically
evaluated to determine their relative distance or deviance from an abstract
ideal normal body (worker). To the SSA, all impairments, symptoms,
circumstances, and conditions are of equal value and attention; all health is
equally neutral. This is because the severity of illness, impairment, or
disability is not actually the metric the SSA uses to determine eligibility.
The crucial axis is instead the individual’s relationship to work. What
emerges from these phenomena is a shadow biocertification regime that
hides in plain sight as a means test to ward off would-be “waste, fraud, and
abuse.” Labor power is equated to bodily state, and health is measured
through this contradictory lens.15
     To the SSA, illness is only relevant in relation to whether and to what
degree it impacts a person’s capacity to work. As Rosemarie Garland
 Thompson argues, this presumes that ill health, disability, and impairment
are located only in the body and not also in the broader social, political, and
geographical context that comprises the individual’s social determinants of
health. Impairments and disabilities are reduced to numbers on a page: “On
one scale, for example, limb amputation translates as a 70% reduction in
ability to work, while amputation of the little finger at the distal joint
reduces the capacity for labor by a single percentage point.” Garland
Thompson’s critique of the disability eligibility schema in the US questions
the ability of the state to meaningfully measure such complex and dynamic
situations as a person’s health and worth using a precise “mathematical
relation.” Labor power, social and material conditions, and bodily states are
collapsed into a single metric, measuring all health along a continuum of
relative currency.
     The ideological framing of wage work as a mitigating factor in an
individual’s eligibility for health and welfare benefits attempts to map
economic valuations of life onto regimes of biocertification, as is readily
evident in SSDI determinations. Social Security disability eligibility is a
legal process of decertifying a body for work, not the certification of a body
for any type of qualifying disability or impairment demonstrating need for
care and additional social supports. These notions have become replicated
in social security and social insurance programs internationally. Countless
states limit or adjust their benefits dependent on the amount of productive
labor the individual has already participated in during their life. This has
become particularly prevalent alongside the spread of social insurance
privatization schemes by international financial firms, as discussed at length
in BORDER.
     The authority of medical opinion is widely used as a means to measure
the truth of a body’s impairment and certify to the state’s satisfaction that
the benefit applicant is truly biologically incapable for work, through “no
fault of their own.” This arguably subjective perspective of medical
authority is treated as if it is a visible and clearly quantifiable fact. The state
relies upon the signifier of medical authority as a means of depersonalizing
and depoliticizing the biocertification process writ large. Relying on
claimed scientific or medical frameworks, biocertification schemes seek to
identify and sort bodies, placing each within the context of their correct
category, which is reflective of the intersections of their race, gender,
citizenship, wealth, or ability, as a means of validating the social truth of a
 person’s identity. This framework assumes that a person’s biological
identity can in fact be scientifically measured, rendering their ultimate
categorization or eligibility as if depoliticized—a procedural, objective,
binary decision. An individual’s material conditions or identity cannot be
understood as in any way fluid or abstract under this biocertification
preference. Existing outside of certification means categoric exclusion.
    Biocertification regimes assume that validating characteristics are
readily obvious or apparent, falling squarely in the category of “common
sense” generalizations, meaningful or not, about various observed metrics.
Despite little scientific basis, strategies of biocertification are treated as fact
and reinscribed through law and policy, leveraging medical authority to
consolidate the power of the state to determine life chances—who lives and
who dies.16 Importantly, none of this is to say that states of being,
“conditions,” ailments, and so on do not exist. Far from it. Instead, it is to
say that the intersection of those conditions of health—or simply of being,
of states of existence—have become of significant use to capital in its
demarcation of ontological boundaries within society and the resulting
distribution of resources. Resisting biocertification does not mean resisting
“diagnosis” or identification. It means resisting the leveraging of these
certifications by capital and the state.
    This impact on an individual’s life chances through the intersection of
biocertification, public policy, and moralizing norms can be quickly
ascertained through an analysis of who and what the state excludes from its
policies. Dean Spade writes of one profound example in his book Normal
Life: Administrative Violence, Critical Trans Politics, and the Limits of the
Law:
   Proof of having undergone gender-confirming health care, especially surgery, is required by
   the majority of ID-issuing agencies in the United States … However, the majority of private
   health insurers and state Medicaid programs have rules excluding this care from coverage,
   which means that those who cannot pay for this care out-of-pocket probably cannot get it
   and thus cannot change the gender on their IDs… . For most trans people, these rules make
   getting correct ID nearly impossible. Not having appropriate identification creates
   difficulties and dangers when dealing with employers or the police and other state agents,
   trying to travel, attempting to cash checks … The most marginalized trans people experience
   more extreme vulnerability, in part because more aspects of their lives are directly controlled
   by legal and administrative systems of domination.17

    The self-administered authority and expertise of the medical profession
has been used as a fantastical ruse for the validation and verification of the
 various methods used to sort populations according to perceived biological
difference. You can see the traces of the modern systems of evaluation in
early policy regarding the state’s role in care for people disabled by injuries
of war. In 1867, petitioning the government for assistance on behalf of her
disabled husband, Amelia Steward stated: “I present myself to you on
behalf of my Husband who is a cripple for life … If you choose you can
send a man to see to the correctness of my story.” As historian Jim Downs’s
extensive archival research notes, the government was skeptical of
Steward’s testimony because she was Black and was seeking long-term care
admission for both herself and her disabled husband in a state hospital set
up to care for freed people. Though her husband, Lloyd, had clear
documentation of his disability, the state did opt to send several rounds of
medical and bureaucratic representatives to certify the veracity of Steward’s
story—an administrative burden put in place to help alleviate demand that
outstripped state hospital resources. This scenario is one that still plays out
for people on welfare everywhere who must frequently submit to
evaluations to determine if their claimed need is “still true” and verifiable
under the medical-legal definition of need so as to avoid “waste, fraud, and
abuse” of scarce funds.18
    The idea of disability being a true and biologically verifiable category in
the first place, however, is seemingly never questioned. What basis do we
have to assert disability but consensus from the medical establishment and
from medical professionals while, as a social construct, the guidelines of
what qualifies are as changing and mutable as social conceptions of
disability itself? As Kim Nielsen explains:
   The ever-changing, ever-slippery spectrum of what has constituted disability is almost
   overwhelming. Gender, age, race, marital status, behavior, family politics, the power of
   capital, and embodiments contribute to definitions of disability. The use of disability as an
   analytic tool matters in the story of the United States because it forces us to analyze the
   strengths, weaknesses, and contradictions of American ideals.19

The authority of expertise and the power that medical expertise holds over
the survival of modern disabled people, has roots in racial capitalism’s
corrupt framings, built from the idea that certain people were property and
that the state was only responsible for caring for those deserving of its
artificially limited resources. Engaging with and fighting back against these
 systems of power becomes, for individuals marked as surplus, a never-
ending assault of deliberate austerity at the hands of the state.20
    We reference austerity as “deliberate” here in part because the surplus is
subjected, always, to aspersions over its burdensome nature, its supposed
value drain. But as we have mentioned, the surplus is not in fact the burden
to society it is made out to be by state officials, representatives of financial
capital, and bourgeois knowledge producers alike. The surplus has been in
recent centuries a productive engine of capital accumulation. Thus to be
marked as surplus is also to be marked for extraction.

                                      —

The consequences of these regimes of biocertification are not only austerity
and abandonment. As we will argue throughout Health Communism, the
demarcation of the surplus has become its own set of profitable industries.
The subjection of the surplus populations has become an engine of the
capitalist state. Capital and the state have defined health and formed whole
structures of value and productivity around it. In so doing, the host-body
relationship capital enjoys with health has also fundamentally shaped
capital and the state.
    The surplus populations have become a source of capitalist profit
generation through a process we define as extractive abandonment. Our
conception of extractive abandonment comes from a synthesis of several
ideas, described below, about the relation of the surplus populations to the
political economy and the relationship of the social determinants of health
to capital. Key among these are the late disability rights activist and scholar
Marta Russell’s idea of the “money model of disability” and Ruth Wilson
Gilmore’s concept of “organized abandonment.”
    Marta Russell’s money model of disability theorizes that while the
disabled—the surplus population—are widely regarded as a “drain” on the
economy, in truth over time capital and the state have constructed systems
to reclaim this lost population as a source of financial production. Russell
situates these systems as manifesting through charity fundraising, the
prioritization of care aimed toward the “repair” of disabled people to
become workers, and through policies that grow the private sector through
for-profit private nursing home care paid for by publicly funded, means-
tested state health care programs.
     Russell’s work is significant in moving beyond the two dominant
theories of disability, the social model and the medical model, toward a
materialist analysis of how disability is situated within the broader political
economy.21 Despite, or perhaps because of, this Russell has long been left
out of mainstream disability rights discourse and disability scholarship.
Former collaborator and legal scholar Ravi Malhotra explains Russell’s
omission as owing to her “fully-fledged counter-hegemonic” theory of
disability, her use of Marxist materialist analysis, and her rejection of
arguments about culture and identity in favor of an approach instead
centering the political economy of disability. Malhotra explains, “For too
many … amending the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) or
transforming its case law is seen as the complete answer to the dilemmas
faced by people with disabilities.” This mindset has captured the energies of
the American disability rights movement, who have primarily focused on
rearticulating the symbolic and political landscape of disability through law.
Malhotra ascribes this to a “degeneration” and “dilution” within the
movement from an initial interest in the sociological dynamics of disability
oppression to a defanged struggle for representation and inclusion.22
    As Dean Spade has argued, this is a common theme in many strategies
of mainstream rights-oriented activism. Liberal reformers seek to expand
rights within the framework of the courts, ignoring the fact that the resulting
policies rarely shift the political economy of oppression. Spade notes that in
the case of trans rights, as well as disability rights, attempts to enforce civil
rights protections in the courts have demonstrated disappointing results,
“with courts saying that … exclusion is a legitimate preference on the part
of the employer, landlord, or business owner.”23
    Russell’s approach rejected these notions of incremental reform through
legal representation at a time when the strategy was being widely adopted
by liberal organizations and activists, providing a profoundly different basis
for liberatory disability politics than the mainstream disability rights
movement or the budding academic discipline of disability studies. Russell
wrote critically of these self-restrained reform efforts during a period of
their ascendancy, while at the same time organizing with disability rights
groups ADAPT and Not Dead Yet against the rapid growth of the nursing
home and rehabilitation industries. It is likely for these reasons that
Russell’s work has been largely excluded from dominant scholarship
around disability.
     To Russell, “people with disabilities function as canaries in the coal
mine,” offering a picture of the treatment able-bodied workers should
expect to experience in their lifetimes if American capitalism was allowed
to continue. Russell argued that in a society organized around the primary
goal of ensuring maximum extraction and profitability in all relations, little
leeway is given for the inclusion of people with bodies which do not
conform to normative standards of productivity required of workers in the
market. Instead, people are passed through a system of social assistance in
which class hierarchies and capitalist values of human productivity,
meaning, and worth are endemic to the way resources are allocated, placing
higher priority on those who have demonstrated their worth through the
valorization of their commitment to “the American work ethic.” The
commodification of disablement, as identified in Russell’s money model,
therefore presented an opportunity to reclaim disabled people to “be made
of use to the economic order” through a mixture of public and private funds
continuously circulating throughout the economy, creating wealth from the
exploitation of these “unproductive” non-laborers.24
    Under the money model of disability “the disabled human being is a
commodity around which social policies are created or rejected based on
their market value.” Russell argued that this constituted much more than
simply profiting from the provision of medical care to the disabled. For
Russell, the money model is presented as a corporate “solution” to the
problem of disablement, predicated on the primary assumption that
“Disabled people are ‘worth’ more to the Gross Domestic Product when we
occupy a ‘bed’ instead of a home … The ‘final solution’—corporate
dominion over disability policy—measures a person’s ‘worth’ by its dollar
value to the economy.” The money model of disability identifies what is in
essence a “cure” for the existence of unproductive bodies under capitalism.
    To support her model, Russell pointed to how nursing home residents
are counted as assets in Wall Street evaluations of nursing home
corporations, which are assigned a valuation in anticipated annual revenue
per person:
   To maximize profit, [nursing homes] cut corners in quality of care and keep worker pay low
   to show their owners and investors as high a return as possible on their money … Corporate
   managers and owners reap six-digit salaries and bonuses, while workers, paid below a living
   wage, are given more tasks than they can physically, emotionally, or safely handle.
 The economic regime of warehoused care exploits not only the labor of
those who provide care, it exploits the bodies of those who need care,
transforming them from people into commodities.25
    The dynamics Russell identified have only continued to expand and
accelerate since her death in 2013. Body by body, nursing homes have
billed themselves as sound investments, attracting increasing amounts of
capital from rapacious private equity firms looking to strip these already
bare operations of any additional surplus value.
    As Russell theorized, this market-driven money model of disability and
elder care was only made possible through the mechanism of federal
financing. Rather than pay benefits directly to recipients to help them live
or age safely at home, Medicaid has a preference-by-design for institutional
care, which steers many into congregant facilities and nursing homes. Legal
scholar Sidney D. Watson explains that because “state Medicaid programs
must cover nursing home care while most home and community-based
services are optional,” in practice Medicaid is the only means by which
many can secure access to personal care services.26 Russell argued that
funding mechanisms like these demonstrate that social policies are designed
not toward the anticipated benefit to the targeted population, but instead to
create pathways, or capacities, to generate market value through the
investment of public funds.27
    The money model of disability therefore provides a useful metric to
understand why social welfare policies are instituted with such austerity.
The money model does not provide a political theory or process, but instead
offers a framework to understand this evolution of the politics of care. It
functions not unlike Mariame Kaba’s theory of abolitionist praxis, igniting
“other questions capable of meaningful and transformative pathways.”28
Through the money model of disability we can understand the warehousing,
surveillance, treatment, management, and diagnosis of difference as an
enormous sector of our economy, circulating trillions of dollars through
global markets each year.
    Yet few people have meaningful access to the support they need to
facilitate their survival, and the few options that are readily available are
often stigmatized and come at the expense of the best interests, freedom,
rights, or needs of the recipient. The ever-growing industry of private care,
nursing homes, assisted living centers, psychiatric hospitals, boarding and
 halfway houses, rehabilitation facilities, and long-term treatment centers
reflects a complex web of profit extraction designed to prioritize economic
interests and reclaim commodified bodies as avenues for profit. Rather than
support disabled people directly in their homes and their communities,
welfare systems have been designed as mechanisms for public money to
pass into private companies seeking to apply economies of scale and
generate revenue from mass market care. The question then becomes, why
does the money model exist, and why are these systems designed this way?
     Ruth Wilson Gilmore identifies similar logics within state carceral
policies to those outlined in Russell’s money model of disability,
demonstrating that states, limited by federal restrictions on deficit spending,
have used complex bond schemes to generate cause for economic
investment in the construction of new prisons and jails. These prisons and
jails are overwhelmingly constructed in and around communities with high
numbers of surplus reserve-army laborers and surplus land, both of which
can then be reclaimed for profit. These preferences, as Wilson Gilmore
shows, led to the rapid expansion of the prison system in California in the
1990s and corresponding expansions to the criminal legal code, helping fuel
the rise in mass incarceration. Wilson Gilmore identifies these as the state’s
process of “organized abandonment.” Organized abandonment describes
how the state constructs itself through its capacity to sort and separate the
surplus populations, marking some for reclamation and others for slow
death.
     The money flowing through these systems of “care” (in Russell’s case)
and warehousing (for both Russell and Wilson Gilmore) has become a vital
source of revenue for the capitalist economy, and for the subnational
governments that serve as their host. The state’s power, responsibility, and
purpose become defined by the ways it counts, sorts, organizes, and
disorganizes both its surplus labor power and its surplus populations—
creating jobs, whole industries, and diversified revenue streams from these
non-workers who capital putatively no longer wants. As Wilson Gilmore
puts it, “The state makes things, but is also a product of what’s made and
destroyed.”29
     In this way, Wilson Gilmore theorizes racism as a relational process of
statecraft. Organized abandonment by the state is not just a process, but a
capacity: a means by which the state can shape both its power and its
structure. As Wilson Gilmore explains:
    Racism, specifically, is the state-sanctioned or extralegal production and exploitation of
   group-differentiated vulnerability to premature death … The state’s power to organize these
   various factors of production, or enable them to be disorganized or abandoned outright, is …
   based in relationships that also change over time and sometimes become so persistently
   challenged … that the entire character of the state eventually changes as well.30

    We argue that similarly, how the state manages the creation and
destruction of health is not a representation or material manifestation of its
power, but a means by which the state justifies a capacity to create power
through the setting in motion of political-economic conditions.
    The methods and tools of population-level biopower are different from
the disciplinary tools of the state, though there are inherent carceral and
eugenic connections between the two. The height of disciplinary power is
easily visible, for example, in state executions. But the population-level
power of fiscal control is much more subtle and difficult to measure. It
comprises a series of interwoven and contingent phenomena, which is to
say, aleatoric and discursive social bio-political determinants of health
chaotically intersecting and interweaving at the various junctions of race,
ability, gender, and geographic locale. Extractive abandonment is the way in
which a state constructs itself and its political economy through the
optimization of the population at a demographic level. Decades of policy
entrepreneurship and a preference for decentralized, gamified funding
schemes have led to a system in which the high cost of care is, in truth, a
public subsidy of the private health sector and all the other industries which
intersect with the operations of the health sector. This dynamic, which has
been inscribed into the superstructure of American capitalism through fiscal
federalism, has spread throughout the world, as the principles of society-
building through extractive abandonment have been introduced into other
capitalist political host economies.
    Profit lives in the interstitial spaces between bodies, in the counting of
bodies, in the measuring of bodies, in the creation and destruction of bodies,
in every locus where capitalism touches illness, disease, disability, and
death. This relation, in and of itself, is not intent to harm; instead, it is the
capacity to levy harm at the population level, as driven by clearly defined
socially constructed parameters of race, ability, health, and class. Public
money guarantees a fixed amount per body, leaving public and private
entities (long-term care and nursing home corporations, prisons, jails) to
find or create the opportunity for growth and revenue. This totality of
 motivations and relations, defining the intersection and incorporation of
health with capital, is what we have elected to call extractive abandonment.
In a political economy built on systems of extractive abandonment, the state
exists to facilitate a capacity for profit, balanced always against the amount
of extractable capital or health of the individual subject.
    We argue that, at the intersection of these forces, there exists a core
relation of health to capitalism called extractive abandonment—that is, the
means by which the state constructs “health” culturally, politically, and
institutionally. And in the process of constructing, destroying, and
reconstructing health, the state itself is made.
                             OceanofPDF.com
                                        WASTE

   Death is indeed different from most consumer events, and its avoidance different from most
   commodities … But people have been dying for as long as they have been living; and where
   life and death are concerned we are all consumers.
                                                                        —Thomas Schelling1

   While politics might seem like the art of collecting votes or co-sponsors for a piece of
   legislation, one exerts far greater power by determining what is up for debate and what isn’t
   —and, perhaps even more importantly, by deciding the criteria by which policy proposals
   are judged.
                                                                               —Philip Rocco2

Once marked as surplus you are regarded as waste. The history of social
welfare systems is marked by battles over this essential element: what the
surplus populations “deserve.” In what ways are their lives social burdens,
and what is to be done to empirically separate the “deserving” (a burden in
society’s interest to take on) from the “undeserving” (an irredeemable
burden)?
    Waste—surplus populations—are policed and certified by capitalist
states to demarcate the boundary of who is an acceptable member of the
body politic, with all who fall outside of this normative frame labeled as
burden. First and foremost, as eugenic burden: demographic threat, threat of
disruption to the social order, reproductive threat, bloodline threat, “three
generations of imbeciles,” etc. Second, as burden of public debt: that
protecting the health of the most vulnerable few will lead to the
immiseration of the many, a demographic threat managed by the appeal that
we can and should only “take care of our own,” which itself constructs the
“we.”
    This conjoined eugenic and debt burden framework is visible across the
modern period and forms the tacit political philosophy of capitalism.
      This eugenic and debt burden casts a long shadow over centuries of
reform movements. It is both the first line of defense for stewards of power
intent on resisting change and a crucial vulnerability too often insufficiently
rebuked by reformers. A project that politically and philosophically centers
the surplus populations within the political economy must therefore by
necessity reject the framework of the surplus as eugenic and debt burden.
So, too, should any project of socialized medicine or redistributive health
justice. Reformism—merely seeking alterations, tinkering around the edges
—inherently preserves the violence of capitalism. This formulation of the
surplus populations as waste, wasting, malingering, unde-serving, and
otherwise, is based on an intrinsically capitalist logic that must be dispensed
with. Any left political projects that rely on the logic of waste—that are
structured around scarcity, lack, capital accumulation, certification,
citizenship, property, or carcerality—are doomed to fail. To accept the
argument that certain populations are irredeemable eugenic or debt burdens
is to perpetuate the very political philosophy of capitalism.
     It is for this reason that we advance our frame for pressing revolutionary
social demands around a refutation of this joined eugenic and debt burden.
Arguments that take as a prerequisite that capital and finance exist as they
are, and must at most be rebalanced, ignore the revolutionary potential of
recognizing the economic system as only a transitory social order for the
allocation and distribution of resources and activities. What is latent in
welfare systems has revolutionary potential if we can imagine the
reformation of the political economy around the social determinants of
health. We will not produce any form of genuine liberation if we think of
welfare as only a safety net or a temporary protection as we await a
revolution-kept-theoretical. Instead, the question is: what are the social and
material needs of all? How can we allocate resources and activity in order
to meet those needs, including and in particular the needs of those seen as
the far “edge cases” of the system? The only way to spur genuine liberation
is to assure care even for the most vulnerable, those at the most extreme
margins. To borrow from Black feminist thought, we mean to bring the
margins to the middle.
     Struggles for and against socialized medicine over the last two centuries
illustrate the urgency of this task. Where movements to resist socialized
medicine have appeared among industry groups and professional
stakeholders, a profound language of burden appears. This language has
 become so naturalized that even those advancing platforms on national
health insurance have accepted the framing to varying degrees. We contend
that a socialized medicine that fully rejects the eugenic ideology of
“deservingness” for treatment and rejects the public debt ideology of care as
economic burden must be understood as fundamentally threatening to the
existence of capitalism. We write to say what few others have claimed: the
panicking industrialists of the early twentieth century were correct in their
hysterics. The severing of health from capital will mark the end of
capitalism.

                                      —

The history of the suppression of socialized medicine in the United States
should be understood as nothing less than having advanced a renaissance of
capitalist violence in the guise of a polite collaboration of industry and state
—a public-private partnership of pure immiseration.
    Welfare allocation imagined as a matter of economic tinkering always
redounds to this frame: what will be the cost of care? Is that cost
worthwhile to society? Is that cost worthwhile politically? This caustic,
statistical valuation of life is everywhere. It is in the words of our enemies
when they propose, vapidly and to great acclaim, that in order to “control
costs” to the “taxpayer” they will support a program to root out “waste,
fraud, and abuse” in welfare systems.
    Welfare systems are imagined in capitalist social reproduction as the
ultimate contradiction: it is resolutely claimed that our social supports
unfailingly capture and maintain the poor, the ill, and the disabled;
simultaneously, the stories of those individuals and populations our social
supports fail to capture are simply tragedy, an aberration, the result of a
personal flaw, expected to be borne by individuated risk. To the extent that
welfare is insufficient, capitalism dreams that welfare could perfectly
capture the needs of the surplus populations if it weren’t for the debt
burdens—lies, cheats, the malingering poor, fraudsters. Or the eugenic
burdens: those so beyond help that their medical needs become a drag on
the public coffers. Those unworthy of help because their inability to
“advance their station” is simply their own, a genetically predestined drag
on society, whose death and immiseration is just tragic luck, a failure so
 inevitable that when death comes it can only be remarked that their death
was “pulled from the future,” always coming but just slightly too soon.
    Capturing all the politesse of rigorous post-eugenic social science, one
contemporary doctoral thesis in management states, “Medicaid fraud and
abuse … [is] a pervasive problem that negatively affects the wellbeing of
beneficiaries and undermines the integrity of U.S. social and financial
structures.” This, from 2013, may as well have been Malthus himself. “The
fact that nearly three millions are collected annually for the poor and yet
their distresses are not removed is the subject of continual astonishment,”
Malthus wrote. “The great and radical defect of all systems of the kind [is]
that of tending to increase population without increasing means for its
support, and thus to depress the condition of those that are not supported …
and, consequently, to create more poor.”3 We see this language throughout
the discourse on welfare as these systems struggle into being. James Philips
Kay, in 1832, fulminating over proposals to extend early welfare to
occupied colonial Ireland: “We nevertheless tremble at the thought of
applying unmodified poor laws to Ireland … It would ultimately render
every individual dependent on the State, and change Ireland into a vast
infirmary, divided into as many wards as there are parishes, whose
endowment would swallow up the entire rental of the country.” In 1947,
physician and medical historian George Rosen said of Kay’s project, The
Moral and Physical Condition of the Working Classes Employed in the
Cotton Manufacture in Manchester, that “Permeating this anatomy of social
misery is the bleak gospel of contemporary economic orthodoxy.” This was
no less true in 1947 than it is today.4

                                      —

The first social insurance program in the modern era, despite being a
nightmare of public-private contrivance, was explicitly proposed to stave
off socialist revolt. Otto von Bismarck presented the German social health
insurance system, the first of its kind, as such: “The cure of social ills must
be sought, not exclusively in the repression of Social-Democratic excesses,
but simultaneously in the positive advancement of the working classes.”5
That the state’s role in the maintenance of the health of its population was
first intended to deflect “Social-Democratic excesses” was, however,
quickly lost to the era. The twentieth century is rife with appeals that this or
 that welfare system is an onboarding mechanism to socialism, rather than a
concession of the ruling class to stave off popular revolt. As articulated by
Ronald Reagan in his recording for the Women’s Auxiliary of the American
Medical Association, “One of the traditional methods of imposing statism
or socialism on a people has been by way of medicine.”6 Despite a long
history of socialized medicine being decried by reactionary forces as a
threat portending the end of capitalism, the history of this struggle shows
that this connection has rarely been openly embraced by reformers. For too
long, socialized medicine has been billed as a humane concession to be
made by the capitalist state, while those in power have recognized it as the
threat it is.
    In the United States, the earliest proposal for a national health insurance
program was brought in 1900 by the Socialist Party, but not as a route to a
socialist or communist state. Instead, American socialists appear to have
viewed a social health insurance program as a stopgap method protecting
the working classes from degrees of immiseration. Pauline Newman,
socialist trade unionist of the International Ladies’ Garment Workers’
Union, recalled that at the time the Socialist Party felt the working class
“didn’t want to wait that long before socialism would come and make all
the changes—they wanted something now.”
    This places the early history of socialist movements’ relationship to
social insurance and health insurance in an interesting position: while the
struggle to liberate health from capital was largely regarded as fully
commensurate with a socialist program, health remained a reformist goal
that was not necessarily leveraged for its revolutionary potential. That is,
health justice was regarded as a palliative to capitalism’s ills but not
necessarily the path to end them—a reform that could never become
revolution. Isaac Rubinow identifies this tendency in the German labor
movement, writing in 1913 that “socialists of Germany … for many years
were not only indifferent, but actually antagonistic to the whole structure of
social insurance. But as the particular object of Bismarck failed … the
socialists in Germany and elsewhere have not only ceased to be antagonistic
to social insurance but have included its extension in their program.”7 (This,
we will note, bears some resemblance to today: there is a line of thought
within some anti-capitalist discourse that regards health as an ancillary
movement to the primary goal of class and worker struggle, and to the
extent health justice is mobilized toward, it is viewed as a reasonable,
 attainable goal on the path to—but not meaningfully advancing—
revolution. We argue instead that the social production of health and ability
are inextricably linked to the capitalist political economy, and therefore the
abolition of health from capital is under-theorized as a vulnerable site of
attack.)
    Rubinow also presents us with what is widely understood by the
capitalist class and those otherwise resisting socialized medicine (or at this
stage, simply socializing medical expense, or socializing what we would
call “health finance”) as the central, fiscal argument against national health
insurance. “On the other hand this very fact,” Rubinow writes of German
socialists’ slow adoption of social insurance reforms, “is often mentioned
by antagonists of accident compensation in support of their contention that
compensation is a useless waste of money, since it is powerless to bring
about social peace.”
    In other words, the degree of social benefit conferred by socializing
aspects of risk, or at least socializing the financing or compensation for risk
or injury, is here already understood to be a question of what we might
today call a cost-benefit analysis. In this instance, an argument clearly
existed that took the macroeconomic claims of the capitalist class at face
value. Social supports were an undue burden on the public coffers in that
they would come at some degree of perceived expense and only modestly
ameliorate the living and working conditions of the poor. This perhaps
shows the limitations of imagining socialized medicine as only a mollifying
measure to reduce the burden of public immiseration by degrees. In failing
to truly refute the eugenic and debt framework, we can understand public
debate around welfare systems as offering only differing shades of
entrenched capitalist economic orthodoxy.

                                      —

One of the most characteristic industry stakeholder figures of the crusade
against socialized medicine in the early twentieth-century United States was
Frederick Ludwig Hoffman of Prudential Insurance Company. His tactics
through the 1910s to protect the capitalist class from the specter of
socialized medicine are notable for how literally he adopted the merger of
eugenic and public debt appeals.
    Hoffman was an avowed race scientist and eugenicist, rising to
prominence as a result of his 1896 study Race Traits and Tendencies of the
American Negro, in which he wrote:
   Given the same conditions of life for two races, the one of Aryan descent will prove the
   superior, solely on account of its ancient inheritance of virtue and … supremacy. Easy
   conditions of life and a liberal charity are among the most destructive influences affecting
   the lower races; since by such methods the weak and incapable are permitted to increase and
   multiply, while the struggle of the more able is increased in severity.8

    Hoffman’s thorough statistical approach to race science is credited with
securing his appointment as a statistician at Prudential (and eventually its
vice president). His intellectual credentials were such that by 1918 he was
invited to be an advisor to the exploratory health insurance commissions of
Connecticut, Illinois, and Wisconsin, often sought out as a consultant on the
topic of health and social insurance systems, despite his conflict of interest
as an executive at a major insurance company.9
    Some decades later, Hoffman’s eugenic ideology appeared unchanged;
he wrote in his 1928 book Some Problems of Longevity that “it requires no
argument to support the theory that the insane or mentally deficient should
not produce offspring.”10 In the same volume, Hoffman expounds:
   The negro has never wanted to face the truth of the situation but continues to blame the
   white population for a condition which is largely inherent in racial predisposition. It is
   something very considerably to the credit of the whites that in their medical and hospital
   practices everywhere the negro should receive the same painstaking attention that is
   extended to the whites.11

His commitment to a eugenic philosophy would play out in his role as a
crusader against socialized medicine. Apart from a clear ideological
commitment to the principles of both eugenic “race-preservation” and the
maintenance of the capitalist political economy, Hoffman’s beliefs are
notable for matching the exact archetype later spun by industry groups and
lobbyists as reasons to fear socialized medicine. It should come as no
surprise that the health-capitalist system Hoffman and others were fighting
to maintain was inherently and inseparably bound to taxonomies of race,
ability, and gender, as it remains today.
    Hoffman lobbied extensively against socialized medicine, dedicating
himself to employing his professional credentials as a statistician in
developing an economic and moral argument to prove its danger to the
 higher classes. Among these were surveys of early European welfare
systems, conducted to prove that their implementation collectively
increased poverty and immiseration. While Germany’s early health
insurance program may have been intended by Bismarck to stymie socialist
revolt, Hoffman asserted that in its purported failure it had accomplished
the opposite. As Hoffman stated in a 1918 speech to the Association of Life
Insurance Presidents: “The spirit of socialism in Germany was, however,
not diminished, but to the contrary strongly accentuated by social insurance,
which did not remove the true and underlying causes of social unrest. In
1884, when the social insurance system came into existence, the Socialistic
vote was 550,000. In 1912 … the vote was 4,250,000!”12
    Whether Hoffman believed this rationale or merely saw it as a
convenient statistical figure to draw from, it is one of few appeals against
socialized medicine that attempts to prove (in its way) a meaningful
connection between the implementation of national health insurance
programs and an increased demand to socialize the political economy. In
this area alone, we agree with Hoffmann: socialized medicine has a
profound capacity to change what individuals demand from the state and
whom it ultimately serves.
    Though far from unique, Hoffman was characteristic in his mobilization
of statistical evidence as a weapon against threats to the private insurance
industry. One of his main arguments to demonstrate how Germany’s
insurance system had fallen prey to a eugenic and debt burden was to point
to statistical analyses of “malingering” (faking illness to avoid work or
responsibility; a concept also discussed in LABOR), particularly by victims
of industrial accidents. Denouncing “the evils of unrestricted free choice of
physicians” in Germany, Hoffman accused the medical profession of
betraying the capitalist class:
   It is frankly conceded that the members of the fund seek physicians who are willing to
   prostitute their calling for the purposes of falsifying certificates on the basis of which sick
   support, medicines, and even articles of non-medical value can be secured… . Further
   investigations disclosed … [only 46.3 percent of cases of worker illness] as really entitled to
   sick pay and medical treatment, the remainder being obviously malingerers.13

    In this period, such quantitative demonstrations of the burdensome
nature of the surplus became the subject of considerable effort for industry.
Statisticians like Hoffman fulfilled a crucial role of knowledge production
 for the established order, working to demonstrate that a material demand of
the working class and the surplus populations could be explained away as a
kind of statistical mirage, putatively an extravagance not supported by
Hoffman’s “facts.” This form of ideological knowledge production should
be familiar to anyone who has witnessed claims about the unwarranted
expense of social welfare programs, or who has been assured that a clearly
unsafe workplace was safe.
    In the late 1910s, industrialist groups set up committees to conduct
statistical analyses of health insurance and create “plans of how to deal by
legislation or otherwise with the growing sentiment in favor of an organized
method by which to take care of sick persons who cannot take care of
themselves” as well as to study the prominence of malingering. The
National Industrial Conference Board’s committee on malingering
(officially, its committee on “worker absenteeism”) eventually reported that
“estimates heretofore accepted of time lost on account of sickness are
considerably higher than would seem to be warranted by the facts.” The
conclusions of industry group Associated Manufacturers and Merchants
were similar. After a study they financed determined that only 3.2 percent
of worker absences were due to illness, their trade journal The Monitor
began referring to health insurance as promoting “scientific loafing,”
warning that any health insurance reform would mean “any worker in
YOUR plant may be seized with cramps in the stomach and for twenty-six
(26) weeks thereafter he will draw two-thirds of his pay as he comfortably
sucks on his pipe and reads the newspapers at home.”14
    The contradictions in this articulation of the worker/surplus division are
many, and for this reason we will revisit them further in LABOR. But this
early rhetorical conflict is also instructive in its demonstration of the
eugenic and debt burden framework—a framework so foundational to civic
thought under capitalism that assertions like the above are rarely effectively
countered. We call this framework foundational in part because when
reformers have attempted to refute such claims, too often they have done so
by uncritically accepting their underlying assumptions.
    Historian Beatrix Hoffman points to Lillian Wald, a nurse and
settlement house worker, as one of the only reformers to attempt to
meaningfully push back on the very premise of industry claims on the
prevalence of malingering. Wald testified in 1917 that “the real malingering
is the ‘malingering of health’ rather than the malingering of sickness, that
 is, the fear of stopping work to secure … needed medical attention when the
loss of even a week’s wages might mean destitution.”15 Elaborating on the
uniqueness of Wald’s testimony in the historical record, Hoffman writes:
   Few were as outspoken as [Wald] in her criticism of the malingering argument, or as explicit
   as hospital administrator John Lapp, who contended that “[t]he extent of malingering is
   exaggerated for political effect.” Instead, the supporters of health insurance emphasized how
   their plan, by keeping payments low and providing expert supervision, would efficiently
   curtail the inherent and inevitable tendency of workers to malinger.

In other words, reformers phrased their plans for expanded social welfare as
the better management of “malingering,” rather than refuting the logic of
malingering all together.
    That this tremendous strategic error was not only perpetrated among
reformers of the time but persists today speaks to the unfortunate social-
reproductive power of the eugenic and debt burden frame. Extracting health
from capital must be inherently revolutionary and destabilizing; the din of
respectability, compromise, “further exploratory study,” the promise of less
“malingering,” and statistical formulations are the death knell of
movements.

                                               —

Innumerable histories have attempted to capture the defeat of socialized
medicine in the United States via its portrayal as a part of the larger “red
menace” of communism. These histories accurately portray this struggle as
a perennial repetition of similar, if rote, red-baiting tropes. Throughout the
twentieth century, the use of these tropes by industry and professional
organizations was effective in discrediting attempts to comprehensively
reform the health finance system.
    These histories display a clear lineage of class solidarity among industry
groups and private interests that is only infrequently matched by affirmative
appeals for socialized medicine on the part of reform groups. “Reform” is
again a relevant word here: to the extent that groups agitating for changes to
the healthcare system were entertained in mainstream US political discourse
of the early twentieth century, they were careful to resist even an
association with communism and the revolutionary potential of socializing
health.
     Throughout the early twentieth century, an ascendant and emboldened
American Medical Association (AMA), the professional lobbying apparatus
of physicians, became the public face of a wide range of industry groups
aligned in (ruling) class solidarity to prevent any incursion on the capitalist
health market. Physicians wielded their social role and professional
credulity to create sophisticated, decentralized campaigns to curtail the
passage of any imaginable health reform. Characteristic of this were the
AMA’s activities in the elections of 1950. The AMA took advantage of the
wide national distribution of their members to encourage physicians to
lobby their local communities and their patients to vote against any
candidates who had supported President Truman’s health insurance
proposals of 1948. Physicians in Pennsylvania created what they called a
“Healing Arts” committee, which mailed 200,000 letters to patients warning
that health reforms constituted “evil forces creeping into this country.” In
Florida, physicians mobilized against the candidacy of incumbent senator
Claude Pepper, who they deemed an “outstanding advocate of ‘socialized
medicine’ and ‘the welfare state,’” promising that “in eliminating Pepper
from Congress, the first great battle against Socialism in America will have
been won.” For good measure, they ran advertisements featuring a photo of
Pepper with Paul Robeson, a Black member of the Communist Party, while
the businessman Edward Ball raised funds to “collect every photo of Pepper
with African Americans, [monitor] his ‘every statement on civil rights’ and
on the need for the United States to be more tolerant of the Soviet Union,”
according to sociologist Jill Quadagno. Pepper and several other senators
lost their elections.16
    It is important to note that we raise the actions of the AMA here as an
example of industry groups engaging collectively in what we might identify
as national or mass “mobilization.” This history is often recounted to
highlight physician groups as the single most important coalition against
socialized medicine in the twentieth century. Instead, it is important to note
that the strength of the AMA’s public lobbying position was predicated on
the support of other business and professional organizations aligned with
the AMA’s class interests. (Class solidarity is not only an act observed by
the subjected.) The actions of physicians’ groups in the US in the twentieth
century therefore fit a pattern of resistance to reforms whose ultimate
success depended on their ability to gather the support of other industry
 groups, and that coalition’s ability to ultimately leverage the state to
privilege their interests.
    This can to some degree explain variance in outcomes of prominent
social welfare systems of the early twentieth century. As Vicente Navarro
notes, many of the structural compromises in the formation of the UK’s
National Health Service arose from the fact that Aneurin Bevan, one of its
principal architects, “questioned neither the professionalism and class
interests of the [medical professions] nor the class structure of Great Britain
in 1948.” Navarro contrasts this with the earlier reforms of the USSR,
noting that the first Bolshevik social welfare programs explicitly did
challenge the class position of the medical professions by placing their
activities under social control, leading to an initial revolt and sabotage by
physicians (who at the turn of the century in Russia were almost exclusively
serving the wealthy). Navarro states this history “shows quite clearly that
for the majority of the medical profession, when having to choose between
the defense of its privileges and the Hippocratic oath, the choice is quite
clear.”17
    The AMA and other industry lobbying groups did not stop at resisting
government encroachment on health insurance. The litany of reforms they
resisted in the early twentieth century suggests a well-developed
understanding of the intersections of health and the political economy, and
the many angles from which their vaunted professional sovereignty could
be attacked. This is most clear in organized labor’s attempts, prior to the
passage of Medicare and Medicaid in 1965, to win worker disability
insurance. By 1956, organized labor had dropped most of its efforts toward
a national health insurance program. The labor movement had weathered an
extremely hostile anti-communist political environment, winning some
degree of benefits from industry but leaving significant gaps in what those
benefits did and did not guarantee. As Quadagno writes,
   Disability benefits were a union concern because disabled workers had no government
   benefits until they became eligible for Social Security at age 65. That placed the burden of
   their support on the unions. Some unions negotiated benefits for disabled members in their
   collective bargaining agreements but in return had to make concessions on wage increases
   for working members. Thus the incentive to shift this cost to the government was intense.

    As labor pushed for non-medical state disability benefits, the AMA
asserted that this, too, was a threat to health-capitalism. Just as national
health insurance was understood to precipitate a move toward communism,
 disability benefits were positioned as inevitably leading to further
government involvement in the health industries—creeping socialization.
As described by former member of the Social Security Board Isidore (Ig)
Falk, the AMA opposed these benefits because “the next thing you’d have a
broader disability program and the next thing you’ll be giving medical care
to the disabled.”18
    Rather than embrace communism or stand resolute toward a vision of
national health insurance, labor and reform groups worked to assure they
could not be mistaken for communists, socialists, or even so much as
communist “sympathizers.” Instead, they adopted the logic and rhetoric of
business and industry, including the logic of the eugenic and debt burden. In
1960, the AFL-CIO formed a new physician auxiliary to replace its existing
group, which was seen as discredited by communist influence. By contrast,
the new group “had not been tainted by communist associations.” Its head,
Dr. Caldwell Esselstyn, explained that this new “physicians committee”
wanted to demonstrate that the campaign for national health insurance
included “some perfectly common sense people with their feet on the
ground who were not necessarily involved at that time in banning the bomb
or other things of a far out nature.” This account, coming before even the
passage of Medicare and Medicaid in 1965, perfectly exemplifies the tone
of self-moderation and acceptance of the terms of bourgeois discourse too
often on display in public debates surrounding socialized medicine. After
the United Auto Workers split from the AFL-CIO and founded, post-
Medicare, a Committee for National Health Insurance, this moderation
continued. According to Quadagno, “Wary of criticism that its plan may be
labeled socialized medicine, the [Committee for National Health Insurance]
promised [their proposal would] reorganize the health care system ‘in an
American way’ without taking over hospitals or turning physicians into
government employees.”19
    This self-policing approach only serves to severely curtail the scope of
possibility in political discourse. Moderating a message to please the classes
already aligned with and benefitting from the capitalist system is a tendency
that must be wholly rejected if we are to win health communism.
Movement self-moderation comes in part from understanding health as a
siloed component of the political economy, not a support underlying its
entire structure. To attack that structure is to destabilize capitalism. This is
 why we say that, on this, the right is correct: socialized medicine can bring
communism.

                                     —

What is less present in established histories is an analysis of how the
eugenic and debt burden frame, as mobilized by the capitalist class, was
insufficiently resisted by reformers and revolutionaries in the twentieth-
century United States as well as of the strategic loss the left incurred in
muddling their message to appear reasonable to the social demands of the
ruling class of the day. In the 1910s and 1920s, consternation over the
supposed failures of the German social health insurance system had spread,
abetted by the statistical work and rhetorical pronouncements of anti-
welfare crusaders like Frederick Hoffman. This ideological knowledge
production circulated as social-reproductive proof that the prejudices of
pro-capitalist ideologues were bearing out as correct: provision for the
“least” in society was an undue burden to the capitalist class, the center of
all things moral and productive in society and the most trustworthy with the
voluntary allocation of their charity.
     After the world wars, when the threat of the German state was
supplanted in the American Cold War imaginary with the Soviet Union, this
same tactic was applied to assessments of Soviet social programs. The
Soviet state emerges in this period as paradoxically both an existential
threat portending a challenge to American life under capitalism and a
subject of derision potentially requiring international aid, under the
presumption that Soviet apparatuses of state health and welfare were
profoundly ineffectual. As one analyst put it at the time, “Russia has no
medical Sputnik up its sleeve.”20
     In a 1957 speech to the Pharmaceutical Advertising Clubs and members
of the AMA, Senator Hubert Humphrey, pressing for the United States to
take on the creation of a public-private “new world health leadership,”
proclaimed, “I have seen how communism thrives on misery … Faced as
we are with a new Soviet approach in those areas where the greatest doubt
and misunderstandings as to our way of life exist, we are now, more than
ever, challenged to help the starving and disease-ridden people of the world
to raise themselves up out of their misery.” Humphrey’s stated aim in this
aid was not merely moral or humanitarian but premised on proactively
 maintaining the primacy of capitalism and its growing statistical self-
valuation in the form of gross national product. “There is a growing
awareness,” he continued, “of the fact that disease-ridden populations are
unproductive and therefore a drain upon national economies and upon the
world economy. This in turn becomes a drain on our own economy.”21
    According to medical historian Dominique Tobbell, Humphrey’s speech
prompted the American pharmaceutical company Smith, Kline & French to
send a delegation to the Soviet Union to assess the state’s capacity for drug
manufacturing. While they did not find a real threat to the capitalist
pharmaceutical system, the delegates were alarmed to find that the Soviet
Union possessed a much larger labor pool of physicians and other
biomedical staff than anticipated. Tobbell quotes Merck’s president John T.
Connor as concluding that the “Soviets [planned] to ‘export’ their medical
talent to underdeveloped countries in their effort to ‘sell Communism.’”
Connor recommended that the United States should pursue an essentially
biopolitical-colonial strategy, training more physicians in order to “embark
on a foreign medical aid program in a ‘longevity race’ with the Russians,
raising the life span throughout the world.” (Ironically, as many public
health scholars have pointed out, there is in reality greater positive impact
on “life expectancy” from socialized medical systems than privatized or
capitalist ones.22)
    This profound conflation, a eugenic and demographic panic manifested
via a national contest of colonial supremacy, arrived in time to perpetuate
the burden framework already well established in earlier struggles over the
political economy of health. As the AMA and the insurance industry
lobbies fought disability social insurance and health insurance for the aged
prior to the passage of Medicare, pharmaceutical companies were busy
fighting drug pricing reform. Drug companies marshalled national Cold
War sentiment to sell what was called “the drug story,” an affirmative claim
that pharmaceutical advancement uniquely resulted from the capitalist
political economy and could not be reproduced under communism. Their
self-described goal was to socially reproduce an understanding that under
capitalism pharmaceutical companies had a unique “record of achievement
in protecting health, prolonging life and lowering the costs of illness.”
    Among the results of this “drug story” campaign are striking examples
of the overlap of state and industry agendas. According to Tobbell, one
advertisement from the campaign portrayed the stakes as such: “Who’s
 winning the human race?” This statement, a twist on the ongoing “arms
race” and “space race,” was well positioned to prey on Cold War fears of
Soviet technological and military dominance. The claim that the Soviet
Union’s system of “socialized medicine” debased its people’s collective
health was, by then, a demon decades in the making. The ad touted
American pharmaceutical companies with having developed “75 new drugs
important to modern medicine,” contrasted with the claim that “forty-six
years of Communist rule in Russia has not developed a single new drug of
consequence.”23

                                       —

These joined eugenic and debt burden arguments form the basis for the
majority of attacks on the wisdom and morality of socialized medicine,
extending even to the maintenance and provision of existing welfare
systems. It is no coincidence that the UK’s campaign to exit the European
Union was promoted on a basis of the debt burden for maintaining the
NHS, or that the discourse surrounding Medicare for All in the 2020 US
presidential election cycle focused so exhaustingly on the question of how
such a program was to be “paid for,” an absurd question for a nation that
creates and manages a sovereign currency. Endless revanchist arguments
portend the doom of the US Medicare system on the basis that its coffers,
referred to as its “trust fund,” will soon run dry, despite the entire social and
economic foundation for this argument being built on a convenient fable of
the capitalist class. Just the same, endless debt/eugenic arguments have
persisted across the modern period, whether as capitalist proclamations
toward the further retrenchment of the welfare state, as the inverse shade of
reformist language delimited by a counterrevolutionary restraint on
movement demands, or in the casual politesse of the managers of social
reproduction regarding the current welfare systems, internationally, who
merely poke, prod, and study, and resign themselves that they may yet solve
the puzzle without removing capitalism, one day.
     Just as we must understand the very definition of the “surplus”—those
we deem waste—to center them in our political imaginary, so must we
understand the potential in the political economy as not some abstract end
in itself but as a means for liberation. To invert the political economy, and
reconstruct it around the surplus, is by necessity to invert the relationship
 that currently categorizes all non-normative and surplus identities as
demographic, eugenic threats, and as economic burdens to the public debt.
Malingerers of the world unite.
                           OceanofPDF.com
                                         LABOR

   It is almost dawn when I pour lighter fluid on Mahmoud’s clothes. I notice the man playing
   him is exhausted. I am the penultimate person to set him on fire. There have been hundreds
   before me, traipsing in after mandated ten-minute intervals.
                                                                       —Deepak Unnikrishnan

   In the context of a Keynesian political economy, the life of the national population is set to
   positively correlate with the life of the economy: both must grow for either one to grow …
   The economy becomes divorced from labor; the abandonment of mass segments of the US
   population … is not only social, but, very literally, economic. The economy moves on without
   many of us.
                                                                                —Craig Willse1

A pivotal factor in the rendering of whole segments of society as “waste”
was the construction of the worker/surplus binary. This binary is at the
foundation of the eugenic and debt burden framework, a principle that
rationalizes political notions that not all people are in fact equal in
deserving assistance or support. In the process of constructing the
worker/surplus binary, health and the social value of the surplus populations
were defined first ideologically and then statistically against their perceived
capacity to engage in work. Through a succession of behaviorist policies of
incentivization and population management, the modern state has been built
on an austerity framework which seeks to show just cause for the extractive
abandonment of the surplus population and the warehousing and exclusion
of the surplus population from the body politic, as we will discuss in
MADNESS.
    In capitalist political economies, illness is seen as a drag on
productivity. Frequent or prolonged illness is often seen as disqualifying or
devaluing an individual’s labor power. There is a rush to be over with ill
health and get back to work as quickly as possible. Rest is scarce, and all
treatment under health-capitalism is rationed along class lines. The ways we
 encounter medicine reflect this dynamic: care is designed around billable
encounters, acute care is the most easily accessible, and our cultural
imaginary frames disease as something which is episodic. The provisioning
of medical care and the social determinants of health have been based on a
system of triage that attempts to devote maximum care resources to those
most able to contribute productively to the economy.2
     The pervasive myth of the malingerer—whose infectious dependency
will bring about certain doom—is supported by the alleged eugenic/fiscal
burden threatened if the surplus class were allowed to grow unchecked. The
lie at the foundation of this theory is that if benefits are made too generous,
the temptation for faking illness will be too high, thus defrauding the
“taxpaying citizen” and the state. In this way, the capacity to submit to labor
exploitation—that is, to work—became a prerequisite both for citizenship
and for community membership, largely through laws which sought to
outlaw vagrancy and idleness, laws which redefined structural flaws of the
political economy as behavioral flaws of the individual. Accordingly, the
idea that generosity and material comfort itself could act as a pathogen for
“idleness” (and thus “fraud”) is a way of framing those conditions,
impairments, illnesses, or disabilities that could contribute to an individual’s
inability to work as a contagion in need of a “cure.”3
     Early legal frameworks pathologized the reasons and causes of poverty,
framing changing labor conditions and shifts in class power as not the
symptoms of economic inequality that they were but instead as
scientifically verifiable signs of the impending breakdown of society and a
putative denigration of “the human race.” The legacy of this is still with us
today, as workers’ welfare is pitted against the needs of ill/disabled/non-
working people. Since the early days of the English Poor Laws, the
apparatus of the law has been used to sort the surplus population into
increasingly marginal, verifiable categories. These distinctions, and the
construction of the worker/surplus binary, became seen as necessarily
contingent on clearly delineating who deserved to be a non-worker. Some
typologies of surplus were constructed as “deserving,” in particular those
whose impairment could not be identified as an individual moral or genetic
failing. All others were treated as waste, which under the myth of fiscal
burden reproduces the idea that nonworking or nontraditionally productive
people are a strain on the productive/working/taxpaying community who
are understood as the real sovereign citizens. The worker is told to beware
 of the degenerate influence of the surplus population and to root out those
who would fraudulently claim state or private benefits as surplus; we are
deputized by the state to surveil and judge others’ worthiness for aid.4
    The resulting shape of the worker/surplus binary can be found today in
eligibility requirements for welfare programs, pensions, health insurance
benefits, poor relief, and others.5 Many of the laws and policies that sort
and shape the worker/surplus binary function as a means of investigating
and certifying deservingness based on these criteria, ones that mark labor
capacity as the foremost value of life.6 As such, those on the bottom of the
spectrum of economic productivity have been medicalized and pathologized
to justify the lack of universally available social supports. Capitalism has
defined “health” itself as a capacity to submit oneself to labor.7

                                     —

The contemporary formulation of the worker/surplus binary emerges prior
to capitalism but is so intimately linked to broader changes in the political
economy that it is possible to say that capitalism itself required a
redefinition of health as a labor capacity in order to take shape. We say this
because the legal frameworks that form a definitional basis for the
worker/surplus binary—particularly ideas like work requirements and moral
and demographic requirements for aid—emerged in the centuries
immediately preceding the generally understood inception of capitalism.
    It may come as no surprise that the legal definition of the
worker/surplus binary first emerged after a significant shock to what we
would now call public health: a labor shortage in the United Kingdom
resulting from the mass casualties of the Black Death. The first Statute of
Laborers, passed in 1349, was issued by Edward III’s Parliament in
response to fears of the growing leverage commanded by workers to
demand better wages in a more favorable post-plague labor market. After
years of plague, in which up to a third of the lower class of Britain died, a
crisis of economic and labor power had arisen. In response, Parliament
passed laws requiring workers to cede total control of their labor conditions
to the ruling class and its state representatives.8
    This novel legal framework compelled all able-bodied people below the
age of sixty to work and criminalized all who refused. The statute explicitly
 stated that what we would now call a “work requirement” needed to be
instituted “because a great part of the … workmen and servants has now
died in that pestilence, some, seeing the straights of the masters and the
scarcity of the servants, are not willing to serve unless they receive
excessive wages, and others, rather than through labour to gain their living,
prefer to beg in idleness.” Idleness was made out to be a looming social
threat, posing an existential crisis not just to the ruling class but to the
national body politic.9
     The statute narrowly defined those who deserved to be excluded from
compulsory work as a specific set of groups: those considered to be
legitimately “crippled,” people over the age of sixty, land owners, and
business owners. The point was not just to regulate the non-working poor
but to establish a categorical distinction between the “idle” or “vagrant”
poor and unemployed workers, all of whom were seen as greedily
withholding their labor power from the ruling class.10
     The idle poor were categorized as permanently spoiled, biologically
irredeemable. It was put to question if they did, or should, even retain
membership in the body politic. Some, however—like the unemployed,
holding out for their right to better wages—were considered by the state to
be recapturable assets who could be reintegrated into the existing social
fabric with the same poverty wages as before the plague. For this reason,
the statute not only prohibited idleness but intentionally limited the power
of employed workers by putting a maximum cap on what a worker could be
paid and setting a number of other highly restrictive novel limitations on
worker rights. Under the new law, quitting a job for any reason was illegal.
If a worker was fired, the law granted permission for state officials to assign
them to new work that they were legally unable to refuse. The stakes for
disobeying the work order were raised, and the resulting punishment to the
idle poor, those deemed not sufficiently disabled to “deserve” freedom from
work, became an incentive to accept exploitative labor conditions.11
     To enforce these distinctions, workers who refused to bend to the new
will of law were characterized as a kind of social plague, weaponizing the
memory of death and destruction that had just ripped through the lower
classes over the course of the Black Death.
     Vagrants, cripples, paupers, and beggars were pathologized as morally
and biologically spoiled, lacking the will to fulfill their potential as
 upstanding citizens. Illness, impairment, and disability had already been
framed under Christian religious dogma as a personal lack; in many cases
even considered to be a kind of phenomenological punishment for sin or
bad deeds.12
The sins of the father, mother, or the self were thought to be marked by
divine commandment upon the body. Despite this fatalistic and moralistic
framing, there were many formal and informal means of meager almsgiving
that supported both the lower classes and those marked as spoiled under
Christian dogma. By outlawing idleness and banning the church’s previous
policies regulating almsgiving, the new statute prohibited the giving of
charity to all but the most verifiably deserving poor. As the statute stated,
   Because that many valiant beggars, as long as they may live of begging, do refuse to labour,
   giving themselves to idleness and vice, and sometimes to theft and other abominations; none,
   upon the said pain of imprisonment shall … give any thing to such, which may labour … so
   that thereby they may be compelled to labour for their necessary living.13

    Vagrancy and poverty became in this way not only morally and
spiritually stigmatized as a personal lack or as punishment for sin, but were
now framed as a social problem caused by the lack of work, which could
only be solved through the re-application of work. Until the idle body
returned to work, it was in need of intervention and cure. Idleness became a
sickness that must be cured at the source, lest it “go plague” and spread
throughout the rest of the population, destroying hope for humanity like
some sort of social virus.14
    The statute was enormously successful in suppressing labor power, and
gradually Parliament expanded the state’s oversight of the lower classes. In
1563, the poor were further separated into three distinct legal categories.
This addition constituted the development of a continuum of deservingness,
a kind of taxonomy of poverty, measuring degrees of social contagion and
expanding the understanding of one’s employment status as being an
outward reflection of one’s overall health. Each tier came with its own
unique stigma and unique relationship to work and the economy.15
    The first new category was the “impotent poor,” those unable to support
or care for themselves either due to illness, disability, impairment, or age.
The impotent poor were seen as deserving of state aid so long as their
illness or impairment was attested to by the community they lived in. This
category, however, was seen as prone to infiltration, so benefits were kept
 meager, putatively to discourage the abuse of state charity. The second
category consisted of the “able-bodied poor,” those able and willing to work
but unable to find it. The able-bodied poor, or long-term unemployed, were
given access to assistance in the form of work assignments or short-term
direct financial relief. It was expected, and later mandated by law, that the
able-bodied poor would be happy to (and must) accept whatever work they
were assigned in return for state assistance or salvation from criminal
prosecution. The third category was the “idle poor,” encompassing those
who were “fully capable of honest work” yet nevertheless dishonestly
“refused to be productive citizens,” dragging the economic prosperity of the
community down with them. Sometimes termed vagrants, beggars, rogues,
dependents, leeches, plagues, or parasites, the idle poor were summarily
criminalized, often whipped in the streets and incarcerated in houses of
correction to be made an example of.
    This tiered system of worker/surplus deservingness formed the basis for
the Elizabethan Poor Laws, broadly understood as the early modern
successor to contemporary capitalist state welfare programs. When the Poor
Relief Act was passed in 1601, it formalized a regional system of fund
distribution managed by appointed “Overseers of the Poor,” a position first
established in 1572. Overseers were tasked with creating an official record
of those who were verifiably poor and noting the subcategory or type to
which each belonged. They were expected to rely on the community for
information and verification of a person’s worthiness, and to adjust the
amount of aid someone received accordingly. On the other hand, for those
verified as undeserving burdens, including poor children and able-bodied
dependents, the overseers were tasked with putting them to work.
    Poor relief was compulsory, as were the taxes levied on local
communities to finance the care and administration of state-ordered relief.
Overseers were provisioned to collect poor-relief rates from local property
owners, with each overseer, tasked with determining how much money
would be needed for relief of the region’s poor, setting the tax rate
accordingly. This meant the needs of the poor were directly positioned in
relation to the tax burden of the property-owning class in the community,
reflecting a valuation of the poor as commensurate with their perceived
eugenic/debt burden.
    Importantly, the poor-law system and its frameworks of valuation would
spread to the colonies in America, including the role of the overseer (later
 called Selectmen) as the agent for supervising and dispersing fiscal relief
for the deserving poor. The sociological flexibility of these worker/surplus
categorizations also made it possible for evaluation criteria to shift or
introduce new terminology to match local or evolving social mores, making
the system conducible to exportation abroad.
    For example, the 1693 Massachusetts Act for the Relief of Ideots and
Distracted Persons included deservingness criteria adopted wholesale from
the Elizabethan Poor Laws. The act, one of the first formally implemented
legal constructs defining what we now refer to as intellectual and
developmental disabilities (I/DD), provided state assistance to people
determined to be “naturally wanting of understanding so as to be incapable
to provide for him or her self.” If the individual had “no Relation appear
that will undertake the care of providing for them,” it became the state’s
responsibility.16

                                     —

With the same demonizing vigor characteristic of the Poor Laws, ideas
emerged in Europe and the United States in the nineteenth century about
eliminating the dependent (surplus) class through science and medicine;
people, it was thought, could be “cured” of their dependency.17 As a result,
modern medical authority in contemporary society developed concurrently
with the idea that the goal of healing was to return the ill to their prior,
productive status as a working member of the capitalist political economy
—a definition of healing that became concomitant with medicine itself.18
Rather than let those not able to return to their full economic worth “sit on
the shelf” unused and untapped, by the nineteenth century, and into the
early twentieth, ideas of biorehabilitation, reversal of disability, or cure
became a central answer to the question of “what to do” with the surplus
populations.19
    In and around what was referred to as the “rehabilitation movement,”
ideas were circulated for how society could capture and return a spoiled
worker to their former productivity. As the rehabilitation movement swept
America in the post–Civil War era, medical professionals were tasked by
society and the state with differentiating between the spoiled, who could be
returned to a state of perceived normalcy through rehabilitation and
biomedical intervention, and those considered irreparably impaired,
 different, or otherwise clinically unable to be made “normal.” Medical
intervention became, in this way, a kind of industrial maintenance work. As
rehabilitationist Harry E. Mock explained, the reclamation of “human
salvage—became a central driving force behind medical innovation.”20
    Inspired by his work rehabilitating soldiers after World War I, Mock
campaigned to have US industry lead the way in the “reclamation and
restoration of human life” and the “reclamation of the disabled” otherwise
lost to the “industrial army.” Citizenship, to rehabilitationist practitioners
like Mock, was wholly contingent on an individual’s economic participation
in society. When out of work for too long, citizens became parasites,
feeding off the hard labor of the body politic. Not only was work a
requirement for membership in the body politic, for rehabilitationists work
itself would become the sole therapeutic means by which one who had been
cast out of society could re-earn their citizenship and be reclaimed for
industry. The rehabilitation movement ultimately saw disability, illness,
impairment, idleness, and poverty as the common anchor which caused a
totalizing and pathologized state of dependency, which they understood to
be a risk to the entire nation.21
    Rehabilitationist Richard Cabot went so far as to declare that the
adoption of industrial production, which he saw as softening the physical
demands of labor, was to blame for a rapid increase in idleness and
“dependents.” Cabot thought that the introduction of the production line,
not the exploitative conditions of work itself, was responsible for rendering
people “nervous invalids” who would have previously been sustained from
idleness by the hardness and risk of work. The idea that hard work brought
natural health was fully cemented by the turn of the century, and the
rehabilitationists began to dominate the medical discourse for the care and
reclaiming of the disabled industrial army with the express hope of turning
them into productive earners.
    The rehabilitationist ideology would take its most paradigmatic form in
the early twentieth century with the introduction of a novel therapeutic
practice called the “work cure.” The idea was that through forced labor the
surplus could be cured of any number of physical or mental impairments,
including social or moral deviance. As Dr. Herbert J. Hall, the practitioner
most often credited with coining the term, said in 1911: “It may be stated
without fear of contradiction that suitable occupation of hand and mind is a
very potent factor in the maintenance of physical, mental and moral health
 in the individual and in the community.” Though not without its critics, the
idea gained widespread popularity.22
    The selling of the work cure to the masses involved the enforcement of
what Marion Fourcade calls the monetary valuation of life, which places a
value on human life that “comes, ultimately, from society: not simply from
the economic benefits of life, but also from our emotions and our moral
assumptions about risk and just compensation.”23 This framework would
ultimately justify the rationing of rehabilitation resources along perceived
notions of an individual’s potential to be made an “earning, serving, unit” at
the end of their cycle or course of prescribed therapy. With pressure to
deliver clinical results, many proponents of the work cure began to
incorporate a form of cost-benefit analysis into their rehabilitation work.24
    Dr. Charles H. Jaeger, another prominent proponent of the work cure,
was among those who began to use a cost-benefit analysis to determine
whether disabled individuals were worth therapeutic investment. Jaeger
created a system to classify the various “classes of cripples” into three main
categories, based not only on the circumstances of their impairment but also
on their relative ability to be reclaimed for the industrial army. He outlined
his framework in the American Journal for the Care of Cripples in 1915:
   1. The congenital cripples:—Those born with some malformation not amenable to medical
   or surgical treatment, who must go through life with a physical handicap.
   2. The cripples from disease:—Of which there are two kinds, (a) those who are suffering
   from some constitutional disease like tuberculosis which makes the patient, in addition to his
   diseased condition, weak and incapable, and (b) those who are left crippled by some disease
   like infantile paralysis or hemiplegia which leaves them more or less badly disabled but
   which has no influence on their physical well-being.
   3. The cripples from accident (the various amputations). Again we have two classes, those
   crippled in childhood, thus subjected to all the unfavorable influences surrounding the
   diseased crippled child, and the second class, those crippled by accident in later life.

Jaeger saw the third class, “cripples from accident,” as a class of surplus to
be prioritized for the work cure because many of them had been disabled in
the course of their daily duties as industrial workers. Jaeger said of this
group of formerly productive workers: that “this is, to my mind, the ideal
class to work with, the most important class to work with.” Like many of
his contemporaries, Jaeger felt that the most urgent task of medicine was to
save those who could be reclaimed as workers, and to do so as quickly as
possible before the “mental kink” of dependency kicked in. “We have here
a group of people who have had a normal youth, who have acquired no
 mental kinks and who have been trained to some occupation or trade …
These cripples have passed through the vicissitudes of childhood, have been
engaged in gainful occupations, have possibly assumed family
responsibilities, in other words, have proven their industrial worth.”
    The benefit of rehabilitating these “high value” spoiled workers was
thought to be much greater. Because the cripple in question had previous
experience as an upstanding citizen and member of the body politic, their
reentry could be facilitated by returning them to a state of ability
commensurate with their former productive class position. To Jaeger it was
more rewarding and “of greater economic importance” to save a crippled
person destined for pauperism than it was to help lift a crippled person out
of poverty. As a result, he and other rehabilitationists advocated for greater
scrutiny and screening to evaluate if rehabilitation was a worthy investment
for each individual in need of care or aid.
    When the work cure failed to produce results, rehabilitationist
physicians argued that the problem was not with their methods but with the
patient’s family, who were enabling the cripple’s decline.
   Well-intentioned but ill-advised friends and relations coddle the patient. He is cared for and
   supported until he has lost his ambition to work. In his idle hours he seeks solace and
   companionship in the saloon. This environment still further aids in the moral decline [of the
   individual into dependency]. It is an easy step to beg for the money thus needed and when he
   once finds out how profitable this is, he loses his desire to work.25

Dr. Augustus Thorndike, orthopedist, agreed, writing in the American
Journal of Care for Cripples in 1914 on the importance of realizing “the
mental warp of the cripple, and struggle to overcome it.” Thorndike
believed that dependency was caused by “sensitiveness, fostered by
misguided home influences,” which negatively imprinted the mind. This
caused a kind of psychic rift in patients, Thorndike argued, corrupting their
self-worth by reframing their identity from citizen to object of pity.26
    Tragically, the rehabilitationists’ attempts to manifest treatments out of
the demands of the capitalist political economy met its most effective
resistance not in the form of an affirmative, liberatory vision for the future
of medical practice, but from a movement for more extreme exclusion. In
the early twentieth century, the American eugenics movement gained
prominence in part for its refutation of the work cure and the
 rehabilitationist movement and its corresponding assertions about what was
to be done with the surplus.
    Dr. Charles Davenport, Director of the Carnegie Institution’s Station for
Experimental Evolution at Cold Spring Harbor, felt that public and private
money was being ill-spent on the reclamation of the poor, disabled, idle,
and dependent. Davenport, a race scientist and the founder of the American
eugenics movement, felt that a scientific analysis of the surplus population
suggested that while rehabilitation was good for some, the vast majority
were in fact incurable. He and others in the eugenics movement felt that
public money would be better spent warehousing the incurably defective
and preventing them from reproducing. Eugenics, they argued, was the only
sustainable solution to a problem that would otherwise swiftly bring an end
to humanity in a matter of generations. As Davenport argued to a reporter
from the New York Times:
   May an American citizen inquire … whether a system by which philanthropists drain
   effective persons of their income until they cannot afford to have children, in order to secure
   funds to be spent in relieving imbecile parents of any expense of parentage, is a good thing
   for America? … Modern philanthropy and medicine have co-operated not only to keep alive
   the persons who show the undesirable traits of the non-social strains, but to facilitate their
   reproduction.27

As we will see in MADNESS, these same ideas would become mobilized
toward a precipitous rise in the institutionalization of large portions of the
surplus populations. The incurable were seen not only as a eugenic and debt
burden to society but, in a logical extension of the post–Black Death specter
of the social plague, as a manifest physical threat to body and property.

                                                —

The worker/surplus binary should be understood not just as a system for
economic control but also as an idea that drives the many means of
certification which have been repeatedly reproduced in legislation and
diagnostic criteria designed to shield capitalism from caring for the poor. In
separating out the incurable surplus from the curable surplus in order to
reclaim the curable surplus for the industrial army, a basis and rationale for
legal exclusion, extermination, and removal developed to justify the
abandonment of surplus populations.28
     Importantly, the reliance on a worker/surplus binary as a means of
sorting the deserving from the undeserving establishes a concrete historical
record offering de jure justification for organized state abandonment. This
concept has been a central feature in the design of pension, benefit, and
social welfare eligibility schemas. Capital has used this as a tool, just as the
ruling class of England used the Poor Laws as a tool to oppress the
population by collapsing the space between health and labor power. The
goal was to segment and separate the poor into categories of who is and
isn’t a worker, analogous to who is and isn’t worthy of membership in the
body politic.
    On this early foundation the justification for modern practices like
means testing or disenrolling beneficiaries as part of a never-ending war
against “waste, fraud, and abuse” is built and legitimized. Conjured through
warnings of an ever-growing parasitic plague of social dependency, this is
the same cultural imaginary that historically drove the nationalistic fervor
(and generous private funding from wealthy American businessmen) behind
the eugenics movement’s campaign to globally exterminate the “human
surplus.”
    It is crucial to recognize how we have deflected and diverted
accountability for poverty and ill health away from the obvious culprit—the
capitalist political economy—and toward a more individuated notion of
isolated labor power—the worker-beneficiary—absolving our political
imaginary of the need for radical redistribution of wealth and the
expansion/socialization/communization of robust social safety net supports.
Placing the blame for idleness, dependency, illness, or vagrancy on the
individual facilitates a push-and-pull system where an “afflicted individual”
is solely responsible not only for their poverty and ill health but also for
transcending them. In this logic, society at large and the system of political
control are therefore not materially or ethically liable for the care and
welfare of those unable to meaningfully contribute to the economic worth
of the nation. Those “unsound” burdens instead were a threat to the nation’s
fitness and proposed for elimination to preserve the future of the capitalist
state. Pathologizing and criminalizing dependency is a way of taking the
blame for poverty and ill health away from capital and the state and forcing
it onto the most afflicted.29
    The worker/surplus binary solidifies the idea that our lives under
capitalism revolve around our work. Our selves, our worthiness, our entire
 being and right to live revolve around making our labor power available to
the ruling class. The political economy demands that we maintain our
health to make our labor power fully available, lest we be marked and
doomed as surplus. The surplus is then turned into raw fuel to extract
profits, through rehabilitation, medicalization, and the financialization of
health. This has not only justified organized state abandonment and
enforced the poverty of the poor, sick, elderly, working class, and disabled;
it has tied the fundamental idea of the safety and survival of humanity to
exploitation.
    We’ve been told that work will heal us. We’ve been tricked into trying
the work cure. We are told that work is in our best interest, when the truth is
that it only serves the needs of capital and the ruling class at the expense of
our health. Breaking the mirage of worker versus surplus provides a
revolutionary opportunity to unite the surplus and worker classes in
recognition of a better truth: safety, survival, and care are best ensured
outside of capitalism. This revolutionary potential has been divided,
discouraged, and criminalized.
                              OceanofPDF.com
                                 MADNESS

   We know what makes us ill.
                                                                   —Brecht

Discourses on the surplus populations, especially those categorized as what
we would now call “mentally ill”—known across various periods as
distracted persons, natural fools, schizos, the criminally insane, etc.—often
point to the rise of institutionalization as a historical and moral error that
was corrected in the late twentieth century as a result of societal progress
and a kind of collective, righteous embarrassment. In addition, these
narratives position madness as a biologically certifiable category separate
from other states of being, a social construction which is a fiction. In this
chapter we will complicate this history and refute these understandings by
tracing how psychiatric institutions and their corresponding systems of
financial and behavioral control were formed to suit the needs of
developing capitalist economies. These institutions, along with the social
construction of madness as a constitutive framework for understanding
ability and health, developed as complementary institutions to capital, not
only to manage the perceived “burden” of the surplus populations but also
as an attempt to produce economic value from their oversight and control.
Further, despite the widespread closure of these institutions in the late
twentieth century, their structure and the carceral preferences they embody
can be found dispersed throughout the contemporary healthcare system.
What the asylum system was, and where it went, illustrate in practice what
we have previously described in theory: the biocertification and extraction
of the surplus populations.
    The mass institutionalization of those deemed mad, particularly in the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries, is foundational to understanding the role
of the surplus populations to capital as well as the construction and
 certification of health and ability within the capitalist state. As we will
argue, “carceral sanism”—a term from Liat Ben-Moshe reflecting the
carceral preferences and attitudes that produced and maintained this mass
institutionalization—constitutes evidence of what we have called extractive
abandonment, borrowing from Ruth Wilson Gilmore’s “organized
abandonment” and from Marta Russell’s idea of the “money model of
disability” to understand the financial and macroeconomic incentives at the
root of institutionalization (as elaborated at length in SURPLUS). The
material horror of the practices visited upon those labeled mad/surplus must
be understood not simply as some abstract, moral failing of society, but as a
fundamental feature of our political economy. Concomitant with
developments in the political economy, schemas of carceral protectionism
emerged as the preferred strategy for ameliorating the perceived problem of
unchecked madness in society, resulting in the perpetuation of sanist
rhetoric and beliefs as well as the justification of harm, violence, or death at
the hands of the capitalist state under the guise of social “safety.”

                                                 —

Madness encompasses a wide range of body/mind states and types. Some
posit that madness constitutes biomedically mediated neurological
disease(s), some argue that it is a result of sociopolitical circumstances and
influenced by the downward pressure of negative social determinants of
health, and yet others argue that it is merely part and parcel to human
behavior and difference, but has been stigmatized through complex
intergenerational processes of social labels of deviance resulting in
systematic exclusion from society.1
    There is no scientific validation which supports any one dominant
theory of madness, nor is any one dominant theory of madness necessary.
As Liat Ben-Moshe writes,
   Psychiatrization, for example, is not natural or God given; it is a specific discourse arising in
   a particular historical moment that had come to be seen as ahistorical and inevitable.
   Imprisonment as a form of punishment is also a contingency … States’ ability to control and
   measure their populations is a contingency, as is the modern nation-state to begin with.2

    It is important to note that when we refer to madness, we refer not to
some specific biocertifiable category but to a shifting and diffuse set of
sociologically and historically situated definitions. While we categorically
 refute assertions that have attempted to label madness as merely “a product
of capitalism” or as categorizations of difference premised only on
“control,” the historical construction of madness as an expansive category
for collective social difference or “deviance” is important to confront. As
early as the fourteenth century, madness was used to describe a mental state
which was lessened or irrational and produced noticeable “headstrong
behavior.” As decades wore on, additional sociocultural connotations
accumulated that associated madness with foolishness and danger.3 Shifting
definitions of madness and other forms of “deviance” are also illustrative of
how designations of madness/surplus have served a disciplinary function
relative to capitalist political economies, marking bodies for abandonment
and extraction to suit fundamentally economic and sociopolitical aims. For
example, as noted by Bruce Cohen, between 1864 and 1889 the Trans-
Allegheny Lunatic Asylum in West Virginia employed such flexible
certifications of madness as to incarcerate people for “immoral life,”
“laziness,” “novel reading,” “politics,” or such patriarchal justifications as
“uterine derangement” or “desertion by husband.”4
     Sanism is based on the fundamentally flawed notion that the mere
existence of madness threatens the safety and order of society. As a result,
the question of “what to do” about madness prompts “solutions” that give
preference to coercive and carceral practices at the expense of the
individual experiencing distress. The premise of sanism relies heavily on
cultural mis/perceptions of danger and disorder, a sort of pre-limiting
cultural imaginary characterized by the central political goal of exclusion,
justified by pathology, and reinforced by professional medical expertise.
     The medical professions have developed an ill-fitting and misguided
commitment to conceptual biological cyclicality that does not reflect the
realities of lived experiences of illness, madness, or impairment. Thus, a
distinction between the mad and the not-mad is constructed and reproduced
by medical and psychiatric expertise, which differentiates between those
who can be returned to a state of perceived normalcy through rehabilitation
and biomedical intervention and those considered to be irreparably
impaired, different, or otherwise clinically unable to be made normal. This
is a key ideological tenant of sanism: those who can be “cured” through
biomedical interventions became the living-well, able to return to work,
life, and freedom with pharmaceutical support. These living-well were
considered rehabilitated, able to reintegrate into society as valuable (that is,
 productive) members. Sanism represents the imagined preference for the
living-well. The outcome of this dualistic understanding of “mild vs. severe
mental illness” was that those who could not meet the rehabilitative
expectations of psychiatrists were considered to be irreparably damaged,
and thus categorically stripped of their personhood, agency, and autonomy.5
    This binary framing of the curable and the incurable has historically
dictated the scope of access to care that an individual might be eligible to
receive. Many of those deemed incurable were cast out of acute care
hospital settings and relegated to perpetual residential confinement in
congregant institutions—most prominently, the psychiatric hospital.6 This
systemic preference for confinement, a carceral preference, was enabled by
the perception and certification of an individual’s “permanent not-
normalness,” a determination ultimately made according to perceived
pathology and along the complex compounding nexus of racialized hate and
prejudice.7 As Ben-Moshe writes, “For psychiatry to become a legitimate
profession, let alone a science, a separation was created between those who
can be treated (the ‘mentally ill’) and those labeled as incurable
(feebleminded and then intellectually disabled).”8 This separation relied on
the idea that the “incurably mentally ill” were not only incurable but also
dangerous.9 While the justification for removal from society for those with
intellectual and developmental disabilities (I/DD) was often centered on
infantilizing notions of “mental incapacity,” dictating and defining a social
need to protect the individual, by contrast the fear of madness often came
down to issues of perceived safety as a result of the inaccurate correlation
of states of madness to violence, deviancy, and social unrest. In truth, the
fear of madness is unfounded. It is not madness that causes unrest, but the
greed, despair, suffering, alienation, and inequality the incentives of
capitalism produce.10
    Individuals who are unable to find stable housing and employment as a
result of either their symptoms or other aspects of their identity are more
likely to experience the pathologization of their reasonable reactions to
precarity and the material impacts of their social determinants of health.
That is, they are more likely to be labeled “mad” or “deviant” for wholly
logical responses to their subjection. Sanism labels this psychic resistance
to the dominant values and behaviors of social life under capitalism and
marks it as unreasonable, founded not on ideas based in logic but in
 madness. It is not that the individual’s state of mind is “unreasonable,” it is
that our society is ill-fit to accommodate the complex needs of mad people
under the incentive structures and fiscal restraints of capitalism. In fact,
society is actively antagonistic toward mad people, using psychiatric
frameworks to dictate how they may live, if they may be free, and
sometimes, as is often the case in mad people’s encounters with state
violence at the hands of police or doctors, how they must die.

                                      —

Throughout the nineteenth century and much of the twentieth, mad people /
“psychiatric patients,” migrants, poor people, unhoused people, orphans,
people with I/DD, elders, and other groups defined as surplus were
institutionalized in large congregant facilities, a process that was dominated
endto-end by medical authorities. The nineteenth century saw a dramatic
rise in this practice of institutionalization, billed as a humane answer to the
problem of the catch-all almshouses for the poor and indigent. The separate
institutionalization of psychiatric patients was also intended to meet
growing policy concerns about the perceived phenomenon of increasing
numbers of “chronically and severely mentally ill people.” This rise is best
exemplified in figures from the United States and the United Kingdom from
the period. In the UK, the population incarcerated in public asylums rose
from 7,140 people in 1850 to 148,000 by 1954. In the US, although
definitive nineteenth-century figures are unavailable, by 1955 the state
mental health population was 559,000. As the trend of carceral, medicalized
rehabilitation accelerated, so too did the power wielded by biomedical
expertise. Central to this struggle over “what to do” with the people being
cast out of society and into institutionalized life was the development of the
idea that it was possible, and necessary, to “reverse” or “cure” madness.11
    The increased warehousing of those deemed mad/surplus was in part
driven by medical logic akin that of the rehabilitation movement (as
discussed at length in LABOR). The evolution of the psychiatric profession
as an arm of medical practice and expertise is understood to extend from
similar principles: Philippe Pinel’s development of a traitement moral
(moral treatment) in the late eighteenth century, subsequently taken up by
the alienist profession in England, stressed that madness and difference
could be alleviated by rehabilitation through social conditioning, work, and
 “the employment of psychological terror and fear to gain the compliance of
the insane.”12
    These practices bled together with contemporary notions of the “work
cure” and with corresponding values in the social and philosophical role of
welfare, epitomized by Jeremy Bentham’s elaboration of his Panopticon as
“a mill to grind rogues honest and idle men industrious.”13 (As Leslie
Stephen would write of the Panopticon in 1900: “It had now occurred to
them to employ convicts instead of steam, and thus combine philanthropy
with business.”14)
    Justified as a corrective measure to instill normalization via discipline
and reduced time for “idleness,” the labor value of these otherwise
“surplus” individuals to the institution itself quickly became apparent. As
Cohen notes:
   As the asylums grew in size, the work undertaken by patients became more orientated to the
   goals of the facility. Similar to prisons, inmates of asylums could be found “employed” in
   the asylum laundries, as farm laborers, and for undertaking other menial tasks … Thus,
   “work therapy” became an excuse for patients to be used as cheap labour for the smooth
   running of the institution.15

     This disciplinary practice, proselytizing a return to value through work,
is significant in its underlying assumption that much of the surplus could be
erased from society by rehabilitating them across the worker/surplus binary
to become a worker. Ironically, in the design of these questionable
“rehabilitative” systems, the surplus was put to work, making it clear that
the mad were not an inherent waste or burden to society but instead
categorically excluded so the social constructions of capitalism could
appear defensible. In the process, bodies otherwise difficult to capture as
component to the labor force were repurposed for extraction.
     The asylums and the early psychiatric profession, filling its role as
stewards of capitalist population management, were tasked with deriving as
much labor and professional value from their wards as possible, within the
bounds of the contemporary economic and class system. This made the
asylum system one of the principal institutions for upholding social norms
and general political and behavioral discipline under capital. The
boundaries defining each of these were necessarily flexible and found their
shape at the meeting points between what “mad doctors” diagnosed as
 mental or moral deficiency and the respective political power of the ruling
classes. As Andrew Scull describes:
   Once the asylum was established, the psychiatric profession sought, without success, to
   secure a clientele not restricted to lower-class marginal elements of the population. The
   upper classes displayed an understandable reluctance to confine their nearest and dearest in a
   total institution … [Therefore] the expansion of the English asylum system during the
   nineteenth century was substantially an expansion of the pauper sector.16

    Further, the formalization of the labor/surplus divide, with madness and
psychiatric carcerality as one of its disciplinary extremes (alongside the
prison), provided an effective tool to stabilize worker exploitation and the
subjugation of potential labor demands or revolts. Scull notes:
   From the bourgeoisie’s perspective, the existence of asylums to “treat” the mentally ill at
   public expense could be invoked as a practical demonstration of their own humanitarian
   concern with the less fortunate. But far from asylums having been “altruistic institutions …
   detached from the social structures that perpetuate poverty” … one must realize that they
   were important elements in sustaining those structures; important because of their symbolic
   value and as a reminder of the awful consequences of non-conformity.17

    With this understanding, we can see that asylums were not a temporary
moral failure on the part of society but rather institutions built to serve the
explicit purpose of control and segregation of the surplus. Here, as others
have noted, we see the capitalist state as taking on the provision of social
services and welfare programs (such as they are, given that the asylum
system must be considered as a construct of social welfare) to facilitate the
goals of ascendant private industries by managing the worker/surplus
divide.
    For example, living and sanitary conditions in asylums, often cited as
one of the precipitating reasons for deinstitutionalization in the late
twentieth century, were the subject of public exposés and state inquiries as
early as the beginning of the nineteenth century, with official inquiries in
1815–16, 1827, 1839, and from 1842–44. Scull notes of these public
debates that, ultimately, “improving the conditions of existence for lunatics
living in the community would have entailed the provision of a relatively
generous pension or welfare payments to provide for their support;
implying that the living standards of families with an insane member would
have been raised above those of the working class generally.” This analysis,
we argue, remains true today with only degrees of difference, and forms a
 compelling reason for “worker” and “surplus” to join their demands and
move toward mutual liberation.
    The issue inherent in this rehabilitative, essentially “work cure” model
of psychiatry was that disciplining individuals for a larger social problem
did not make for particularly efficacious results. As Cohen elaborates, it
became a major professional liability that, even as psychiatric incarceration
dramatically increased, “‘curability’ rates—measured by the numbers
discharged from such facilities—declined. Between the 1870s and the
1920s, the ‘recovery’ rate in England dropped from 40 to 31 per cent … By
the 1950s, the average stay in a U.S. state psychiatric hospital was 20
years.”18
    This problem, coupled with the simultaneous rise of new biomedical
models of illness that revolutionized medical practice (if not psychiatry)
and the eradicationist principles of the influential eugenics movement,
inspired a turn toward first surgical and then pharmacological psychiatric
treatment. The principle that the surplus populations were not only a
eugenic and debt burden to society but also constituted a threat, which had
driven their institutionalization in the first place, was by the early twentieth
century mobilized by psychiatrists toward the further professionalization of
their field. The institutions that had been labeled “asylums” were
refashioned as “mental hospitals.” (Correspondingly, the label
“psychiatrist” emerged to replace “mad doctor” and “alienist,” which
occurred shortly after physicians swapped “customer” for “patient.”)
    In this period, the rehabilitative framing of psychiatry, already a long-
disputed idea, became more directly a process of managing, and indeed
suppressing, the behaviors of the psychiatrically incarcerated. Most
importantly, as these forms of carceral preference shifted, the surplus
increasingly became a group from which psychiatric, procedural,
pharmacological, or otherwise scientific knowledge could be extracted,
largely through the routinization of surgical and pharmacological testing.
As explored in this chapter and elsewhere in historical-materialist accounts
of asylums, the procedures and therapeutics developed in this period
fundamentally amounted to technologies of social control (or
management/demarcation/enforcement of difference), which was a
transformational moment in the development of the surplus as a source of
capital generation—a significant event in the modern history of extractive
abandonment.
     This is made clear in examining early cases of novel psychiatric
technologies. Electroconvulsive therapy (popularly known as
“electroshock” therapy) was first tested on “a thirty-nine-year-old
disoriented vagrant rounded up at a railroad station by Rome police” and
subsequently sent to the clinic of the psychiatrist Ugo Cerletti. Cerletti’s
hypothesis was that applying an electric current could induce seizures in a
patient, which he hoped would be a useful method for “correcting” the
behavior of schizophrenics. After a series of unsuccessful experiments
resulting in his test animals suffering fatal heart attacks, Cerletti was
inspired by a visit to a local slaughterhouse, where he was surprised to
discover their method to “simply [stun] … pigs with electric jolts to the
head, as this made it easier for butchers to stab and bleed the animals.”19
    The fact that this method, before its broad employment in hospitals and
psychiatric institutions throughout the twentieth century (and, albeit with
lessened prevalence, a practice ongoing to this day), was first employed on
an unhoused member of the surplus population demonstrates the dual use of
this population as value generation (research subjects) and as waste (fit to
die for the cause of knowledge production), viewed as outside of the
boundaries of societal norms and in need of correction or extraction in
furtherance to the capitalist economy.
    There are many more examples. One early lobotomy subject, for
instance, was a woman simply described by one of the surgeons, Walter
Freeman, as a “master at bitching.”20 This justification is indicative, as is
the overt presence of racial capitalism in these accounts: the prime targets
for lobotomy were “uncooperative women” and Black people.
Lobotomization was viewed by Freeman and his colleague James Watts as a
successful intervention, in that it usually successfully pacified the
individual’s behavior. As Freeman and Watts would write, lobotomies were
justified in part because if “creative artistry has to be sacrificed in the
process, it is perhaps just as well to have a taxpayer in the lower brackets as
a result.” (Many lobotomy subjects, of course, did not get the chance to
enjoy this promise of a free, if affectless, life; some 12 percent of lobotomy
patients are estimated to have died from the procedure, and nearly one in
four were so permanently disabled by it that they would spend the rest of
their lives in asylum.21)
      The prevalence of carceral sanism and the policing of difference
through psychiatric norms appears unchanged when the psychiatric
profession turned from surgical to pharmaceutical intervention in the mid-
twentieth century. The first person administered Thorazine
(chlorpromazine) for behavior modification—which had initially been
trialed as an anesthetic and an antihistamine—is described as “a 57-year-old
male labourer who had been admitted for ‘making improvised political
speeches in cafes, becoming involved in fights with strangers, and for …
walking around the street with a pot of flowers on his head preaching his
love of liberty.’”22

                                      —

Often lost in the historical narrative of madness are the consequences of
psychiatric pathologization on the life, freedom, and death of individuals
labeled to be dangerous or “mad.” Many of these lives are barely present in
historical archives, visible only as statistics or components of statistics. As
deinstitutionalization took place, many of these institutions intentionally
destroyed the personal effects of those incarcerated to prevent moral or
societal discomfort—by which we really mean, to avoid accountability.
With this in mind we share the following stories of two individuals who
were stripped of agency and reduced to numbers as part of the capitalist
state’s sorting and warehousing of the surplus.
    On June 7, 1945, Mr. Frank, #27967, a Black man in his mid-thirties,
was served a meal on a broken plate at Virginia’s Restaurant in downtown
Brooklyn, New York. Records note that as a result, “[Frank] became upset
and caused a disruption outside the restaurant, yelling and kicking garbage
cans.” The staff and customers at the restaurant deemed Frank’s behavior
not only unusual but menacing, and called the police. When the police
arrived, they did not arrest Frank but instead took him to the psychiatric
ward at Kings County Hospital. He was later admitted to the Willard
Psychiatric Center in upstate New York.
    It seems reasonable of Frank to be upset that his meal had been served
on a broken plate. The vagueness of the incident’s description also suggests
that Frank was likely also reacting to physical or verbal racist aggression—
either from staff and customers or from the police—not described in the
official record. Yet through the lens of sanism, Frank was labeled as acting
 “without reason.” State archives reveal that he was a military veteran
relatively new to the area and without many supportive socioeconomic ties,
but little else. It is not difficult to imagine the circumstances that could have
been pressing down on him, and how those pressures could have been
mitigated other than by institutionalization. Yet the sanist preference for
carcerality produces a political economy in which Frank’s life and freedom
became secondary to the perceived “safety” of society. Carceral sanism is a
preference for deprivation in the face of need, for confinement over care, a
violent and dispassionate way to enforce social and biological norms.
    When Willard Psychiatric Center was finally closed in 1995, workers
discovered hundreds of suitcases in the attic of an abandoned building.23
Among them were Frank’s belongings. He spent the rest of his life
institutionalized, dying in 1984 after nearly four decades of living in an
asylum. The account of this man’s life—a life fully stripped of personhood
in the name of social “safety” and reduced to a near-nameless account of
social abandonment and death as a direct result of sanism, the story of “Mr.
Frank, #27967”—is far from unique. In fact, much of the history of both
mental health pathology and policing is deeply intertwined with the history
of racialized violence and white supremacy in America. As Tanja Aho, Liat
Ben-Moshe, and Leon J. Hilton attest in “Mad Futures:
Affect/Theory/Violence,” the police have always been used as an occupying
armed force, carving out social norms and borders among the population in
real time:
   Police forces were established to protect owners at a time when Black people were
   considered unruly property, when Indigenous people and other people of color, women, and
   people with disabilities were construed as “irrational” others against which liberal
   personhood was constructed. The ongoingness of racialized police violence extends this
   history and continues to assign to social death and literal death those deemed irrational,
   unruly, unstable, and unpredictable.24

The consequence of carceral sanism and the policies it produces has meant
that hundreds of thousands of people like Frank were remanded to Willard
Psychiatric Center and thousands of similar institutions over simple
breaches of social norms, unfounded perceptions of violence, racism, or
simply the biased opinion of medical experts.
    Miss Margaret, #25682, had been living independently, albeit with
multiple chronic health conditions, for forty-eight years before she was
committed to an institution. Originally from Scotland, Margaret immigrated
 to the United States during World War I and worked as a nurse at New York
City’s Women’s Hospital until 1925, when she sustained a head injury and
then contracted tuberculosis. Margaret spent the next six years recovering in
TB facilities across New York State, eventually becoming well enough to
return to work as a nurse at a state TB hospital. She spent the next decade
working full time and living independently without issue until, in 1941, her
employer sent her to a new doctor, concerned that Margaret “faced stress at
work.” This new doctor, hand-picked by the hospital she worked for,
determined that Margaret’s previous doctor had been wrong to certify her as
fit for work. Margaret had no family in the US, and had never married—
leading the doctor to determine that her “emotional problems” now
prevented her from living alone.
     On June 28, 1941, Margaret’s new doctor admitted her to Willard—
promising her it would be temporary and claiming the change was
necessary because “her physical complaints were [now] overshadowed by
emotional problems.”25 Margaret, like Frank, also spent the rest of her life
institutionalized, remaining at Willard for the next thirty-two years until her
death in 1973. Her records note that she was never given a single session of
psychotherapy throughout her three decades under state care; her chart
noted that she was instead given a heavy daily dose of Thorazine and tasked
with crafts like knitting and crochet. She described her experience as like
being a fly trapped in a spiderweb. Her boyfriend Arthur and her friends
visited and wrote frequently during the first ten years of her
institutionalization, but as time passed the world outside moved on without
her. In the doctor’s opinion, Margaret’s “danger to society” was in existing
differently than others in a way that was deemed irreversible, living
independently and by her own terms in such a way that could eventually
render her a burden on her employer. That alone was justification for her
removal.
     Madness is depicted as antithetical to the needs of society under
capitalism, a hindrance to productivity, a burr on the otherwise smooth
surface of “forward progress.” But in the rise of psychiatric institutions, the
mad themselves became fuel for this same progress. While some may look
to these histories and content themselves with the idea that the asylums
constituted an aberrant and temporary moral failing on the part of society,
the carceral preferences we employ against the mad, and the carceral
 sanism that makes up the logic of institutions and norms outside of the
asylum, show that our treatment of the mad/surplus has only barely shifted.

                                      —

As we have described in this chapter, in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries carceral psychiatric institutions were employed, in part, as an
apparatus for managing and disciplining surplus bodies. In addition to those
deemed “mentally ill” or diagnosed with I/DD, the asylums became
common repositories for managing difference of all kinds, while also
attenuating the perceived productive “burden” of those marked as surplus
on families and communities. It is in part for this reason that we focus
attention on psychiatric institutions and the biocertification of the
mad/surplus: these institutions are emblematic of the contemporary political
economy of health. Asylums, both as we knew them historically and in the
forms they inhabit today, serve a key function in this political economy:
creating the conditions for the state’s extractive abandonment of surplus
populations. In this way, institutions constitute a paradigmatic intersection
of health, carcerality, and capitalism.26
    We say as we knew them and in the forms they inhabit today because,
contrary to popular assertions, we argue that the long period of
institutionalization has not truly come to an end. Of course, the widespread
closure of psychiatric institutions throughout the late twentieth century,
both internationally and in the United States, is an unquestionable fact. We
argue, however, that some of the key functions of the asylum system
persist; deinstitutionalization did not destroy carceralsanist logic but instead
redistributed the asylum’s responsibilities into a vast, chaotic network of
private and public entities. With deinstitutionalization, the aesthetics of
warehousing merely shifted, as a means by which to convince the public
that the only remaining souls who were warehoused deserved to be there.
The large-scale model of carceral containment became synonymous with
the prison-industrial complex, and care for those considered to be disabled,
mad, or elder was rebranded under the broad consumer-oriented umbrella of
publicly privatized and fiscally decentralized long-term care.
    The term “long-term care” deserves special scrutiny here. As we have
described, capital and the political economy of health rely on the
construction, division, and management of surplus bodies and identities as
 putatively siloed off from each other’s material interests. This is also true of
how typologies of care become categorized, divided, and ultimately
managed. In the United States and internationally, “long-term care” has
become a catchall term for an immense variety of health services,
particularly for the disabled, elders, and the chronically ill. The term serves
as a means of distinguishing the types of care involving maintenance and
solidarity (assistance with eating, bathing, or small tasks) against “curative”
care typologies that are understood as mediating the worker/surplus divide.
In other words, any pretenses of morality, or even the already austere and
punitive “rehabilitative” frameworks of concepts like the “work cure,” have
been stripped from the political economy of health. If there is a direct
descendant of the asylum system it is the nursing home, a punitive,
fundamentally carceral setting built on the same principles of social
management described earlier. But the asylum system has many lesser
descendants.
    The explosion of service follows the dollar care in the wake of the
passage of Medicare and Medicaid in 1965 solidified the pathway by which
the state passed public money into private corporations in the long-term
care sector. In the decades since deinstitutionalization—a process that
stretched in waves from the 1950s through the 1980s—the long-term care
industry has become dominated by increasingly monopolistic for-profit
corporations. Large state institutions, hospital-schools, and asylums were
replaced by an assemblage of public-private, non-profit, and for-profit
nursing and home-care corporations as the preferred locales for the
sequestration of the surplus class. Often these “new” smaller facilities
opened on the very edges of the grounds of the “old” asylums. Just as
catchall almshouses transmogrified into siloed, categorically segregated
institutional care, “old” institutions gave rise to a public-private continuum
of contingent phenomena that serves few interests beyond the cost-benefit
fueled reproduction of capital. Long-term care encompasses a wide variety
of corporations, services, products, and relations; from institutionalized
skilled nursing care, personal care, and in-home services and supports to
unpaid informal care labor from family or kin.
    Attempting to profit off long-term care is like trying to squeeze blood
from a stone. And so the dynamics of the “old” warehousing model of
congregant confinement and maximized austerity continued despite the
“end” of the era of institutionalization. Nursing homes are only smaller,
 decentralized, and fractured facsimiles of the “old” warehousing institution-
industrial model. The expansion of in-home services and supports, as
opposed to larger congregant nursing settings, is persistently looked at by
the American state as some kind of impossible problem to solve, largely
because it maps perfectly onto the state’s own self-reproduced fears of the
“dependent” subject as an ever-impending fiscal and eugenic plague.
“Fixing” long-term care has been repeatedly and unfairly branded as
politically toxic and prohibitively expensive. It’s often considered to be a
wholly separate category from healthcare, and because the community who
relies on it is near-universally politically devalued and ignored, little has
been meaningfully done to address what is perhaps the most gaping hole in
the social safety net. Long-term care has been left out of numerous reforms
to healthcare and health finance, furthering the gulf which silos the two into
separate typologies of care—as if health and daily living could be
bifurcated into distinct and separate aspects of one’s relationship to care.
    Distinctions between “healthcare” and “long-term care” are a
convenient shadow in capitalism’s leveraging of health. An understanding
of the social determinants of health and the broader political economy
similarly means “mental health-care” cannot be wholly separated from
other kinds of health-care. It is necessary to understand, and refute, these
distinctions if we are to win health communism. As we will later discuss in
CARE and CURE, to challenge these distinctions is inherently threatening
to capital.
                             OceanofPDF.com
                           PHARMACOLOGY

   Intellectual property rights can be readily conceived not as property, but as regulation, and
   their insertion into international law as not a move toward free trade, but instead as a result
   of protectionism and rent-seeking.
                                                                            —Amy Kapczynski1

   Health and public hygiene slow the exhaustion of labour power … Public education cover[s]
   future needs for trained manpower … Public city transportation, financed by the entire
   population, deliver[s] manpower to the factories in good condition … Nationalization of
   energy sources and raw materials place[s] onto the shoulders of the entire population the
   burden of supplying industrial needs at low cost. The expansion of public activity, in short, is
   welcome so long as it limits itself to publicly pre-financing the basis of monopoly expansion
   and accumulation.
                                                                                   —André Gorz

It is crucial to understand extractive abandonment not only as a national
process of the state, turned inward on its own population, but also as a
process turned outward to target international populations. The twentieth
century saw dramatic shifts in the policy orientations of these various
imbrications of health and capitalism. The United States and other wealthy
capitalist countries are best understood as having served as hosts to the
growth of the health-capitalist relationship, incubating the various health
industries and taking an active role in assisting with their spread. In few
health industries is this process clearer than in the pharmaceutical industry.
Throughout the twentieth century, US imperialist practices were wielded in
no small part through the private pharmaceutical industry, with the explicit
goal of furthering a US- and Euro-centric capitalist hegemony. In the
process, entire nations were, and remain, pathologized and marked as
surplus, to which the logics of extractive abandonment were then turned.
This essentially colonial framework is the subject of PHARMACOLOGY.
     The extension of colonialism via the dynamics of global trade relations
is far from a new observation. As early as the 1950s, the USSR was
publicly accusing the US, during United Nations meetings, of using its trade
proposals to advance an agenda that would displace European colonial
power into the hands of the United States.2 The particulars of how this was
achieved by the US, European nations, and a handful of transnational
corporations who dominated the drug trade in the mid-twentieth century,
however, demonstrates the essential position health—and the ability to
define and manage it—plays in contemporary capitalism. It also shows the
importance of an internationalist agenda pursuing the liberation of health
from capital. Pharmaceutical companies are among the most visible
examples of the threats posed to global public health by the international
spread of health-capitalism. They operate as extrastate international actors
and, as we will demonstrate, actively participate in both the marking of
entire nations as surplus and in constructing a global rationing regime for
therapeutics and care.
    The importance of internationalism is not simply to wrest profits from a
massive global enterprise. Capitalist control of international pharmaceutical
research, manufacture, and distribution has demonstrable negative effects
on global public health.3 Just as states are marked as surplus under the trade
and intellectual property regimes that constitute the global drug industry, so
too are entire categories of people marked as surplus by the deprioritization
of orphan drug development under global capitalism. Drug development,
while largely directed by wealthy capitalist states as a matter of public
funding, is largely oriented toward a work-reparative goal in resonance with
the capitalist debt and eugenic ideologies discussed in previous chapters.
Drugs are, in short, increasingly valuable as a subject of capitalist
management, as a regulatory mechanism for moving people across the
worker/surplus divide.
    Movements for health justice would do well to recognize the global
specter that pharmaceutical companies portend. National health movements
—for example, the Medicare for All movement in the United States, or
movements to defend or expand the UK’s National Health Service—can
only accomplish so much if the role of global pharmaceutical companies is
allowed to persist. With this in mind we will turn, at the close of this
chapter, to a key period for the activist group ACT UP in the late 1980s and
early 1990s, when the group wrestled with internal conflicts over their
 approach toward pharmaceutical companies. Bringing drug research,
development, manufacture, and distribution under global international
control within a health communist framework would itself constitute a
substantial attack on global capitalist hegemony. Health communism must
be international.
    This is one area where we break with predecessors who have conducted
analyses of the political economy of health. It is crucial to understand that
pharmaceuticals and therapies are not simply expensive, and generally so
valuable as to be the subject of thorough capitalist regulation, because of
some nefarious process of marketing driven by capitalist ambition toward
endless growth.4 Equally, we reject the idea that the regulation of “drug
prices” is an essential component to national health systems, or that national
health systems, as welfare programs, should ration the types of
pharmaceuticals available to their publics in order to “reduce costs” to the
system. Any liberatory health movement that believes in the necessity of
rationing care will fail. To do so is to accept the capitalist logic that health
belongs to and is of the market, one component in a broader cost-benefit
analysis chart (for instance, the often cited line in US health-capitalist
discourse that healthcare prices are high because of the “overutilization” of
health services).5 Logics of rationing and the biocertification of a
“deserving” drug recipient also reflect attitudes cemented during the
twentieth century that demarcated licit from illicit drugs and set a formal
role for the state as a manager of that divide. This framework assumes that
the holes in the safety net are meant to be there, as is the debt/eugenic
burden, and just need to be budgeted properly by the state.
    Instead, we assert that pharmaceuticals are valuable to capital precisely
because they can serve essential functions in managing public health of
national and international populations. The growth of this industry,
particularly in the twentieth century, is ample evidence of this.
Pharmacology has been employed as a colonial arm of the major capitalist
empires to explicitly and deliberately advance the further spread of US and
European capitalist state structures. Identifying the global colonial role the
pharmaceutical industry plays is critically important to resisting extractive
abandonment, both within national boundaries and beyond.

                                      —
 In the twentieth century, the pharmaceutical industry emerged as a key
component of capitalist empire, exemplified by the US state. This
relationship is symbiotic: In some instances, the state turned to
pharmaceutical companies as a vessel for outward colonial and economic
expansion. In other cases, pharmaceutical companies did the same, turning
to the state for assistance in expanding their markets and monopolies
through diplomatic or juridical tactics, or through overt threats of violence
or the oppression of external states. In the process, a relationship was forged
between state power and global pharmaceutical enterprise that precipitated
the rise of capital in its current role as defender of a global intellectual
property regime.
    The 1950s marked a significant turning point for the ascendant
pharmaceutical industry in the United States. In this decade, as the US
sought to expand its grip on the international economy, a significant
reorientation took place in the role of drugs in society. The industry
dominance of European pharmaceutical companies began to wane, and they
were supplanted by US and transnational corporations. The ascendancy of
US firms was not, however, preordained. At each stage, US state power was
mobilized to defend private industry and establish US dominance of the
global market to head off the perceived threat of communist ideology. This
provoked a reaction: by the end of the decade, a growing domestic
resentment in the US toward high drug prices would manifest in a series of
high-profile hearings led by Senator Estes Kefauver, which sought,
unsuccessfully, to establish greater state regulation of drug development
and prices.
    In the Kefauver hearings, criticizing the US drug industries was framed
as a question of Cold War loyalty. For example, Lowell Coggeshall, vice
president of the University of Chicago, testifying in the Kefauver hearings,
warned that criticism was detrimental because the United States’
“excellence in the treatment of disease may very well be decisive in the
ultimate outcome” of the Cold War.6 Most profoundly, these issues would
merge with expanding the state definition of “illicit” drugs as a justification
for the designation of a population as “waste” and their subsequent mass
incarceration—carceral abandonment.
    The Kefauver hearings provide a valuable situational context for the
ascendant position of pharmaceutical companies at this time. For example,
during the hearings Merck president John T. Connor defended the moral
 imperatives of the pharmaceutical industry as vectors of capitalism,
“fighting the spread of communist ideology,” noting that this was why
Merck had made efforts to establish corticosteroid manufacturing plants in
developing countries.7 These efforts, however, had little to do with fighting
communism and everything to do with massive disruptions in the global
steroid trade in the 1950s, as initiated by Syntex, a (capitalist)
pharmaceutical company in Mexico.
    In the early twentieth century, European firms had developed a method
of synthesizing steroid hormones from animal cholesterol, a costly and slow
process that limited the mass production of steroid and hormone treatments.
By the late 1940s, Syntex (working with American chemist Russell Marker,
who had defected from Pennsylvania State University to start a lab in
Mexico City) had developed a method to produce progesterone from the
plant genus Dioscorea, and later from the barbasco plant, an abundant
resource then categorized as an invasive species. By 1950, Syntex had
developed methods to synthesize not only progesterone but also androgens,
estrogens, and corticoids. The impact of this quicker, cheaper process was
swift. According to sociologist Gary Gereffi, “Most of the steroid
manufacturers in Europe and the United States were thus forced to abandon
their own processes and either use Mexican starting materials or buy their
finished hormones from Mexican sources.” By the end of the 1950s, 80 to
90 percent of global steroid production was done by a handful of Mexican
pharmaceutical companies. Despite this figure, Syntex faced such steep
barriers to international markets that it emerged principally as a raw
material supplier, and it was only allowed to enter these markets after its
sale to an American holding corporation in the mid-1950s. By the end of
the decade, American and transnational pharmaceutical companies like
Merck, with the backing of the US government, could succeed in entering
the Mexican market directly, attempting to bypass companies like Syntex
entirely.8
    Merck’s activities abroad, and in Mexico in particular, then, were far
from the capitalist-humanitarian and anti-communist mission its president
had portrayed in the Kefauver hearings. Prior to Syntex’s developments,
Merck had been the only producer of cortisone in the world, using a much
costlier, slower process.9 In 1955, Merck, along with Pfizer and four other
American pharmaceutical companies, began to lobby the Counselor for
American Affairs in the US Embassy in Mexico and Mexico’s Secretary of
 the National Economy to protest what they saw as market manipulation and
intervention by the Mexican state in international trade dynamics. This
resulted in Syntex being compelled into a licensing agreement with the US
government to sell its materials to the American market, followed by
Syntex being brought before a Senate committee hearing in 1956 over
alleged “patent infringement.” Just two months before the hearing, Syntex
was sold to Ogden Corporation, an American holding company.
    These strategies—corporate-capitalist and US power aligned in an overt
defense over “property rights”—formed the mobilizing strategy to regulate
pharmaceutical capital throughout the twentieth century. The case of Syntex
is broadly illustrative of the myths that solidified around this time that the
production and refinement of new drugs to treat or forestall disease was
unique to the innovative ethos of American and European capitalism. This
was, and still is, a fantasy. The claim that “developing” countries are
incapable of producing new drugs, or drugs of good quality, is not truth but
rather political repression enforced by trade regimes; it is an expression of
colonialism.

                                     —

The case of Syntex demonstrates the increasing reliance on the technology
and enforcement of patents since the twentieth century. As Gereffi notes,
“The earliest ‘wonder drugs’—sulfanilamide, penicillin, cortisone, and
hydrocortisone—were not patented. Improved versions of these products …
were patented, but the patents were licensed widely” to other
pharmaceutical manufacturers. After widespread licensing led to an
abundance of drugs in the market and a steep drop in prices in the 1940s,
pharmaceutical companies instead turned toward using their patents to
intentionally restrict available supply. In other words, “by not licensing
their patents, firms were able to restrict output of their own drugs to levels
where monopoly products could be maximized.”10
    This led to public outcry and the Kefauver hearings at the end of the
1950s. Among Senator Kefauver’s policy goals for the hearings was to
establish legislation dramatically restricting the length and scope of
pharmaceutical patents. Industry representatives, as well as academic
physicians and scientists who had worked with or for pharmaceutical
companies in the past, came to the defense of the pharmaceutical patent
 system. This was the context in which Coggeshall referred to
pharmaceutical companies as playing a critical role in the Cold War.
Coggeshall was echoed by Dr. Philip S. Hench, who had worked with
Merck on the development of cortisone, when he stated, “At this time when
we are in a most serious scientific race with Russia,” Congress should not
“endanger by legislation the scientific, professional, and industrial
teamwork that has been responsible for putting us far ahead of the Russians
in at least this one regard.”11
    Perversely, Hench and others argued specifically against the curtailing
of drug patents by using steroid production as an example, echoing the
ongoing market disruption caused by the new production methods for
synthetic steroids and hormones. One of Kefauver’s proposed patent
limitations would reduce the ability of drug companies to file new patents
on minor changes to drug composition (thus curtailing the renewal of
intellectual properties close to expiry, referred to by critics of intellectual
property regimes as “evergreening”). Hench proclaimed the proposal
disastrous, asserting that “the current history of corticosteroid
pharmacology has taught us … that marked, indeed profound physiological
and therapeutic changes can be, and have been, obtained from making what
had appeared to be minor molecular changes.”12 Another physician, Dr.
Edward W. Boland, wrote to the Kefauver subcommittee that “during the
last 8 years much knowledge had been gained regarding the effects of
chemical alterations on the physiological properties of steroids,” and that
changing the patent qualifications would “discourage continued efforts to
modify the molecular structures of steroids and … impede the introduction
of new drugs.”13 The irony of both these defenses is that US patents had
done little to aid the advancement of scientific development of steroids at
this time. If anything, the patent system had just been mobilized against
new developments from outside the United States. Testimony in defense of
the pharmaceutical patent system included Vannevar Bush (who had
worked at Merck), who warned of the patent provision in Kefauver’s bill,
“You gentlemen have a blunt instrument in your hands. If you use it you
will do great harm.”14

                                      —
 The pharmaceutical industries and the relationship of drugs to the American
state in this period cannot be evaluated solely on the basis of the state as a
mediating factor between various enterprises manufacturing licit drugs for
individual consumption. A significant amount of the leverage and
monopoly stakeholder position drug companies were able to take at this
time stemmed from direct cooperation between the state and private
corporations in order to preclude some drugs from the market as “illicit.”
    By the 1950s, the categorization of illicit drugs, and the corresponding
policing and regulation of these drugs from American bourgeois society,
had taken hold. Cold War hysteria positioned the United States as subject to
demographic and biological threat from agents of communism. Despite the
fact that the United States had become, following World War II, the
preeminent global supplier of narcotic substances such as cocaine, a
concerted effort was made by government officials, including Harry
Anslinger, commissioner of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics (predecessor to
the Drug Enforcement Agency), along with innumerable media figures, to
push the baseless claim that the United States was subject to an epidemic of
heroin use directly pushed by communist forces.
    These allegations were rampant in the American public imaginary of the
early 1950s. Public officials and industry leaders asserted that the US was
subject to, in the words of Anslinger, “chemical (heroin) warfare”
perpetrated by the Chinese Communist Party. The common assertion was
that China was bringing heroin into the United States for the purpose of
suppressing the American public, deriving significant illicit profits as a
result. The New York Times echoed these sentiments in its editorial pages,
running with assertions that “narcotic addiction [is] a weapon against the
societies in which it can get a foothold,” and “teen-age addicts in New York
are helping to pay for the shells that kill American boys in Korea.”15 The
US Office of National Drug Control Policy put out a series of ads to this
effect, with text reading “Where do terrorists get their money? If you buy
drugs, some of it might come from you.”16
    As historian Suzanna Reiss notes, the situational irony of these claims—
for which evidence was never produced—was not lost on the public
officials who promoted them. It was well known that from the eighteenth
century, the British East India Company had participated in colonial
economic warfare on China through the opium trade, culminating in the
“opium wars” of the nineteenth century. American public officials simply
 inverted this relationship, suggesting that China was now turning the same
tactics of economic warfare toward the American empire.
    These ideas would remain pervasive in American society through the
1950s, with a wide variety of public figures voicing consternation over the
threat of communist heroin. Many of these arguments characteristically
conflated this supposed biological threat with an economic one, leading to
such proclamations as: “Red treasuries swell as free world consumption of
drugs mounts. The social aspect of the menace is evident in the
degenerating effects upon our youth.” And, “Our Communist enemy has
invaded. They are shooting our youth with drugs instead of bullets.”
Senator Alexander Wiley, chair of the US Senate Committee on Foreign
Relations, went so far as to implicate Mao Zedong himself:
   Mao Tze-Tung is engaged in undermining the health and morale and the strength of our boys
   in the services … It is not just a few skunks around the corner that are handling it … it is the
   result of people in high places, like Mao Tze-Tung, who is using [opium] as a weapon to
   deteriorate the morale and health of this country.17

     The anti-communist hysteria in the United States, mobilized explicitly
toward the designation of illicit drugs as a social and political menace,
would quickly lead to pathologization and explicit calls for the extractive
abandonment of drug users and their demarcation as surplus. This
pathologization was used to great effect to police and incarcerate members
of the surplus populations at a time when anti-colonial, anti-racist, and
leftist sentiment was high in these communities. Drug use was invoked as
an inherent pathology in language that recalls the rhetoric mobilized against
the ill, the disabled, the mad, and the paupers of prior centuries: “Addiction,
then, is a disease of high social contagion that not only may produce
criminality … but also tends to attack those persons whose resistance to
anti-social activity is, for a multitude of reasons, notoriously low.”18 As
Reiss notes, this rhetoric and the escalation of disciplinary control over
newly illicit drugs dramatically escalated policing through the 1950s, as
well as incarceration, marking a significant development in the shape of
contemporary American racial capitalism. The Boggs Act of 1951, for
example, was an early statute passed in a wave of legislative activity
defining carceral preferences toward illicit drug use. The Boggs Act
established the first mandatory minimum sentencing, which persists to this
day as a principal tool of state subjection fueling mass incarceration.
     The carceral attitudes of the era extended to the direct, and literal,
comparison of what was to be done with people using newly illicit drugs to
the previous approach to madness and the designation of the worker/surplus
divide. Echoing the history we have discussed in earlier chapters, one
prosecutor invoked the asylum system as the ideal solution to the social
menace of drug use:
   The plan calls for the hospitalization of addicts on a massive scale … Some of these …
   might be work camps; others might be on farms … others—more immediately available—
   would be existing institutions, such as mental hospitals with beds that have been emptied
   through the miracle of tranquilizers and improved therapy, or tuberculosis sanitariums
   vacated by the new wonder drugs.19

     Rhetoric like this was successful in prompting early significant
international agreements on the regulation of the drug trade. A 1953
initiative by Anslinger and the FBN to control the opium trade was adopted
nationally and became the subject of a decade-long campaign to shape
international law (it was instituted internationally in 1963). The protocol
limited opium production to Bulgaria, Greece, India, Iran, Turkey, the
USSR, and Yugoslavia, and put limits on the importation of these
substances according to “legitimate demand”—defined as only enough to
meet “the medical needs of the world.” Crucially, the arrangement allowed
for on-site inspections of any producing facility, and any state found to have
a facility in violation could be subject to austere trade embargo. The treaty
was understood as one of “the most stringent drug-control provisions yet
embodied by international law.”20 This formalization of states
internationally policing the boundaries between licit and illicit drugs
through trade policy—enforced through sanctions and economic or military
retaliation—prefaced the establishment, later in the century, of trade laws as
the central disciplinary apparatus behind “licit” drugs.

                                             —

Decades later, the largely separate battles in the 1950s over pharmaceutical
patents and international trade regulation would become intimately linked
to the power and capital accumulation of American corporations. In the
process, the respective roles of industry and the state in pharmaceutical
production and the regulation of the political economy of health would
become further defined, while also further imbricating the two.
      The developing role of patents in the protection of pharmaceutical
monopolies, as illustrated in the events surrounding the Kefauver hearings
of the 1950s, was the direct precursor to the set of international intellectual
property controls mobilized by global capitalism today. This is true not only
of drug patents but of all varieties of intellectual property: the principal
trade arrangements in the 1990s were in large part executed because of
stakeholder mobilization from pharmaceutical companies and a set of other
allied industries (in particular, the computer and software industries). In
fact, there is a clear body of legal scholarship that locates the development
of the current global intellectual property regime, particularly as manifested
in the powers of the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPS) agreement discussed below, as stemming directly and intentionally
from legal frameworks proposed by industry stakeholder groups
themselves. That is, the primacy of intellectual property to contemporary
international trade was developed by those most concerned with protecting
and regulating their own intellectual property interests.
     Susan K. Sell documents this lineage in her scholarship, asserting that,
importantly, “the recent globalization of intellectual property rights
originated in the United States.”21 This is true not only because the main
agitating forces behind the current intellectual property regime were
American diplomats, but also because a small group of American capitalists
functionally dictated the main intellectual property protections that state
representatives sought during international negotiations. This group, the
Intellectual Property Committee (IPC), was made up of a rotating coalition
of around a dozen corporate executives led principally by Edmund Pratt,
CEO of Pfizer, and John Opel, CEO of IBM. As Sell writes, “These private
sector actors succeeded in getting most of what they wanted from an
[intellectual property] agreement, which now has the status of international
law. In effect, twelve corporations made public law for the world.”22
     What this group of industrialists won in the ratification of the TRIPS
agreement was the conflation of intellectual property concerns with trade
issues.23 Prior to the TRIPS agreement, the World Intellectual Property
Organization had no effective enforcement mechanism of its own.24 In
other words, earlier in the twentieth century pharmaceutical patent
protections were policed through few real mechanisms to exert state power
over parties found to be “infringing” property rights. Intellectual property,
 itself a muddy juridical concept, might be enforced in one locale in one way
and unenforced in another, with no existing punitive apparatus backed by
state power to support pharmaceutical companies ready to demand
reparations for a putative violation of their property rights.
     With TRIPS, recognizing intellectual property of all kinds—including
pharmaceutical patents—was made a condition of international trade
participation for World Trade Organization members, and correspondingly
tied to existing mechanisms of state and imperial punishment for trade
violations. Only as recently as the mid-1990s, with the ratification of the
TRIPS agreement, did a formal mechanism come into place whereby an
international pharmaceutical company could protest drug production or
development around the world and expect to see swift political, military, or
economic action by the US and other imperial WTO members against the
“offending” state. As Amy Kapczynski has noted, the link between
intellectual property protections, global trade regimes, and state power has
produced a “persistent threat of unilateral retaliation” for states that would
ignore or reject international corporations’ patent rights.
     These dynamics mark a finite barrier between wealthy “developed”
nations and those consistently held underneath as vessels of extraction. It is
a colonial process that marks entire states as surplus.
     Those in violation of trade agreements are pilloried for engaging in a
kind of phenomenological theft, regardless of whether the corporate owners
of the intellectual property have any interest in producing a given drug for
the market the “infringers” are supposedly superseding them in. This
dynamic was made explicit in the conversations leading up to the
ratification of TRIPS and in efforts to compel signatories to the cause.
According to Jacques Gorlin of IBM, IPC’s director, the goal of the
proposals that became the TRIPS agreement was to “avoid the
obstructionist tactics of the [less developed countries].”25
     This narrative—that states who ignore intellectual property claims by
pharmaceutical companies are engaged in theft—remains pervasive. For
example, in 2012, India issued a compulsory license for sorafenib, a cancer
drug principally owned by Bayer (marketed as Nexavar). This compulsory
license was fully consistent with the TRIPS agreement, but Bayer, which
had been selling the drug in India for the equivalent of $5,500 per month,
retaliated in international court and put pressure on the US state to threaten
 the country with sanctions. At a Financial Times event following this
incident, Bayer’s CEO Marjin Dekkers would say of the dispute:
   I don’t know if you’ve even been to India, there are a lot of poor Indians obviously, and the
   hospitals aren’t that close by [laughs] to where they live, so we found that this was extremely
   politically motivated and essentially, I would say, theft. Of the Indian government, of a
   capability of a company that is patented, and therefore a patent right. So now, is this going to
   have a big effect on our business model? No, because we did not develop this product for the
   Indian market, let’s be honest. I mean, you know, we developed this product for western
   patients who can afford this product, quite honestly. It is an expensive product, being an
   oncology product. But you know the risk in these situations is always spillover. If this
   generic Indian company is now going to sell this product, then South Africa, and then New
   Zealand, you never know, you know, how this is going to spillover. And that puts the whole
   industry and the patent right of an industry at risk.26

In addition to positioning this compulsory license as “theft,” Bayer
immediately lobbied the US government to take punitive actions toward
India in retaliation. Two weeks after India filed its compulsory license, US
Commerce Secretary John Bryson flew to New Delhi to meet with India’s
Minister of Commerce and Industry, warning that pharmaceuticals were “a
competitive area” for the US and that “any dilution of the international
patent regime was a cause for deep concern.”27 India was shortly thereafter
placed on the United States’ “priority watch list,” broadly understood as a
threat of international sanctions—economic and material warfare under
global capitalism.
    Importantly, this scenario is not an outlier; it is the desired outcome of
the TRIPS agreement. These actions are now a matter of course when
pharmaceutical companies feel threatened by the prospect of surplus nations
rejecting property rights to address the health of their populations. In 1998,
South Africa was placed on the priority watch list simply for having a law
in place that would allow compulsory licensing. In 1999, when Thailand
considered compulsory licensing for an expensive AIDS drug, they were
threatened with sanctions, and ultimately placed on the priority watch list
when they acted on the compulsory license in 2007. As Sell writes,
“Corporations also pursue normative power, or the construction of the
normative context. This normative context defines right and wrong, and
distinguishes fair from unfair practices.”28

                                                 —
 The role of global pharmaceutical companies in reinforcing the power of
capital and the state must therefore be understood as a key challenge for
health communist movements, ultimately toward the abolition of
capitalism. It is with this in mind that we conclude this chapter with a coda
on the radical potential contained for a period within the group ACT UP in
the 1980s and 1990s. Ideological conflict over the issue of drug
development led to the formation of Treatment Action Group (TAG), and a
split within the movement about whether to work alongside or against
dominant structures of health-capitalism. We understand the conflicts
presented in the remainder of this chapter as a cautionary tale of what is lost
when solidarity is abandoned.
    The AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power, or ACT UP, was a grassroots
political group working to fight the HIV/AIDS epidemic formed in New
York City in 1987.29 Leaderless in theory, ACT UP was an organization
with an explicitly horizontal membership model.30 The group was divided
into various caucuses and committees organized around different issues and
constituencies, like the Finance Committee which managed overall
accounting; the Housing Committee, which later broke off and became the
independent organization Housing Works; the Media Committee; the
Actions Committee, which coordinated a constant series of campaigns,
protests, political funerals, mutual aid projects, and zaps (their term for
direct actions); the Latino Caucus, which was formed around issues of
pharmaceutical access in Puerto Rico; and the Women’s Caucus.31 Each
group was unified in solidarity through centralized funds.32 ACT UP
demonstrated that through direct action protest, the immense power that
pharmaceutical companies had to make live, rather than let die, could be
quickly mobilized, though only when faced with relentless and militant
public outrage.33
    ACT UP’s tactics differed from those of other HIV/AIDS groups at the
time, most of whom focused on providing healthcare within the community
or worked in more formal non-profit arenas, funded by grants from local
governments or grants from other charitable foundations. ACT UP was
confrontational, particularly in their earliest tactics. As Larry Kramer
remembered in 2007:
   These are just a few of the things ACT UP did to make the world pay attention: We invaded
   the offices of drug companies and scientific laboratories and chained ourselves to the desks
    of those in charge. We chained ourselves to the trucks trying to deliver a drug company’s
   products. We liberally poured buckets of fake blood in public places. We closed the tunnels
   and bridges of New York and San Francisco … We tossed the ashes from dead bodies from
   their urns on to the White House lawn … We infiltrated the floor of the New York Stock
   Exchange for the first time in its history so we could confetti the place with flyers urging the
   brokers to “SELL WELLCOME.” We boarded ourselves up inside Burroughs-Wellcome,
   (now named GlaxoSmithKline), which owns AZT, in Research Triangle so they had to blast
   us out. We had regular demonstrations, Die-Ins we called them, at the Food and Drug
   Administration and the National Institutes of Health, at City Halls, at the White House, in
   the halls of Congress, at government buildings everywhere, starting with our first
   demonstration on Wall Street, where crowds of us lay flat on the ground with our arms
   crossed over our chests or holding cardboard tombstones until the cops had to cart us away
   by the vans-full. We had massive demonstrations at the FDA and the NIH. There was no
   important meeting anywhere that we did not invade, interrupt, and infiltrate. We threatened
   Bristol-Myers that if they did not distribute [Videx] immediately we would manufacture it
   ourselves and distribute a promising drug some San Francisco activists had stolen from its
   Canadian factory and had duplicated.34

ACT UP’s actions were reinforced in their radical rhetoric and demands.
(This would continue long after the group’s actions had become less
aggressive. For example, in 1995, when US National Institutes of Health
Director Dr. Anthony Fauci was invited to speak at a benefit dinner by
another group, Project Inform, celebrating “Ten Years of Hope” against the
HIV/AIDS crisis, ACT UP members circulated an open letter proclaiming
that “With 270,000 dead from AIDS and millions more infected with HIV,
you should not be honored at a dinner. You should be put before a firing
squad.”35)
    Their radical aggression was more than warranted. As Gregg Bordowitz
explains:
   In 1985—people don’t realize that in the mid-1980s, at very high levels within the Reagan
   administration, quarantine and mandatory HIV testing were considered viable policy
   options. You had people like [William F.] Buckley, who said that gay men should be tattooed
   on their ass, and drug users should be tattooed on their arms, so the invisible threats would
   be rendered visible. We were aware of the history of internment of the Japanese during
   World War II … We were very scared that the Reagan administration was going to put
   people with AIDS in internment camps. And I think we came close to that in this country. I
   do not think we were simply panicking or engaging in some kind of conspiratorial fantasy …
   I remember thinking through those problems, and what would be a legitimate response. How
   could we defend ourselves from being put into camps? I remember thinking aloud that
   perhaps armed resistance would be one justifiable means … That’s how serious the threat
   seemed to me at that time … The FDA action put us on the offense and enabled us to come
   up with a vision for the way that healthcare should be done in this country, the way that
   drugs should be researched, and sold, and made available. Most importantly—and I keep
   returning to this—was the idea that people with AIDS should be at the center of the public
   discussion on AIDS … We had our agenda. We were just going to seize control of the FDA
    and run the fucking thing ourselves. We knew that we weren’t actually going to do that, but
   this was it. We were just going to seize control. This was why it was so important, even
   though many people found that frightening—I was told, “Gregg, back off of that rhetoric.”
   But I just thought it was incredibly important to stay on point with that rhetoric.36

With comrades, friends, and lovers dying all around them ACT UP was
initially sustained by a wild fight-or-flight survival momentum. As Andrea
Benzacar recalls:
   That was a period of incredible emergency. People were dying and there was nothing we
   could do about it. So, when you had these conversations about drugs into bodies and waiting
   some period of time, well, if you had a friend with KS [Kaposi sarcoma] or you had a friend
   with CMV [Cytomegalovirus] and there were drugs that were there, that were being tested,
   you wanted the fucking drugs. And you didn’t want to wait around, and they couldn’t wait
   around.37

What emerged was what many surviving original members of the group
called a “dual strategy.” At the time AZT, was the only approved treatment,
and was clearly demonstrating to be lethal, often killing people quicker than
HIV/AIDS alone; gaining access to different drugs or trial treatments was a
matter of life and death.
     In 1988, the Treatment and Data (T&D) Committee, the predecessor to
TAG, was formed out of what was formally the Issues Committee.38 The
initial goal of T&D was the dissemination of treatment information.39 As it
became clear that AZT was a deadly and ineffective therapeutic, T&D used
the attention ACT UP brought through their direct actions, and the pressure
that the rank and file put on pharmaceutical executives, government
officials, and researchers to attempt to petition for drug trials and more
basic research studying how HIV/AIDS behaved within the body.40 T&D
began to ascertain its own treatment methods and develop its own
educational materials, filling a community need that the state and many in
the medical professions were not addressing. T&D conducted teach-ins and
trained group members to translate the complicated scientific and medical
jargon into actionable and usable treatment information for those on the
ground who needed drugs or therapies. T&D created strategies for
revamping clinical trials, speeding testing and approvals processes,
diversifying recruiting, and other regulatory overhauls.41 They began to
amass power and influence within the scientific community, which reflected
their ability to pass as insiders.42
     While this could appear a demonstration of radical solidarism and
contestation of hierarchies of expertise, countless members have instead
portrayed the actions of T&D—a group largely composed of cis white men
—as becoming quickly exclusive, even exclusionary. As Moises Agosto
explains in an interview with Sarah Schulman:
   MA: Going to the Treatment and Data Committee meetings, I realized that the reason why a
     lot of these guys kept being healthy was because they had access to the information.
   SS: The guys in Treatment and Data?
   MA: In the Treatment and Data Committee. They had access to Fauci. They had access to all
     these people. And I started to wonder, “I want that. And I want it to be everybody else.”
     …
     I always was with this kind of insecurity that I didn’t know enough. It’s like that feeling, I
     always say, when you’re a person of color here. It’s like you have to prove yourself twice
     and three times. In the treatment and research area, you have to prove yourself like five
     times.
   SS: To the scientists or to [T&D]?
   MA: Both.43

Fundamentally, the issue came down to the social reproduction of power.
T&D gained professional notoriety within the medical community for their
approach to scientific education. This was possible in part because the
membership of T&D already reflected power, which was crucial in their
transformation from radical outsiders to cozy insiders. As Dudley Saunders
explains, this framework of HIV/AIDS activism through the lens of cis
white male privilege naturally meant that structural inequity was
reproduced within ACT UP itself, despite attempts to run the organization
under egalitarian principles and with a horizontal leadership. What resulted
was an attitude of liberal tokenism.
   If you’re a privileged white guy, you’ve got the—it’s easy for you to focus on just making
   the science happen; just making a drug a cure, because you know you’re going to get it. And,
   of course, you believe that everyone should have access to it, but you’re not going to think
   about that right now. You’ll make sure you write in “access to people of color, and women
   and children.” You’ll throw that in every time, and, you know, God bless you. But, there was
   an enormous amount of distrust.44

As T&D gained notoriety outside of the group, they became increasingly
emboldened to moderate the focus of ACT UP’s organizing. This was
perhaps most evident in the deprioritization of organizing efforts around
non-pharmaceutical HIV/AIDS interventions like condoms and needle
exchange programs.45 Though there was great demand for this work in the
 community, and though many within ACT UP felt that there was great
urgency to pursue these political projects, it was difficult to gain support or
attention from what had become the dominant group within the
organization.46 As Jeffrey Fennelly explains, the radical language being
used in poster designs promoting safe sex were felt to be outside of the
ACT UP mission, demonstrating that to some within the group, the
foundation of their activism was the fight for the pharmaceutical cure,
leaving little room for nonpharmaceutical interventions:
   I’d never spoken before or after that, since then. He argued that “This is not what we were
   about. We’re not about education. That’s GMHC or that’s whomever, but we’re not about
   that.” I was like, “But it will save lives in the long run. It’s preventive.” “We’re not about
   that. We’re about treatment. We’re about a cure. We’re about saving lives through a cure.”47

Within T&D, there were concerns about ACT UP’s radical tactics of direct
action.48 As many surviving members have noted, there was a sense that the
early radical tactics that had gotten ACT UP “in the door” were now
gauche. T&D’s newfound insider relationship, holding meetings and
collaborating with Congress and with representatives of pharmaceutical
companies, strained already existing tensions within the organization.49 As
Maxine Wolfe explains, when a group of members attempted to place a
moratorium on collaboration with government officials, T&D forced the
vote down:
   They had already decided, in a way—that whole grouping of men—that their interest lay in
   pushing the drug stuff. And, unfortunately, their view of things, which was that politics was
   separate from medicine, prevailed, eventually. But, at that point, that was not what ACT UP
   was. The beauty of ACT UP was that it was about the fact that medicine is political.50

    Members who disagreed with T&D, accurately identifying that
collaborating with pharmaceutical companies was collaboration with the
enemy, describe the attitudes within T&D as a kind of “Stockholm
Syndrome”:
   And so there was this kind of Stockholm Syndrome happening; that if you, if you argue too
   much, or yell too loud, and you aren’t reasonable with them, they’ll screw us horribly … A
   lot of the research on a drug had been done at the NIH, at taxpayer expense, including early
   clinical trials; and then that drug was licensed to a company, to complete the development
   piece of it; that they would simply agree not to screw the crap out of people. I’m sure that’s
   not exactly the terminology they used in the CRADA [Cooperative Research and
   Development] agreements, but essentially that’s what they were.
        And one of the things I’ll never forgive Peter Staley for—as I understand it, and forgive
   me if I’m wrong, Peter—but was that he went down to Congress, and testified, as an activist,
   that the CRADA agreements were stymieing AIDS drug development. And I think that was
   a horrific mistake. I think that was the kind of thinking that characterized a lot of treatment
   activists.
       And to this day, I’m very disappointed with the AIDS Treatment Action Coalition, this
   ATAC group; which seems to hand out a lot of money to people of color to learn how to be
   —so-called pharmaceutical—“pharmaceutical-company aware,” so they can go to these
   meetings and do what? And it begins to almost smell like one of these grassroots
   organizations that, Schering-Plough, for example, was famous for, around hepatitis C;
   creating grassroots organization fronts that were really nothing more than marketing tools for
   them.51

The race for the cure had become a justification for polite collaboration
with the enemy. ACT UP started to split. Though many surviving members
credit this breakdown as inevitable, many more characterize it as a
fundamental ideological conflict. Rank-and-file members felt excluded, that
their efforts were being undermined by the members of T&D.52 Many in the
Women’s Caucus took issue with the fact that T&D were taking meetings
with the very same politicians, government officials, and corporations the
larger group was targeting for direct action.53 As Wolfe notes:
   We were doing actions against [CDC HIV/AIDS Task Force Director] James Curran, [T&D
   member] Mark Harrington was down there, with a woman who—I don’t even know her
   name—was on the Treatment and Data Committee, and they were meeting with the very
   people who we were fighting against. And, what’s more, they were claiming that this woman
   spoke for women, and even though she had not worked on any of the [Women’s Caucus]
   stuff, and actually had not done anything about women and HIV.

Wolfe goes on to recount that there was no surprise from rank-and-file
members when T&D decided to publicly break with ACT UP, ultimately
forming TAG, to maintain their insider status:
   They were going to split off anyway because they had become convinced that the way to
   proceed was to separate politics from medicine. That is what their point was. They actually
   believed that their biggest impact was to design trials with the people at NIH. That’s what
   they ended up doing. That’s what TAG became—“treatment advocacy.” They would sit on
   all these committees. They would sit on committees with drug companies, and I think that,
   partly, it was whatever they wanted to get out of it for themselves, and partly it was what
   they saw as their way of doing politics. They tried to do this reorganization of the NIH that
   would literally give them control of it. It didn’t work. And they put out this thing that there
   were social issues and there were medical issues, and that they were about the medical
   issues.54
 “Medical issues” cannot be separated from “social issues,” just as under our
current political economy health cannot be understood as abstracted, or
separated, from capital. What T&D, and TAG, demonstrate is that a seat at
the table is of no use if the outcome is not accessible to those who need it
most. As the 1990s progressed, the HIV/AIDS landscape shifted. With
many more drugs providing a legitimate chance at survival, particularly for
white middle-class Americans, the HIV/AIDS crisis became increasingly
socially reproduced as a problem of the Global South, and of “less
developed countries,” even as it continues to ravage Black, Indigenous, and
poor communities in the US. Many connect the ongoing access crisis to the
fact that the members of ACT UP who became insiders were more
concerned with the development of an effective treatment or “cure,”
whatever the cost, and less concerned with helping the most vulnerable.
George Carter, interviewed in 2007, portrayed this tension as such:
   SS: So could you trace the current global access crisis to a lack of vision in ACT UP at those
     crucial moments?
   GC: It’s a lack of vision. I think there was a lack of—really—figuring out more novel ways
     to attack the industry. I think that’s because there was this fear. Because the industry was,
     was and is holding all our lives, mine included … hostage. We’re being held hostage by
     them, because they say, if you fuck with us too much, we’ll stop looking at your drugs,
     we’ll stop developing them. And then where will you be?

Carter situates T&D and TAG’s strategies of polite collaboration as a key
failure of the movement:
   So that kind of colonization of the mind, I think, had a really enormously deleterious impact.
   Yet, on the other hand, I didn’t come up with any particularly good strategies or ideas to say,
   how do we deal with these motherfuckers? I still don’t know. I wish I did. The only thing I
   can think of is not something I care to put in print.55

Other members, in particular those who were themselves insiders, reject
this assessment. When David Barr, a lawyer and founding member of both
T&D and later TAG/TAC, was asked if he felt there was a relationship
between the global access crisis and the decisions of ACT UP to collaborate
and build intimate professional relationships with pharmaceutical
companies, he firmly denied any possibility of correlation:
   Did we make issues of pricing and availability of drugs up front? Yeah. The very first action
   was about the price of AZT, on Wall Street. Right? … For all of its problems, it’s got a lot of
   people on treatment. It’s the work of AIDS activists that have gotten hundreds of thousands
   of people on treatment since 2002. So, is there a crisis? Yes. But you also, I think, need to
   look at the tremendous advances and success that have occurred … Can you get ARVs
    [antiretrovirals] for, less than $50 for a, per person now, for a year? Yes. Yes. Why? Because
   we did our job.

Barr suggests that the ongoing nature of the global HIV/AIDS crisis is a
problem of global “underdevelopment”:
   DB: The biggest obstacle—besides political will—is that, there is a lot of poverty and
     corruption and a lack of infrastructure that could, if everybody, if the leaders of the world
     woke up and said, let’s cure AIDS today, or let’s treat everybody for AIDS today, we
     couldn’t do it … It’s amazing how much we’ve been able to do with so little infrastructure
     in such a short amount of time … It’s that there is no infrastructure; it’s just not possible.
     The treatment is too complex; we can’t do it in Africa. There is no infrastructure for it.
   SS: So the idea that it’s First World greed or racism is not the truth; that the problem is
     underdevelopment?
   DB: Of course it’s the truth.
   SS: I’m serious, I’m asking you.
   DB: Of, of course it’s First World greed and racism and sexism—
   SS: Uh huh.
   DB: —and homophobia and drug-ism—what do we call it, I don’t know. Of course it’s all of
     those things. But that’s not all that it is. And—and are those things the greatest obstacles
     at the moment? Um—I don’t know.
   SS: You think underdevelopment is the greatest obstacle.
   DB: Poverty. Yeah. Is probably the greatest obstacle at the moment.56

The early provocative actions of ACT UP were highly effective. The
coalition was able to direct significant movement resources behind a broad
agenda, and ACT UP did get drugs into (some) bodies. Through radical and
aggressive protests activists were able to revolutionize the drug process, but
it was not enough. Failure, however, is not a bad thing. As abolitionist
Mariame Kaba explains, failure is integral to left movements: “Failure is
actually the norm and a good way for us to learn lessons that help us.”57
    What we must learn from ACT UP is not just their successes but their
failures as well. The novel and explicit precision of their revolutionary
demands captured the attention of the media, the NIH, the FDA, the CDC,
the governments of New York City and New York State, the US president,
Congress, and international powers. As power to aim media’s notice gave
way to elite access, these demands were not only tempered but rolled back,
leading to the loss of a robust and radical health justice movement that
could have been. The movement for health justice was lost in the fight for
the cure, as Bordowitz describes:
   I really wanted us—I felt that ACT UP was a healthcare movement and that ACT UP could
   achieve universal healthcare within New York State. That’s where all of my organizing went
    … So my idea was, “Okay, enough of this we’re all over the place. Now it’s time to kind of
   dig in for a long campaign, because we really have the opportunity here to get universal
   healthcare for the state.” That brought me into tensions with a whole bunch of people …
       By this time, I’m an out person with HIV within the group. And yet, that goes against the
   grain of the position of being an out person with HIV within the group, because to be out
   with HIV within the group you are really a kind of drugs-into-bodies first and foremost as a
   politic. I guess it had to do with treatment decisions and stuff like that. I didn’t really feel
   like there were a lot of treatment decisions in front of me. I don’t know if I had faith or not—
   faith that there would be a cure in my lifetime. I pretty much thought that I was going to die
   from this thing. And I felt that it was pretty clear that ACT UP and the AIDS movement was
   a catalyst for the growing healthcare movement at that time. So I was very much interested
   in that, and that ACT UP could join unions, and the unions could come together. It was this
   coalition politics idea that sexual politics, and race politics, and feminist politics could come
   together in such a way with the unions. I really wrote myself quite a Film International Cuba
   script. That increasingly brought me into alienation with the group, because the group was
   going in another direction. The group did not want to slow down for a long campaign.58

    Movements for health justice must move toward a new revolutionary
intersectional health communist politic, one that seeks to recapture and
reassert its radical history. Resisting the oppressive control that
pharmaceutical companies hold over the direction of research and
development will be one such struggle of our future. It is imperative that
movements look to ACT UP not only for inspiration but for guidance in
embracing, and not rejecting, solidarity when faced with the tremendous
pressures of capital.
                                       OceanofPDF.com
                                      BORDER

   We know the names of the killers. We know about the killing, the process by which it occurs,
   and the agents responsible. And we, as public health workers, must denounce not only the
   process, but the forces that do the killing. The WHO will never do that … It is not enough to
   define disease as the absence of death. Disease is a social and political category imposed on
   people within an enormously repressive social and economic capitalist system, one that
   forces disease and death on the world’s people.
                                                                              —Vicente Navarro1

   It is harder to identify individual risks, and still harder to attribute them to behavioral
   choices. There is no market value for the human body and no possibility of abandoning one
   that is worn out and acquiring a new one. The lack of a natural limit on costs (since the
   asset being insured, the body, has no price with which costs can be compared) distinguishes
   health from other insurable risks.
                                                                                —World Bank2

The project of Health Communism is essentially internationalist; while we
have been concerned over the course of this text primarily with
developments in the United States and several major European capitalist
economies, this has been in large part to extrapolate and demonstrate the
logics underpinning health-capitalism’s global expansion. As capital has
instrumentalized the definitions, biocertification, and consequences of
health and its social determinants, it is incumbent on us to recognize these
definitions and their intentional, outward expansion, in order to fully
extricate health from capital. This is particularly urgent, as in recent
decades capital’s expansion through global trade agreements and the
increased impact of global capital on global health chances has become
increasingly severe. In short, the health-capitalist model as incubated in
major capitalist economies, especially the United States, has successfully
franchised itself globally. It is therefore necessary to recognize that
movements for health justice cannot be constrained within national borders.
 The fights we have lost in the United States and in Europe, the concessions
made in the privatization of the welfare states, and the rise of a new form of
poor laws under the prevalence of philanthrocapitalist charity models have
all created significant global threats that we are responsible for undoing as a
matter of international solidarity. Under current health-capitalist systems,
we are less likely to see a successful movement toward any form of
national health communism than we are to see further losses and the further
retrenchment of global capital’s continued extrication of collective power
and resources. Further, the liberation of health from capital requires the
rejection of all nationalisms: the expansion of health-capitalism is
inextricably tied to the rise of contemporary state securitization and its
constituent bordering regimes, an ever-looming blight on the international
body politic.
     To understand the recent and dramatic rise of international health
capitalism, it is necessary to understand some of the less pronounced effects
of the major global trade agreements of recent decades. Copious literature
exists that is critical of the broad neoliberalizing trends affecting
international labor movements under globalization, including the expansion
of global capital to capture the economies and the welfare states of those
marked under international agreements and law as “less developed nations.”
Yet there is comparatively little documenting the direct harmful effects of
globalization on the political economy of health and the corresponding
international social determinants of health in these regions. In other words,
while accounts of the effects on the working class are relatively common,
there are comparatively few attempts to directly address the conditions of
the surplus.
     We are indebted in this regard to individuals who witnessed and have
been—and remain—critical of the rise of this outward expansion of
imperialist health-capitalism during the developments of the 1990s and
early twenty-first century, among them Vicente Navarro, Asa Cristina
Laurell and Oliva López Arellano, and Howard Waitzkin. In that period,
these and other international public health scholars wrote critically of pro-
industry reforms, largely in the International Journal of Health Services.
Their contestation of a series of significant developments shaping the
symbiotic relationship health insurance companies would share with the
World Bank and the World Trade Organization (WTO) provides an
incredible real-time document of the abrupt expansion of global health-
 capitalism and the privatization of health and welfare programs
internationally—what we describe as an international regime of extractive
abandonment.

                                       —

In the 1990s, as other industries pursued international expansion into new
markets in pursuit of new growth, so too did the health industries. As
discussed in PHARMACOLOGY, the expansion of the pharmaceutical
industries into international markets after World War II, and the reciprocal
relationships these companies enjoyed with state power, in many ways
precipitated the entry of further health industries into similar arrangements.
While pharmaceutical companies were successful in pushing for what
would become the Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPS) agreement, a similar and no less significant campaign for further
capitalist entrenchment on global health was being pursued by health
insurance companies. These companies, abetted by a decadeslong ongoing
industry narrative that rising healthcare costs were a “crisis” to be managed
by the intervention of private corporations, led directly to the adoption of
privatization schemes in a number of countries, particularly in Latin
America.
    Importantly, the adoption of new, private markets for health insurance in
Latin American countries were not decisions primarily initiated by public
demand, nor did the reforms involve much democratic procedure at all.3
Instead, the reforms were explicitly advocated by global trade bodies, the
World Bank, and other international financial institutions (IFIs). The
establishment of new laws allowing for private insurance companies to
enter new states was made a condition to qualify those states for securing
development capital. International financial institutions, evaluating these
“developing” economies for loans, systematically impressed upon them that
their social services spending was out of control and that in order to qualify
for lending they would have to institute privatization reforms in this sector.
As a result, a significant feature of reforms in this period is the privatization
of numerous aspects of state welfare systems and the expansion of the
“managed care” model of private health insurance corporations
internationally. The result of this was the effective exportation of the United
 States’ principal model of health insurance coverage, a system already
widely loathed by the American public that nevertheless persists today.
    A number of accounts have linked the international expansion of global
welfare state privatization to the North American Free Trade Agreement,
the General Agreement on Trade in Services, and the TRIPS agreement,
which were further aided by efforts of the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund, and the Inter-American Development Bank. These have
been demonstrated to have directly affected privatization policies of the
World Health Organization, the Pan-American Health Organization, and the
US National Institutes of Health.4 While many of these agreements include
procedural flexibilities, and trade organizations assert that coercion is not a
factor leading to “pro-market reforms,” international financial institutions
have made states’ alignment with generally liberalizing reforms a major
priority in recent decades, utilizing loan conditions and negotiations over
external debt payments as political leverage in order to advance their
agenda.5 Vicente Navarro has defined these policies as remapping the
political economy of health in ways that “reduce public responsibility for
the health of populations,” “privatize medical care,” and emphasize
“individuals’ personal responsibility for [their own] health improvements”
and “an understanding of health promotion as behavioral change.”6
    Before welfare privatization schemes were franchised around the world,
the broad strokes of this agenda were explicitly laid out in the World Bank’s
1993 World Development Report, subtitled “Investing in Health.” Although
this report has been widely criticized in public health circles, its influence
endures (or in any case, it remains accurate in defining the exact
prerogatives undertaken in the international expansion of capitalism’s
colonization through health). The report has been perhaps best
characterized by Asa Cristina Laurell and Oliva López Arellano as
internationally redefining “health as a private responsibility and health care
as a private good.”7
    “Investing in Health” laid out an expansive agenda for the reorientation
of global finance priorities toward expanding the international purview of
the health industries. Under this World Bank framework, public health
systems (whether national health insurance programs or broader national
health services) were labeled as “costly” and “inefficient.” The language
employed is situated within what we have earlier described as the
 eugenic/debt burden framework: “developing” countries are said to spend
too much on health services for too little gain (as the report says, “World
health spending—and thus also the potential for misallocation, waste, and
inequitable distribution of resources—is huge”).8 The report prescribes that
“governments need to promote greater diversity and competition in the
financing and delivery of health services. Government financing of public
health and essential clinical services would leave the coverage of remaining
clinical services to private finance, usually mediated through insurance, or
to social insurance.”9 In other words, private health industries should be
allowed to supplant state welfare services, with state provision of healthcare
relegated to a secondary, even tertiary function, available only for those
populations that are not profitable markets for private industry (for
example, cases of extreme poverty, presumably judged under a means test
framework, or certain states of disability as judged by a biocertification
framework and elaborately defined through the report’s extended use of the
Disability Adjusted Life Years [DALYs] metric to evaluate the public health
of “developing” countries).10 The report’s proposed model has become
increasingly common around the world in recent decades, and one that we
argue must be met not only with resistance but with complete
dismantlement and reformation.
    “Investing in Health” proposes that states develop twotiered systems
under which states pay only for health services of absolute last resort. These
two-tiered systems have a number of specific effects. One is that, despite
pro-privatization assertions to the contrary, public health spending does not
necessarily reduce under systems that mix public and private health
provision.11 Instead, what has been demonstrated in innumerable
circumstances—and certainly in the privatization efforts in Latin America
in recent decades—is that state spending either remains the same or
increases when accounting for both public spending on health services and
public funding to subsidize private healthcare markets. In fact, in countries
that have recently moved from primarily public health systems to some
mixture of public and private health services, the quality and availability of
healthcare for poor, disabled, elder, and other surplus populations is often
substantially lowered.12
    This is likely the direct result of the basic fact that private health
insurance companies operate on an explicit debt/eugenic-burden model:
 their aim is to insure as many biologically or behaviorally “low risk”
individuals as they can, from which they draw premiums as operating
revenue, and as few “high risk” individuals as possible, to stem potential
losses. (Laurell and López Arellano: “The rationale for government
intervention, then, is the private sector’s lack of interest in providing these
goods and services since they generally cannot become market
commodities.”13) This means there is a perverse and obvious incentive for
private insurance companies to push people with more expensive care, or
with less ability to pay, into public safety net programs. (Including safety
net programs that the same private insurance companies receive state
funding to administer, as is the case in the United States with programs like
Medicaid and many components of Medicare. This is one reason why we
are critical of liberal claims that a “public option” for health insurance in
the United States would constitute a move “toward Medicare for All”—as
we have discussed throughout Health Communism, this system must be
removed from its roots. Reformation must be total.)
    “Investing in Health” goes to great lengths to normalize this
eugenic/debt burden frame internationally, providing arguments that
rationalize the conflation of the body and capital. As ever, the privatization
arguments prefigure the allocation of healthcare or any services related to
the social determinants of health as commodities intrinsically beholden to
scarcity—social objects that could not possibly be made public goods or the
subject of considerable resource allocation and public activity. The report
explains the role of private health insurance markets in managing this
divide and its corresponding villain, the burdensome ill, the “overutilizer.”
It helpfully centers the overutilizer figure within health insurance markets
in the same way that other types of insurance markets fret over waste or
fraud, noting that “There is some moral hazard in the markets for house and
vehicle insurance. The extreme form is when somebody burns down a
house to collect the insurance or abandons a car and reports it as stolen. But
unlike consumption of too much health care, these actions are crimes.”14
    These observations are ironic considering the putative ideological goals
of the World Bank report itself, which is written in the language of global
human rights: the goal is “promoting public health” through neoliberal
notions of economic “development” and “advancement.” We view this
document as marking a substantial shift of international capital from blatant
colonial posturing during the bulk of the Cold War to a humanitarian-
 extractive form following the dissolution of the USSR, the end of the Cold
War, and the so-called end of history. The World Bank report positions itself
in this way explicitly:
   In the formerly socialist economies, where governments have historically been responsible
   for both the financing and the delivery of health care, health care is free in principle … But
   in reality, better-off consumers make informal out-of-pocket payments to get better care:
   about 25 percent of health costs in Romania and 20 percent in Hungary, for example, are
   under-the-table payments for pharmaceuticals and gratuities to health care providers.15

Here the World Bank could just as easily be explaining the immediate
effects its own recommendations would go on to have on the states adopting
them.
    As Laurell and López Arellano write, the goal of establishing such two-
tiered programs incorporating both private and public health services
constitutes
   a basic … problem of ethics, since health is no longer considered a basic human need, and
   healthcare is considered a private good rather than an inalienable right … This results in two
   polarized but complementary strategies: selective relief, a modern version of the poor law[s],
   in which one part of the population receives care because it is destitute; and selective
   privatization, in which another part of the population has access to care as “clients,”
   according to their purchasing power. As a result, both groups actually lose their social
   citizenship, services are fragmented, and the provision of integral healthcare is impeded.16

    Eliding questions of “social citizenship” and whether health has ever
been an inalienable right under capital, this observation is important in
understanding why the entire political economy of health should be stripped
from capitalism. As we have discussed in earlier chapters, health-capitalism
and its constituent welfare programs rely on regimes of biocertification and
the management of the worker/surplus divide in order to situate the
“productive” public against a perceived debt and eugenic burden (the
“surplus”). Segmenting the provision of social and health services into two-
tiered or mixed systems does not result in what its proponents suggest, a
“universal coverage” where all needs are met. Instead, it produces countless
new sites for abandonment. In the name of alleviating the eugenic/debt
burden, vulnerable people in specific circumstances are turned away by
both the state and private entities, with each deferring responsibility to the
other. To the extent that the public is able to mobilize against this, the site of
contestation becomes vague, encouraging protestation of the individual
private entity (for example, the prison), or protestation of one of a vast
 network of private entities, despite the very reliance of those private
industries on the state.

                                      —

By the turn of the twenty-first century, most Latin American countries had
instituted a series of significant welfare reforms that allowed private
industry to encroach on healthcare, social security, disability pensions, and
workers’ compensation.17 Institutions like the World Bank had a direct role
in promoting these new policies, but the mechanics of privatization were
largely stewarded by a series of American and European corporations.
Beginning in the late 1990s, US health insurance company Aetna entered
health insurance markets in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, and Peru.
Cigna, another large US health insurance company, additionally entered
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Guatemala, Mexico, Panama,
and Venezuela.18 Citicorp entered the newly formed private social security
markets in Chile, Uruguay, Peru, Mexico, and Colombia; Spanish financial
institutions Banco Bilbao Vizcaya and Banco Santander also entered these
markets, alongside a multitude of other companies.19
    Collectively, these constitute the incursion of capital on the health of the
global population, and the institution of a contemporary regime of
international extractive abandonment. As early as 2001, research by
Howard Waitzkin and Celia Iriart demonstrates that healthcare and social
security funds of developing countries had become a major new source of
capital for US, European, and transnational insurance companies. The
authors note that “executives of corporations entering the Latin American
managed-care market report substantial rates of profit relative to
investment, predict strong profit margins in the next several years, and
expect high rates of return for investors.” Waitzkin and Iriart quote a
managed-care executive representing the EXXEL group, a private
investment company in Argentina, as saying, “It’s a very lucrative market
… The real opportunity here for an investor-owned company is to develop
tools in the prepagas [prepaid] market in anticipation of the obras sociales
[social security] market.” As anticipation of this new market soared, one
trade journal declared it a “mañana pension bonanza.”20
    The politics of the privatization of the political economy of health, then,
are those in which the outward expansion of financial capital mirrors the
 processes it actively seeks out in its “home” economies. In the United
States, Social Security and Medicare have been the dream targets of total
privatization for similar reasons; equally so the UK’s NHS. There have also
been recent successes (for capital, at least) in the partial privatization of
state healthcare in other European countries, like the Netherlands or
Sweden. Extending private, capitalist enterprises as one of the executors or
mediators of the provision of health services guarantees a steady stream of
state funding to private companies, as we can tell from countries like the
US. As Waitzkin, Jasso-Aguilar, and Iriart write, “Even the smallest of [US]
Social Security funds, targeting disabled people, receives annual revenues
of $90 billion” (this figure has increased to close to $150 billion as of
2020). “The size of these trust funds provides an attractive source of capital,
currently housed in the public sector but potentially subject to
privatization.”21
    This ideological framework regards the health of surplus nations as a
target of extractive abandonment. First, in order to facilitate the spread of
global trade, states are expected to “harmonize” their social policies to trade
body standards (in other words, to adapt their political economies to a
framework conducive to receive international capital as a ready and willing
“market”), which includes opening social services to foreign market
exploitation. Second, in order to facilitate transnational extractive
abandonment, capital limits the state provision of these social services.
    According to the logic of “Investing in Health,” capital’s ideal role for
the state in public and individual health management is minimal but never
absent. This includes a set of provisional public health interventions: the
national administration of vaccines and immunizations, a few targeted
prophylactic treatments (like cheap medications against intestinal worms),
and the minor provision of low-cost treatments to people with AIDS. It also
recommends behavioral adjustment programs to “disincentivize” tobacco
and alcohol consumption, alongside “legal and fiscal measures to regulate
consumption and marketing.”22 As Laurell and López Arellano note:
   It is important to underline that major capital’s inroads into the health sector do not
   necessarily imply the withdrawal of the state. To the contrary, this process requires two types
   of state intervention. On the one hand, the government must develop policies to promote and
   facilitate the expansion of the private sector; on the other, it must provide at least a minimal
   package of health services for a major portion of the population in order to conserve
   legitimacy.23
     In the decades since the initial rush to privatization, this has given rise
to a stark reality. Capital moves relatively unimpeded, using public social
security and health program funds as a conduit to circulate from nation to
nation. Increasingly, states are asked to fulfill securitization roles,
suppressing and criminalizing their surplus populations. These surplus
nations, marked for extraction, are expected to surveil and discipline their
publics at the basest level of public health intervention. This is most evident
in the fiercely ideological demands that always follow public health
emergencies, the emergence of epidemics, pandemics, or novel diseases.
For example, in the late 1990s, the US pushed for the unending HIV/AIDS
pandemic to become the first health issue considered an international
“security threat.” As then vice president Al Gore stated in remarks to the
UN Security Council in 2000:
   Today marks the first time, after more than 4,000 meetings stretching back more than half a
   century, that the Security Council will discuss a health issue as a security threat. We tend to
   think of a threat to security in terms of war and peace. Yet no one can doubt that the havoc
   wreaked and the toll exacted by HIV/AIDS do threaten our security … AIDS is not just a
   humanitarian crisis. It is a security crisis.24

                                                —

In order to resist the influence of capital’s instrumentalization of health for
its international expansion, it is important to understand the sites in which
this expansion occurs. As discussed earlier, extractive abandonment has
come to operate internationally both through the enforcement of intellectual
property and trade regimes, as well as through the use of these same trade
regimes and evolving transnational juridical/governance bodies to facilitate
the expansion of international capital into global social services. But these
cannot be understood without some reflection on the recent history and
current existence of colonialism. While the privatization of social services
internationally constitutes an extension of colonial hierarchies, the spread of
global capital and its social reproduction of the idea (as evidenced in
“Investing in Health”) that its expansion is in the name of “human rights”
and “democracy” obscures the perpetuation of more literally colonized
territories. An account of the political economy of health and its role in the
extraction of value from the colonized could constitute an entire political
project unto itself. We have elected therefore to briefly address individual
 aspects of the political economy of health in two ongoing colonial
occupations: of Puerto Rico and of Palestine.
     Our account of Puerto Rico concerns a legal battle that, by the time of
Health Communism’s publication, will have been decided by the US
Supreme Court: the case of United States of America v. Jose Luis Vaello-
Madero. As of this writing, the case has attracted little debate over the
consequences it portends and what it betrays about the political economy of
health. Disabled residents of Puerto Rico have been codified into law as not
deserving the same social welfare benefits (as meager and inadequate as
they are) as disabled mainland residents. A brief filed by Vaello-Madero’s
lawyers details how the US government describes the denial of equal access
to federal benefits to citizens in Puerto Rico as a “price” for local
autonomy.25 Their abandonment is such a price, a cost that betrays how
little has been done to undo the biopolitical values that have been embodied
and reinforced by the actions of our institutions.
     In 2017, the US government sued Jose Luis Vaello-Madero, a poor
disabled man in his early sixties, who had been receiving Supplemental
Security Income (SSI) payments since 2012. SSI is a means-tested federal
economic assistance program with stringent requirements, meant for the
very poor. The federal government was seeking over $28,000 in back
payments because Vaello-Madero had moved to Puerto Rico to lower his
cost of living and be closer to family in 2013, shortly after enrolling in SSI.
Though Vaello-Madero had lived in New York, where he applied for
benefits, since 1985, once he moved back to Puerto Rico he became
categorically ineligible to receive SSI—a fact he was only made aware of
several years later. While in Puerto Rico, Vaello-Madero continued to
receive his monthly SSI payments, resulting in what the US government
deemed a simple debt of overpayment. To Vaello-Madero, however, this
debt was not a mundane actuarial correction of the system—the government
program designed to help him survive now demanded remuneration he
could never hope to pay.
     The Social Security Administration (SSA, the agency that manages SSI
and Medicare, among others), which had after some time become aware of
Vaello-Madero’s relocation to Puerto Rico, terminated his benefits and sued
him for the aggregate amount of payments they determined had been paid
to him since leaving New York ($28,081). Notwithstanding the fact that the
stringent means testing applied to SSI puts a maximum cap on a recipient’s
 combined resources at $2,000, there are strict provisions that also
criminalize receipt of over-payment, with no cap on how much a
beneficiary can be asked to repay. Arguably, SSI is a punitive and violent
framework for allocating benefits—recipients are forced to remain in
poverty as the price of access to care—but the denial of SSI to residents of
Puerto Rico is one of the lesser-known and more devastating facets of the
SSI program. Despite Puerto Rico falling under the governance of the US,
many federal welfare programs are not extended to citizens residing in the
territory.
    Vaello-Madero initiated a legal challenge against this, which we fully
expect not to be successful following a determination by the current
Supreme Court. The Biden administration’s justice department, in its brief
to court defending its decision to support the SSA, has provided a pristine
outline of the contours of American empire as it relates to the political
economy of health and the subjection of the surplus.
    In defending the suit, the Biden administration argues that US law and
prior court precedent allows the state to manage its territories—colonies—
however it sees fit, including the categorical exclusion of residents from
federal welfare programs (not all territories are excluded from SSI and other
welfare programs; Puerto Rico is). Citing precedent in the case of Califano
v. Torres, it explains Puerto Rico’s categorical exclusion as such: “(1)
‘because of the unique tax status of Puerto Rico, its residents do not
contribute to the public treasury’; (2) ‘the cost of including Puerto Rico [in
SSI] would be extremely great’; and (3) ‘inclusion in the SSI program
might seriously disrupt the Puerto Rican economy.’”26 Califano v. Torres,
itself a relevant development in the legal/juridical demarcation of Puerto
Rico’s colonial subjection, also concerned whether the restriction of federal
welfare benefits for residents of territories constituted a violation of the
United States’ constitutional “right to travel.” The Biden administration
cites the court’s opinion in this regard as well, drawing on highly illustrative
assertions in Califano v. Torres that the court “ha[d] never held that the
constitutional right to travel embraces any such doctrine… . So long as its
judgments are rational, and not invidious, the legislature’s efforts to tackle
the problems of the poor and needy are not subject to a constitutional
straightjacket.”27
    Each of the above points deserves its own refutation, and indeed each
has been refuted elsewhere. The first point is untrue and, in any case,
 irrelevant—to qualify for SSI an individual’s income is necessarily so
extremely low that they are exempt from federal income taxes;28 the second
point is equally irrelevant, except under a debt/eugenic ideology; and the
third point is simply vacuous, though it is worth noting that a later footnote
explains the idea that SSI would cause disruption of the Puerto Rican
economy by citing an assertion that “extending SSI benefits to Puerto Rico
might discourage people from working.” Broadly speaking, the state’s
argument is that Puerto Rico and its people are, categorically, a debt burden
whose health concerns are not the state’s to bear. As stated in the brief,
“Indeed, [the Supreme] Court has [previously] recognized that the
government has a legitimate interest in ‘saving money’ and ‘protecting the
fiscal integrity of government programs.’”29
    Further, the Biden administration argues that legal precedent allows the
state to discriminate against welfare recipients on geographic principles:
“The Due Process Clause allows Congress to treat one geographic area
differently than another if Congress has a rational basis to do so.” (The
“rational basis” here, of course, being the rationale of the debt/eugenic
calculation.) “That text suggests that the Equal Protection Clause—and, by
extension, the equal-protection component of the Due Process Clause—
concerns unequal treatment of classes of persons, not unequal treatment of
regions.”30 Therefore, the right to contest exclusion from federal welfare
programs as a resident of Puerto Rico, and thus as a colonial subject, is in
the eyes of the US state and the Biden administration irrelevant, because the
legal protections pertain only to individuals and not to colonial subjection.
This determination immediately recalls the explicit colonial social
framework of the “rule of difference” in the management of the subjected
populations.
    It is in cases like United States of America v. Jose Luis Vaello-Madero
that we see the profound immiseration and public health impact wrought by
the technocratic liberal apparatus, not just abroad but also “at home.”
Individuals like Vaello-Madero become subject to administrative burden,
violence, and neglect, with geographic distinctions mobilized as bordering
regimes to uphold the debt/eugenic logics of the capitalist state. The
political economy manufactures and then relies on these continual
bordering restrictions to enforce exclusion and abandonment; in removing
these bordering regimes we also remove the ability of the state to reproduce
these distinctions as a logic and a mechanism.
                                       —

Geospatial abandonment and immiseration as a technique of colonial power
is of course far from new. Nor is the assumption and then disestablishment
of paternalistic relationships between occupying state and occupied territory
particularly novel. Consistent unequal distribution of resources is often
explained away as the product of necessary border regimes. Borders create
boundaries of who is and is not part of the body politic, marking
populations as “other” through processes of actuarial citizenship and
biocertification. Borders are often thought of as boundaries that exclude—
keeping people out—but just as much of the violence wrought by health-
capitalism through borders is caused by spatial immobility and the
depravation and debility produced by keeping people in.
    Palestine unfortunately remains an enduring example of these
relationships. The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) is one of the most powerful
contemporary military forces in the world and has played imperial manager
of both Palestinian land and people since the 1940s. Following the Oslo
Accords in the early 1990s, Israel established the Palestinian Authority as a
speculatively independent governing body subject to massive power
asymmetry against the colonizing state. Functionally Israel also
relinquished, in all but name and international culpability, its responsibility
to the health of the occupied Palestinian territories. As Mandy Turner
describes, the Accords “reconfigured Israel’s control and ‘subcontracted’
some tasks to a non-sovereign quasi-state, while Israel retained territorial
rights and control over key factors of production (including land, labour,
water and capital).”31
    In The Right to Maim, Jasbir Puar critiques the “purportedly
humanitarian” practice adopted by the IDF in which soldiers are instructed
that rather than shooting to kill occupied Palestinians, they should shoot to
permanently injure. Puar explains that for decades, the IDF have
consistently demonstrated a preference for “sparing life” through wounding,
blinding, shattering, maiming, crippling, severing, and disabling Palestinian
people trapped within occupied territory rather than killing them outright.
Puar argues that while at first this might appear a comparative act of mercy,
this “minor relief” merely conceals a rhetorical means of creating distance
between the discrete actions of IDF soldiers and the ongoing slow death of
Palestinian people. The right to maim is not an act of sparing life, it is
 instead a deliberate systematic campaign to debilitate the Palestinian
population, an event of mass disablement which has displaced the sovereign
right to kill, with “its covert attendant, the right to maim … Both are
mobilized to make power visible on the body.”32
    Among the economic and geospatial controls solidified over Palestine
was the incorporation of the colonized territories as within Israel’s customs
envelope with regard to international trade, as ratified in the Paris Protocol
of 1994. According to Danya Qato, “Among its many consequences, the
protocol … facilitated the creation of a captive Palestinian pharmaceutical
market for Israel: the link between the Paris Protocol and the current
predicament of chronic shortages in essential drugs and medicines cannot
be overemphasized.”33 Israel restricts pharmaceutical importations into
Palestine to those drugs already approved for the Israeli market and blocks
importation of drugs from neighboring countries like Jordan, or elsewhere,
that could otherwise allow Palestine to import drugs at a remotely
reasonable public expense. During periods of prolonged military
aggression, Palestinian hospitals and healthcare infrastructure have been
targeted, just as Palestinian individuals are routinely targeted by IDF forces
for intentional disablement, contributing to profound interlocking crises of
public health.
    Writing in the Journal of Palestine Studies, Qato excoriated the
collective international abandonment and extraction of the people of
Palestine and the way the languages of policy, diplomacy, public health, and
social science become a defeatist, demobilizing force. Qato’s criticisms
speak directly to the profound injustices visited upon Palestinians but also
upon all of those subjected to extractive abandonment. Her criticisms of the
political economies of health and of settler colonial occupation echo our
own arguments toward the defeat of global health-capitalism, and are worth
quoting at length:
   Cataloguing human rights violations and accumulating evidentiary data, while critical and
   necessary as matters of record and as tools for advocacy, do little to end such violations. The
   cynical din of knowledge production, now predictable in both its content and tone, has been
   rendered meaningless by inaction …
       Such data is neatly parsed out as if it were a simple quantitative measure to disaggregate
   the health impact of direct exposure to violence from the overriding and ever-present
   exposure to settler-colonial violence and erasure. For example, in one paper, authors
   employed multivariate regression models to determine factors associated with the mental
   health of Palestinian adults in the West Bank, East Jerusalem, and Gaza. The investigators
   plugged in explanatory variables including family loss, exposure to political violence, and
    feelings of insecurity to model their impact on the four self-reported health outcomes of
   interest: limits on functioning due to physical health, feeling broken or destroyed, feelings of
   depression, and trauma-related stress.
        Based on the regression models, the authors found little association between the
   covariates and “feelings of being broken or destroyed,” and only insecurity and resource
   inadequacy were factors related to “feelings of depression.” They conclude that it is only
   resource inadequacy (specifically lack of adequate food, clothing, housing, transportation,
   entertainment, capacity to purchase new things) that was associated with all four health
   outcomes. Notably, they mention “Multiple dimensions of political violence (hearing bombs,
   physical harm and humiliation) are related uniquely to trauma-related stress … but notably
   not with feelings of depression, feeling broken or destroyed or functional limitations due to
   health” … The extant and burgeoning critical public health literature focused on Palestinians
   is still replete with similar misreadings of cause-and-effect relationships. To read the
   literature, one might even come to believe that Palestinians are outliers in their
   pathobiological responses to state-sanctioned violence …
        These essentializing frames serve dual roles. Mirroring and often informed by abundant
   human rights reports, they paint Palestine, the Palestinians, and the Palestinian health sector
   as uniquely vulnerable … They depict Palestinians in the global public health imaginary as
   people always on the brink of disaster, always on the periphery of death, barely surviving,
   exceptionally prone to pathology and early death, awaiting the singular event that will be the
   final straw that propels them to ultimate catastrophe and defeat. A Nakba of Nakbas, as it
   were—totalizing views rooted in racist notions of biological determinism and inherent
   Palestinian pathology.34

    The biocertification of surplus is an enduring feature of capitalist and
colonialist retrenchment and will undoubtedly continue to persist and
evolve into new forms far beyond what is possible to capture within the
boundaries of our present account. What is necessary, however, is
recognizing the myriad ways in which power is extracted, and abstracted,
from individuals and collectives (from small groups to states) in their being
marked as surplus. Only by resisting this essentially eugenic notion will we
ultimately defeat the forces of capital; it is not possible to do so without
wrenching these ideologies from social reproduction in their entirety. As
Qato says, we must move toward a project “that centers the possibility of
health and thriving and also centers the very people for whom health is
always in question and perpetually compromised, those most vulnerable
among the vulnerable.”35
    We must be willing to embrace the surplus in all its forms and
manifestations, which by necessity means rejecting the production of
difference that comes from nationalism. Border regimes and border
ideologies reinforce the norms of the capitalist state and entrench the
reproduction of the debt/eugenic framework that suggests resources, care,
ability, and whole states of being are subject to scarcity and targets for
 extraction. Our responsibilities to collectivity and care do not end at the
edge of a map.
                            OceanofPDF.com
                                            CARE

   It’s of me now I must speak, even if I have to do it with their language, it will be a start, a
   step towards silence and the end of the madness, the madness of having to speak and not be
   able to, except of things that don’t concern me, that don’t count, that I don’t believe, that they
   have crammed me full of to prevent me from saying who I am, where I am, and from doing
   what I have to do in the only way that can put an end to it, from doing what I have to do.
                                                                                 —Samuel Beckett

This chapter and the one that follows it, CURE, contain what is to our
knowledge the most comprehensive account in the English language of the
Sozialistisches Patientenkollektiv (Socialist Patients’ Collective, or SPK) of
Heidelberg, a radical patientled group formed in 1970s West Germany. It is
the story of a group of patients and doctor-collaborators who were silenced
for their resistance to the capitalist state. Their project constitutes the
closest direct ideological precursor to what we have termed health
communism.
     SPK has been largely lost to history.1 At the time of this writing, there is
little to no recognition of their project within the broad political left, the
academy, or the discourse of mad rights.
     Among the surviving records of SPK’s actions and ideologies is a
manifesto written by its members called Aus Der Krankheit Eine Waffe
Machen (often translated as To Make an Army out of Illness, or Turn Illness
into a Weapon).2 This 1972 text is part user manual, part oral history, part
sardonic critique of Cold War capitalism. Unlike other self-organized
patient groups and their counterparts in the anti-psychiatry movement, SPK
uniquely combined Marxist political theory, social science analysis, and
what they termed “therapeutic praxis” to create an improvised, in-patient
community with the express collectivist goal of researching the connections
 between capitalism, madness, eugenics, and the individuation of illness
under political economies of work and care.
    SPK refused the distinction of “patient and doctor as two individuals
who are naturally separated.” Instead, they saw a “dialectical unity” of
which there was the capacity in each patient-doctor relationship for
revolutionary solidarity and struggle. The goal was to end the practice of
care as a property regime and to do that by first breaking the boundaries
imposed on care by the artificial scarcity of gatekept expertise. Under
capitalism, SPK argued, these roles of doctor and patient would always be
in conflict—the key to revolution was finding a way to get people the care
they needed without the coercive structures of health-capitalism.
    Capitalism, SPK argued, requires the continual destruction of the means
by which we can build solidarity between doctors and patients, intentionally
partitioning doctors and patients into separate classes. To unite the doctor
and patient in a true dialectical relationship of collaboration is to declare
revolt against the capitalist political economy of health. The division
between doctor and patient was a means by which to undermine solidarity,
and SPK argued that this was precisely why the class identities and care
relationships between doctor and patient are so heavily mediated by
institutions and systems of surveillance. This fracture results in a healthcare
relation optimized for processes of extractive abandonment and not for the
process of care, rendering the doctor into the signifier of state power and
the patient into “pure object.”
    SPK’s theory of physical disability, illness, and madness was incredibly
fluid, relying on the signifier of symptom to designate the affect of illness
under capitalism and rejecting the larger taxonomic categories of
pathological diagnosis. Many confuse this group as a movement only of
psychiatric patients, but SPK importantly saw no boundary between their
work and work centering other chronically ill, sick, queer, trans, non-
normative, dying, I/DD, or physically disabled people. Instead, SPK sought
to remove the division between mental healthcare and healthcare, uniting all
patients in solidarity—to unite everyone by rejecting the taxonomic
categories of illness-diagnostics under the present system. Rather than
distinguish between types of illness or states of being, SPK placed all
health, “good” or ill, on a continuum of illness under capitalism. It is
through this broad unifying gesture that SPK sought to unite the surplus
class under the same banner in a way that had been impossible when
 organizing only the working class. If we are all ill under capitalism, then we
can all awaken into the struggle to abolish what makes our collective illness
unacceptable within society.
    For the mere suggestion that this conception be incorporated into an
academic medical practice, SPK was condemned by their colleagues, peers,
neighbors, and political representatives of the state as criminals,
manipulators, liars, madmen, and vile traitors. The story of how and why a
small group of people looking to revolutionize group therapy came to be
known as international “terrorists” is the story of how capitalism swiftly
punishes its sharpest critics.
    In this chapter, we will elaborate on SPK’s radical political philosophy
and larger program, which called for the mobilization of what they called
the “sick proletariat.” First, however, it is critical to situate the events that
led to the formation of SPK as related to—though not solely shaped by—
two distinct developments in the political economy of health in the mid-
twentieth century.
    The first is the larger international context provided by rapidly changing
norms in psychiatric ideology and practice at the time, as exemplified by
what was known as the “anti-psychiatry movement.” The second is the
nuances of SPK’s local context, as explained through their collaborator Dr.
Wolfgang Huber’s interactions with the administration of the University of
Heidelberg, and within the larger scope of the West German state during a
period of incipient psychiatric deinstitutionalization. Only by understanding
this background can we understand the distinct social and political rupture
that SPK’s work constituted, and why their project was such a clear threat
to capital.

                                       —

Anti-psychiatry, or “critical psychiatry,” was a movement that began in the
1960s primarily among psychiatric professionals in the United States and
United Kingdom who sought to delegitimize the carceral and coercive
components of standardized psychiatric practice. The anti-psychiatry
movement’s rejection of earlier medicalized models of madness played an
important role in the legitimization of deinstitutionalization from a clinical
perspective. Many figures within the broader critical-psychiatric movement
of which anti-psychiatry was a part—such as R. D. Laing, Franco Basaglia,
 Thomas Szasz, and David Cooper—became well known for their popular
books conveying ideas about mental health and therapeutics to the public at
large.
    Uniting the many disparate analyses that fell under the general umbrella
of anti-psychiatry, democratic psychiatry, critical social psychiatry or meta-
psychiatry is the central idea that madness was not an individual’s
biological destiny but a socially determined phenomenon at the population
level. This broad movement was also united, most importantly, by the belief
that madness was always political, in that the identity of “mad person” had
a long and stigmatized political role in society. As Jane Ussher notes, while
anti-psychiatrists themselves were incredibly distanced from the material
factors in the lives and experiences of mad people—as experts revolting
from within their field of expertise, rather than as patients revolting within
the asylum—their “emperor has no clothes”–style argument “proved both
seductive and convincing.” Anti-psychiatrists’ belief that, under capitalism,
“madness was a moral judgement based on value-laden conceptualizations
of health and illness” would come to be embraced by both a large segment
of the general public and by mad people’s movements themselves.3
    Inspired by Jean-Paul Sartre’s existentialist philosophy, anti-
psychiatrists sought to apply ideas of therapeutic-existentialism to create
alternative living and treatment communities for their patients. Sartre’s
approach of “existential psychoanalysis,” first proposed in his 1943 book
Being and Nothingness, saw modern symptoms of mental illness and a
person’s capacity to experience them throughout their life as a normal
process. Existential psychotherapy consisted of trying to foster a higher
philosophical calling in a person’s life, giving meaning to their suffering
and reinforcing the idea that the person had the freedom to mature and
develop away from those symptoms through recognizing this “higher
degree” of life. Mental illness was not a biological process but a temporal
and philosophical state.
    Left-wing anti-psychiatrists took this idea from Sartre and expanded it
to include a materialist criticism of the capitalist political economy,
questioning the very nature of illness-production itself. The early anti-
psychiatry movement began by using the template of existential
psychoanalysis to develop their new understandings of madness, ultimately
leading to the creation of new types of talk therapies and group-oriented
treatments. They sought to end the era of asylums by offering the public
 alternative explanations of madness as not a threat but a predatory social
and material process. They worked to establish alternatives to the
hegemonic narratives of madness by drawing on the social-psychological
dynamics behind the stigmatization, oppression, incarceration, and
institutionalization of “difference” and “disorder.”
    The public appetite for the work of anti-psychiatry was propelled by the
preexisting agitation of more liberal patientled groups who attempted to
offer counter-hegemonic portrayals of the mad in order to win the respect of
the community through increased “model-madness” integration. In the UK,
such “lay-work” and psychiatric/institutional system survival organizing
have a long history going back centuries, from the 1620 petition by
residents of the notorious Bedlam asylum to the House of Lords—“Petition
of the Poor Distracted People in the House of Bedlam (concerned with
conditions for inmates)”—to the work of the Union of the Physically
Impaired Against Segregation (UPIAS), which was contemporary to anti-
psychiatry. Most patientled groups were ultimately reformers, relying on
radical rhetoric to agitate for incremental change.4
    For example, in the nineteenth century, the Alleged Lunatics’ Friend
Society (ALFS) employed a widely discussed, and even more widely
reproduced, civil libertarian approach to patientled, physician-sanctioned
advocacy, focusing on increasing both the representation of mad people in
the asylum admissions process and “awareness” of the need for legislative
overhauls of the Lunacy Commission. ALFS sought to liberate
institutionalized people by publicly advocating for the extension of civil
rights in adjudication processes to those legally labeled as “lunatic”—a
modest liberal goal of “representation and inclusion.” Though their work
accomplished few practical reforms, ALFS was nevertheless deemed to be a
radical and “unsafe” organization by British Parliament due to their
demonstrations in opposition to the proposed New Poor Law in 1845.5
ALFS was the predecessor of groups like the UK’s Lunacy Law Reform
Association, the National Society for Lunacy Reform, and the more recent
National Association for Mental Health (now called “MIND”). The anti-
psychiatry movement came directly out of this lineage of anti-institutional
organizing, but quickly developed into an internationalist coalition with
more radical goals and politics than had been seen before within the realm
of professional self-critique (and rarely seen since).6
      The anti-psychiatry movement was centralized around an understanding
of the psychiatric system as a regime of social and financial control—less
concerned with overhauls to policy and more concerned with the abolition
of institutional care models and the development of social psychiatric
practice. Anti-psychiatric thought was distinctive because of its radicalism.
As a discipline, the ideas in this movement were varied and the politics
behind them broad, comprising a coalition of the Marxist left, liberal
reformers, and the new libertarian right.
     The actual term “anti-psychiatry” was coined by David Cooper, a
Marxist clinical psychiatrist based in the United Kingdom. Cooper was
originally from South Africa, graduating from the University of Cape Town
in 1955, and it is rumored that he left the country immediately after under
pressure from the South African security services because of his
membership in the Communist Party.7 On the whole, most of the work of
anti-psychiatry would eventually stray far from Cooper’s anti-capitalist,
materialist criticism that provided the initial foundations for early critical
psychiatric theory. We will still, however, use the term “anti-psychiatry” to
refer to the movement at large, though many within the movement, Laing
and Szasz especially, would later publicly reject the term as a frame for
their work and professionally distance themselves from Cooper due to his
left-wing politics.
     Others within the movement, such as the US-based neo-
conservative/libertarian Thomas Szasz, came from completely different
political and social perspectives. Szasz saw little difference between
psychotherapy, new age wellness, and Scientology, and felt that care was
only as good as the patient thought it was—a value that was determined by
the trickle-down magic of the “free market.” Szasz offered no political
imaginary or social future for individuals who could not afford to purchase
their cure of choice, and he saw little difference between healthcare and a
contract of sale or a promissory note. Austrian-born philosopher and critic
Ivan Illich also produced work that is of mixed value. He most usefully
theorized mental illness under capitalism as stemming from an “iatrogenic”
process—one in which the system of psychiatric care “creates” more
distress than it “cures.” To Illich, the healthcare system itself was the seed
of illness, leading him to disavow treatment of all kinds.8
     Many anti-psychiatrists who did not have left politics offered droves of
unhelpful critique (like Szasz’s theory that mental illnesses do not exist)
 while still couching their ideas within broader conceptual frames that are in
fact helpful for left political projects (like Szasz’s theory that the psychiatric
treatment system is used improperly by the state as an extension of the legal
system). This has unfortunately led to widespread uncritical citation of
some of the more reactionary anti-psychiatrists, creating the potential issue
of reproducing the harmful political philosophy of Szasz and others through
their sociological observations on mental healthcare.9
    Others, like UK-based R. D. Laing, theorized that mental illnesses were
the product of social relations and not of biological destiny. To Laing,
targeting the root of distress required direct intervention in the dynamics of
the individual’s abusive relationships, not sedation or techniques for
adaptation to help the individual “cope” with the productive social forces of
their symptoms. Laing argued for the therapeutic abolition of the family,
citing it as the germ of many abusive personal and oppressive political
relationships.10 Laing also pioneered the notion that “psychotic” and
“schizoid” patients were capable of being reasoned with, pushing back on
the widespread idea that the nature of mental illness was a lack or inability
to reason, necessitating removal from the community. Laing argued that
rather than the mad posing a threat to “the normal”—the ontologically
insecure person menacing the ontologically secure society—everyday life
posed a threat to mad existence.11
    Erving Goffman and Murray Edelman, both social scientists based in
the US, hypothesized that pathologization, including legal and diagnostic
categories, was leveraged by the state as a pretense for population control,
and that psychiatric power was granted to the physician class by the ruling
class as a means of socially enforcing compliance with laws or norms.12
David Cooper, on the other hand, argued that the capitalist political
economy was directly responsible for “mental breakdowns” in the working
class, and leveraged pathologization to this end. Cooper theorized a
superstructural cause of psychiatry’s corruption that he thought undergirded
all other dynamics identified by his colleagues: the political economy of
madness under capitalism. Left anti-psychiatry, in this vein, offered a
solution: simply end the cause of “mental breakdown.” More specifically,
end capitalism and the economic valuation of life dictated by the capitalist
political economy of health, which many have unfortunately misinterpreted
 as the inverted coda of “abolishing capitalism will ‘cure’ all mental
illness.”13
    Many of the UK and US members of the anti-psychiatry movement
were not overtly political before their involvement in the critical psychiatry
project. The exception, other than Cooper, was the allied Italian meta-
psychiatry movement, many of whom were involved in resistance activity
and anti-fascist organizing during World War II.14 Franco Basaglia and
Franca Ongaro (Basaglia’s wife, coauthor, and collaborator, sometimes
described dismissively in historical accounts as his “secretary”) are the
most well known of the meta-psychiatrists for their work implementing
meta-psychiatry from within the walls of institutions, and their attempts at
institutional closure in the asylums of Gorizia and Trieste.15
    Unlike the US and UK anti-psychiatrists, many of the meta-psychiatrists
in Italy (and democratic psychiatrists in Germany) did not take issue with
the prescription of antipsychotic medication. Basaglia, a student of Maxwell
Jones like Cooper, criticized the negative hagiography of medical records
and intentionally kept minimal or nonexistent records of his patients
because he felt the stigma created by a patient’s chart made it harder for
them to get care.16 Basaglia also officially rejected the notion that there
could be a broad “pathway” for deinstitutionalization, and felt that each
institution had a unique dynamic requiring unique solutions. That said,
Basaglia’s work is known for often being contradictory; for example,
despite his insistence that the deinstitutional model he piloted was not
reproducible, in 1973 he nevertheless gave his blessing to have the hospital
he managed in Trieste designated a WHO “pilot zone” for mental health
services in Europe. Basaglia sought to expand the community-health
continuum model, favoring cycles of readmission and release back into the
community instead of long-term institutionalization. The Italian psychiatric
revolution consequently was not truly geared around the needs and lives of
the patients themselves, but toward a relation of resistance from within the
profession of psychiatry itself.17
    The anti-psychiatric project was influential, but failed to deliver on any
of its promised goals to patients. As a social movement, it died as its
founders died: by the end of their careers, most anti-psychiatrists had never
made the transition from theory to action, and many had drifted toward a
kind of apolitical spiritualism at best and outright libertarianism at worst.
 Few among the group grounded their theories in the building of solidarity
with either patients or broader society, and most framed psychiatric
liberation as an individual right. Their resistance was decidedly professional
and still distanced from their objects of liberation: the patients themselves.
Anti-psychiatry rarely crossed the transom of the expertise barrier,
remaining firmly grounded within the realm of institutional critique from
the level of doctor, therapist, and hospital administrator, rarely from within
the more hallowed dungeons of the asylums.
    While there was beneficial intellectual collaboration between Cooper
and the other members of the early anti-psychiatry movement, by 1970
Cooper felt that their collective political vision had nearly dissolved into a
“bourgeois psychotherapy association.”18 Cooper stood outside the rest of
the American and British anti-psychiatry movement for his commitment to
anti-capitalism. His socialist model of understanding the connections
between capitalism and illness was more closely related to the work of
Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, Wilhelm Reich, Basaglia, and ultimately
SPK. In Deleuze and Guattari’s opinion, SPK perfectly merged Cooper’s
English anti-psychiatry with a clear and resolute political goal, and in doing
so had accomplished more than the professionals of the anti-psychiatry
movement could even dream of.19
    Sartre, who contributed the foreword to Turn Illness into a Weapon,
described SPK as “not merely the only possible radicalization of the anti-
psychiatry movement, but also a coherent praxis which aims at
transforming and supplanting the standard ‘treatment methods’ in mental
health.” While we dispute Sartre’s conflation here—SPK does not belong to
the anti-psychiatry movement, and those who continued the SPK project as
Patientenfront (Patients’ Front, or PF) reject the label of anti-psychiatry—
the anti-psychiatry movement does provide crucial context to the
intellectual debates happening at the time of SPK’s formation.

                                     —

SPK arose out of patient groups facilitated by Dr. Wolfgang Huber at the
University of Heidelberg in the 1970s. While some accounts have attempted
to portray Huber as having in some way controlled or directed the group,
these portrayals are inaccurate, premised on paternalistic notions that
identification as a “patient” precludes autonomy (therefore these assertions
 are almost exclusively employed by SPK’s critics). Nevertheless, Huber’s
role in enabling the group’s formation was clearly significant. Some of the
key incidents that catalyzed the formation of SPK occurred after Huber’s
autonomous group therapy program was abruptly shut down by the new
University of Heidelberg Poliklinik director, Dr. Helmut Kretz, who had
ordered the “abolition” of the clinic’s radical therapy groups. The patients
participating in the group therapy program, who had been practicing
together under the supervision of Huber for months with university support,
were devastated. In response, they organized and occupied the offices of the
university administrators, demanding the reinstatement of their autonomy
and their therapy programs. It is in this first act of organizing in which SPK
was formed, transitioning from a group therapy project to a movement.20
    A “wild-haired assistant doctor,” Huber had been radicalized in 1966
after being transferred from working at the main university hospital in
Heidelberg to the low-income, high-volume polyclinic. The polyclinic
remained squarely connected to the old, warehoused model of asylum care,
acting as a catchall point of first contact for acute psychiatric cases.
Physicians were unable to refer polyclinic patients to inpatient treatment at
the main hospital, regardless of medical necessity. Even if a patient was
suicidal or in an acute state of distress, transfers to the main hospital were
reserved for high-income patients. Patients in the polyclinic were only
allowed to be referred to the “asylums of last resort,” the few remaining
warehouses for the poor located in the countryside south of the city.21
    In early 1969, alarmed by what he saw as a gaping lack of care
resources for his patients, Huber began leading intensive patient-centered
group therapy sessions out of his home in his time off. Huber began to see
the role of psychiatry differently, determining that the failures of the
program at Heidelberg were due to the American social psychiatric
approach the university was attempting to replicate, which appeared
incapable of tackling mental healthcare for the lower classes. Huber felt the
capitalist division of the mental healthcare system along class lines was a
fundamental injustice and readily visible in the flawed model of
“continuum community care” the university was adopting. To Huber,
capitalism was the true hurdle standing in the way of helping his patients.
He attempted to reenvision not only the means of therapeutic intervention
but the point of therapy altogether, reframing madness not as a problem of
 individual biology, heredity, or circumstance, but as a symptom of a deeper
underlying sickness of the capitalist political economy.
    Huber and his patients began to develop a new model of psychiatry
centered around “therapeutic political education,” blending ideas from the
anti-psychiatry movement with the anti-capitalist politics of “new left”
intellectuals. He became quickly known among the Marxist student
movement as “an open ear for taboo topics such as sexual promiscuity,
smoking pot, … LSD, … and getting in trouble with the police.”22 Through
Huber’s unwavering commitment to doctor-patient collaboration,
Heidelberg psychiatric patients developed their own therapeutic models,
scientific inquiries and studies, and unique methods of group therapy—
some of which, like self-advocacy and self-directed group therapy, are
identical to practices eventually adopted by mainstream psychiatrists that
are still in wide clinical use today.23
    Huber saw little difference between what was being done to patients in
this new “humane” era of deinstitutionalized care and the systematic
destruction of patients in the same facility just a few decades prior under
Nazi command. Patients were still sorted according to their disabilities and
economic backgrounds, with many pathologized simply for nonnormative
behaviors such as homosexuality, drug use, or political organizing work.
Under the Nazi regime, the codirectors of the psychiatry department at the
University of Heidelberg, Carl Schneider and Hans-Joachim Rauch, had
used the facility to refine and expand diagnostics, creating systems to
organize and efficiently design euthanasia-screening programs and
developing a complex system to sort patients according to an arbitrarily
determined capacity to be cured. Schneider saw the “incurably mad” as
biologically unable to be integrated into society. He theorized that being
unable to integrate into society correlated with biologically losing the
“reason” to exist, and that the physician therefore had no choice but to
divert state resources used for their care elsewhere. Huber felt this legacy
was still the dynamic driving care at the university despite public insistence
that the era of Nazi eugenics in German medicine was over. The polyclinic
was being used to mark and sort people who were inconvenient to the state
—which included quieting political dissidents.24
    Huber’s assessment of the eugenic philosophies on display was almost
certainly accurate. In 1945, David Pelham, the US Army officer in charge
 of the “denazification” of the university, had concluded in a military report
that the faculty were unredeemable, unapologetic, and unreformable,
thoroughly “nazified to the core.”25 Pelham made an official
recommendation in his report to dismiss numerous faculty, including the
university’s president, Dr. Karl-Heinrich Bauer, who nevertheless remained
in the position until 1964.26
    The university’s Department of Psychiatry also enjoys an infamous
legacy in the history of modern bio-psychiatry. Pioneering
psychopharmacologist and psychiatrist Dr. Emil Kraepelin became the
department director in the 1890s. Described as the “grandfather of the
DSM” (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders), Kraepelin
was the first to theorize one of the most influential ideas underlying modern
psychiatric practice, the distinction between dementia praecox (better
known as schizophrenia) and manic-depressive psychosis.27 He wrote that
he saw his patients as “weak-willed,” and believed that the development
and course of madness or depression was biologically determined at birth,
dooming some to a life only valuable as a research subject. Kraepelin’s
work had enormous influence not just on the Department of Psychiatry at
Heidelberg but on many early twentieth-century bio-psychiatrists.
Following World War II, the university focused on recapturing the status the
department previously enjoyed as a result of Kraepelin’s work, hoping to
usher in a new era of “humane” medical innovation that could wash away
the residue of the Nazi regime.28
    In 1955, the university hired liberal psychiatrist Dr. Walter Ritter von
Baeyer, marking the beginning of a long struggle to rehabilitate the image
of the psychiatry department.29 Inspired by a trip to the US as well as the
work of British anti-psychiatrists like Laing and Cooper, von Baeyer
launched community care demonstration programs, studied experimental
therapies, and funded the creation of new therapeutic departments in more
nuanced areas of study like child, elder, and social psychiatry with support
and funding from the university and the West German government.30 As
German deinstitutionalization progressed, the staff at Heidelberg developed
a plan to dissolve the large asylums and set up a network of community care
facilities, trading cramped, locked wards for a mix of inpatient and
outpatient services.31 There were a variety of programs: day clinics, small
psych units in regular hospitals, community health centers, direct
 counseling services, and self-advocacy groups. The conservative faculty,
however, was not pleased with von Baeyer’s liberal overhaul of the
university clinic, taking issue with his “unproven,” “hippie” tactics,
resulting in a heated internal conflict between the new social-psychiatry
“innovators” and the old-guard Nazi bio-psychiatrists.32
     It is in this context that Huber initiated his experimental group therapy
practice, with university funds, in 1969. The practice quickly became the
subject of controversy within the university, with even potentially
sympathetic faculty like von Baeyer and his deputies growing concerned
over the increasingly overt political nature of Huber’s work. (The level of
norm maintenance in these accounts can verge on the absurd; for example,
in this period Huber is described as attracting negative attention from the
administration due to his “wearing a black leather jacket instead of a white
coat and a Che Guevara beret, growing a Trotsky-like beard and addressing
patients informally by their first names.”33)
     By this time, von Baeyer’s initiatives at Heidelberg had become a pilot
program for West German deinstitutionalization (it would be adopted
nationwide in 1975).34 Von Baeyer became concerned that Huber’s
criticism of capitalism, at a time when the West German state was
committed to promoting the capitalist project, threatened to disrupt the tacit
respect for the deinstitutionalization project that he and his deputies had
carefully constructed.35 In the mid-1960s, the Heidelberg clinic had fully
embraced the American community-continuum model of care,
decentralizing and shifting care locales away from the larger warehoused-
congregant model. Criticism of its failures from the left was far from
welcome.36
     The termination of Huber’s experimental therapy groups prompted
immediate protest from polyclinic patients. Demonstrating outside of clinic
director Kretz’s home on February 2, 1970, the patients called for the return
of their group therapy programs. Kretz was charged with specifically
targeting Huber’s polyclinic projects at the directive of higher-ups in the
university, stranding patients in need with no regard for their therapy,
“including a group of older patients who had specifically moved to
Heidelberg to take part in the necessary therapy and for whom no other
place was possible [outside an asylum].”37 The police were called to break
up the protest, which had attracted a small crowd and a few members of the
 press.38 When the patients resisted, the police responded with force, giving
the media an opportunity to run photos of police beating vulnerable patients
on the posh suburban lawn of a university administrator.39 West Germany,
like many other countries at the time, had been experiencing waves of
student protest since 1968, and growing anxiety about anti-capitalist dissent
had escalated into a recent expansion of state law enforcement powers, of
which many in the media were critical.40
    In the absence of formal university-sanctioned group sessions, patients
began to organize as the Sozialistisches Patientenkollektiv, holding strategy
meetings to plan protests of the disbanding of their therapy groups and of
attempts by the administration to replace their other doctor-collaborators
with Kretz’s own handpicked staff. As SPK wrote in their own account of
the incident, “A blackboard was brought into the hallway for
announcements by patients. A few days later it was torn from the wall by
Dr. Kretz … The clinic administration didn’t want to tolerate the self-
emancipating and self-organizing patients any longer.”41
    SPK set off a trend that led to similar crackdowns on patient organizing
elsewhere in Europe following their censorship. As Helen Spandler notes,
in 1973 the first meeting of the Mental Patients’ Union was broken up by
staff at London’s Hackney Hospital: “Patients producing radical magazines
were often put on higher doses of medication as they were seen to be ‘too
disturbed’ and the magazines were often censored, e.g. ‘Scalebor’ patients’
magazine in a Yorkshire psychiatric hospital.”42
    Once news of the police crackdown went to press, the university
administration panicked. Rather than giving in to the patients’ demands,
they instead fired Huber with no notice and banned him from university
grounds.43 In response, SPK organized what was called the first “Patients’
General Assembly” (which SPK claims is the first general assembly of
patients in “medical history”) in the psychiatric clinic of the University of
Heidelberg on February 5, 1970.44 Direct action against the university
administration was organized, and the patients began to draw up broader
demands, including the immediate reinstatement of Huber and the
resignation of Kretz.45 On February 27, about twenty patients and twelve
doctor-collaborators staged an occupation of von Baeyer’s office, making
their demands heard.46 SPK began what would ultimately become a day-
and-a-half-long hunger strike, occupying the offices of the university clinic
 to agitate for the continuation of their care.47 By the end of February, SPK’s
membership had swelled to nearly one hundred people, and a new round of
protests and direct actions was initiated to agitate for the return of control of
therapy programs to patients’ hands.48
    Von Baeyer negotiated a compromise with SPK, agreeing that the
university would offer support and funding to help the patients reestablish
their self-directed therapeutic program.49 Huber would be granted a
transition period, though he would not be reinstated. SPK would be granted
status as a formal part of the university’s program and given funding to
carry out their research.50 Huber’s prescriptions for patients in the clinic
and SPK would continue to be honored and filled for free at the university
pharmacy, and patients would be provided with space in which to practice
their group therapy and conduct their research. This compromise would, in
theory, allow SPK’s work to continue, but also be formalized, studied, and
expanded.51
    As the handful of scholars who have studied or written on SPK have all
consistently noted, the creation of the collective was directly caused by the
crackdown on therapy and withholding of care by the university
administration. SPK’s further radicalization was also fueled by the
university’s censorship and suppression, who in their anxiety to quell
patient dissent only drew more attention to the patients’ cause. Félix
Guattari, who supported SPK through their eventual criminalization, long
past the point at which many from the anti-psychiatry movement distanced
themselves from the group, argued that as the repression of SPK increased,
contrary to what the university administration had expected, its resistance to
their authority and the West German state only intensified.52
    Throughout the spring of 1970, with Huber back on a temporary,
transitional basis and programs tentatively allowed to continue, the
membership of SPK continued to grow, and they began to put their ideas
into praxis. Rejecting the hierarchical relationship between doctor and
patient, group therapy became known as “agitation”—treatment through
political contextualization. They rejected the design of traditional
therapeutic strategies or regimens that sought only to prepare and
rehabilitate the body for work. SPK instead focused on the social symptoms
that caused continued distress through the repurposing of the identity and
experience of illness toward a revolutionary struggle for the abolition of
 capitalism. The goal was to translate “unconscious unhappiness” into an
“unhappy consciousness,” in theory enabling the agitator to struggle toward
capitalist abolition.53

                                     —

SPK sought to challenge the extractive abandonment of surplus populations
by the state. Further, their work questioned capitalism’s ability to designate
a “surplus” population at all, critiquing the bio-logics and bio-politics that
govern the ethic of capitalism. Their critique of capitalism was driven by a
militant commitment to left liberatory politics, inspired by the Black
Panther Party in the US and anti-capitalist guerilla movements. Unlike their
contemporaries in the anti-psychiatry movement like Cooper, Laing, and
Szasz, who rejected the use of certain therapies and pharmaceuticals, SPK
radically and wholly embraced treatment, and felt that, above all else, care
should be self-directed and synergetic: a dual dialectic between doctor and
patient working in collaboration and producing forms not just of care but
also of solidarity.
     Much of SPK’s 1972 manifesto, Turn Illness into a Weapon, is spent
criticizing systems of power and authority within and without the German
state, focusing on the influence of exported American capitalism on the
commodification of health. SPK takes special aim at bio-psychiatry,
medicine, and the industry of science. Whereas the US and UK
deinstitutionalization and disability movements sought entrée into a
reformed, more “humane” capitalism, SPK saw capitalism as the driving
force of their social model of disability, which they articulated more
specifically as a social-symptomatic model of disability, illness, and
madness. (For our purposes we will hereafter refer to SPK’s “social model”
as the “social-symptomatic model,” to differentiate it from the dominant
social model of disability that has been largely hijacked by capitalist
ideologies.)
     A key tenet of SPK’s politics is their analysis of the industries of
knowledge production. SPK accused the science industries of portraying
themselves as “for the people” or “for the public health” while instead
directing the total focus of scientific research and attention toward profit
maximization. SPK argued that “science has to be freed from its parasitic,
thoroughly life-denying, and anti-human function,” and that it was
 necessary to “carry on science for sick people (because there aren’t any
other kind), so that they put science in the hands of those who need science
to be freed … that means in the hands of the sick.”54
    SPK did not expect that the institutions and powers of the science
industry (from universities to global pharmaceutical companies) would
easily or quietly acquiesce to the demands of the newly united sick
proletariat. It is for this reason that SPK proposed the “People’s
University,” which charged that “instead of the principle of competition and
instead of alienated determination (by needs of capital to accumulate and to
get profits) our guideline in scientific work was collective practicing and
collective self determination.”55 Their aim was the socialization of all
knowledge, skills, and methods away from the false scarcity of capitalist-
oriented education. SPK accused the university of turning patients into
“sick-commodities” (Krankengut),56 putting their function as places of
public education second to their role as a “training stop and career step for
specialists.”57
    SPK felt that they could use their praxis to revolutionize the university,
one site in a whole typology of the industries and centers of knowledge
production they were critiquing. The group sought to become like a cancer
in the university, spreading their approach to political education through the
removal of expertise barriers. As SPK grew the group’s power was not
concentrated centrally; rather, cohesiveness and direction were constantly
affirmed and reproduced through sessions of group agitation in which
members were taught the principles and structures of SPK praxis, and also
how to teach others what they learned.
    According to the group, to adopt SPK praxis you must enter three
important new assumptions into your own political imaginary. These
assumptions would provide a solid foundation for understanding the total
body of SPK’s work, much of which is incomplete or limited to the
historical moment in which it is written. Arguably, the most valuable facet
of SPK’s work to contemporary movements for health justice is the
possibility of using their points of praxis to guide actions and evaluate
demands as we work toward a larger goal of health communism.
    In SPK’s “Three Starting Points of Praxis,” they demand the explicit
right to treatment for all: “We start with the belief that each patient in this
society has a right to life and therefore a right to treatment.”58 This right is
 fundamentally violated by the capitalist state. SPK’s second principle
argues that “1) because illness is socially determined. 2) because the
capacity for treatment and medical functions are socially institutionalized,”
and “3) because each person, whether worker, housewife, retiree, college
student, or young person has paid for the infrastructure of healthcare …
before they ever make a claim to it,” patients deserve involvement in and
direct control of their care, absent the hand of the market.59 SPK praxis
establishes the patient-doctor relationship as one that must be reoriented,
rejecting the relation in which the doctor has total authority over the patient
as an object, and instead embracing a collaborative approach to care and
therapeutics. SPK argued that these points of praxis, if implemented, would
not in and of themselves create revolutionary change. They merely offer a
crucial “toehold” from which “emancipation – cooperation – solidarity –
political identity” can be derived. As health “consumers,” we are preyed
upon as a “fashionable market” for the reproduction of capital through the
financing schema of care. To have a health revolution, we must reject the
modality of “consumer” all together. The right to treatment in SPK praxis
necessitates collaborative patient involvement and control of care
institutions, domiciliary rights, hospital and clinic spatial distribution,
medical education and training, and the distribution and allocation of public
funds and public healthcare resources.60

                                      —

As we have mentioned, it is crucial to understand the Sozialistisches
Patientenkollektiv’s program as attendant to the political economy of health
in ways that move far beyond critiques of psychiatry and psychiatrization.
Their critique of psychiatry is itself encompassed in a larger theory that
seeks to be pro-illness.
    “Illness,” SPK argued, “was the only form of ‘life’ possible under
capitalism.”61 In both “Eleven Theses on Illness” and “Illness and
Capitalism,” SPK explain that illness is the “essential condition” in which
the human body and the productive forces of capital intersect: “The
capitalist production process is at the same time a process that destroys life.
It continually destroys life and produces capital.”62 This is why, SPK
argued, capitalism as a political economic system is dominated by the
duality of destructive industry (which creates illth—ill health) and
 rehabilitative industry (which seeks to cure illth), thereby creating not a
collective regime of population health, but instead systems of wealth
transfer generating surplus profit from the system of care. (This idea is,
notably, similar to Marta Russell’s money model of disability, which was
first theorized at least two decades after SPK’s work. Although not
discussed at length in SURPLUS, we have found SPK’s “Eleven Theses”
immensely valuable to our conception of “extractive abandonment.”63)
     While the social model of disability frames the exclusion and creation
of disability as the result of dynamic social forces that could theoretically
be realigned to create a more equitable society that would reject stigma and
welcome inclusion, SPK’s social-symptomatic model argues that all
impairments, disabilities, illnesses, and differences are excluded relative to
their perceived market value as worker. Furthermore, while the identity of
disabled/mad/ill is a social construction, the symptoms that exist as the
expression of this oppressive social force are very physically and
biologically real. The social-symptomatic model makes room to radically
embrace one’s spoiled identity but doesn’t seek to eliminate or erase the
pain, suffering, and struggle that comes with a life of symptoms under
capitalism. It does not recognize a “fix” to symptoms, only a path toward a
freedom from the forces that compound and exacerbate them. These
symptoms present not only a challenge to the survival of “the patients” but
also represent a call to arms—not just for reform, but for revolution. It is
the capacity to identify a symptom and its social forces, and to rise in
solidarity to overcome the challenge that provides the only real palliative
and path to lessen emotional or physical suffering, rather than sock it away
and feed the “spoiled body” back into the meat grinder of industrial
capitalism as if that person is only worth their weight in flesh.
     SPK cited Marx’s work as the grounding point for their analysis,
theorizing that industry “cripples” the worker through capitalist demands
for endless growth and productivity and by forcing austerity and economic
valuations of life onto the conditions of work. SPK saw this as a means by
which illness itself was a kind of raw productive power, arguing that the
critical function of the healthcare system itself was the “maintenance and
enhancement of the exploitability of the commodity of labor power.” To
resist repair, to be incurable, was to be engaged in revolutionary struggle
against these social-reproductive forces of extractive abandonment, whether
you wanted to be or not. To SPK, this was simply the irrefutable condition
 of a body under capitalism; it was up to the individual to realize their
position and act on the revolutionary potential it contains. It is the task of
the healthcare system, SPK argued, to distract, burden, and prevent “the
patients” from the realization of illness’ radical relational potential.64
    SPK based their praxis on the notion that the sick person under
capitalism becomes an “object” of “two-fold exploitation: the destroyed
labor force has to be repaired in order to continue its exploitation,” and “as
a consumer [they make] for a ‘fashionable market of’ the medical
technology and pharmaceutical industries.”65 SPK importantly, and in sharp
contrast to the anti-psychiatry movement, did not differentiate between
“bio/physical” illness and “mental” illness, reflecting a remarkable
approach to understanding illness and disease from the perspective of
patients rather than through the materially distanced observation of patients.
As the system was, and still is, patients are the object of study, rarely the
ones allowed to ask the research questions. SPK argued that regardless of
the cause of your symptom, be it cancer, madness, or anything else, you still
experienced the negative effects of the eternal clash between your
symptoms and the life-denying forces of capitalism. To differentiate
between the bio and mental symptoms was a false game, SPK argued,
because under capitalism, it only served to pathologize the pathology itself.
    To describe something as bio or mental is to ascribe stigma to it of one
kind or another, and the perceived dichotomy between the two, SPK
thought, was a means by which to further disincentivize solidarity among
the entire sick proletariat. By separating people into categories of illness,
capitalism enforces a structure upon relations of the sick to preserve its own
survival. That is why, SPK argued, “health is a biological, fascist fantasy,
whose function … is the concealment of the social conditions and social
functions of illness.” If care, rehabilitation, and therapeutics were to be
truly and totally oriented toward their self-professed goal of alleviating or
curing the “symptoms” that all people experience in daily living, regardless
of the cause, “health” must be wholly severed from the capitalist political
economy. Over and above that, the systems of administration, education,
and incarceration would need to be completely overhauled, with sick, mad,
and incarcerated people not only involved, but in control at all levels. SPK
made clear that the means to truly create a new “health” for the people was
to end the class and expertise divisions imposed on care by remaking the
 landscape of healthcare, study, and administration into a collective
communal process.66
    SPK proposed that illness—and the ways in which illness disrupts the
order of labor power—could present a rupture in the normal fabric of
society, allowing for “a revolutionary force which stands outside of the …
state.” A sick proletariat, or proletariat in illness, which “has namely no
rights, possesses nothing with which it could exploit alienated labor power
—be it house, car, refrigerator—nothing which is not every time under the
command of the capitalist forces.”67
    The idea of the “sick proletariat” identifies that capitalism owns even
our bodies, and only once we apply a class “analysis or perspective” to this
fact of collective illness can we create a truly revolutionary struggle. SPK
explains:
   Muscles, nerves, and bodies never belonged to the proletariat … for their functions are pre-
   programmed in a manner which starts from the basic relations of capitalism which puts its
   marks into every proletarian person, even long … before being born or having born,
   everybody thus being programmed for the best possible exploitation … Marx’s description
   of the proletariat in the Communist Manifesto is correct, when Marx underlined that
   proletarians are those who have nothing to lose but their chains, but that the proletarians also
   and especially are the negation of the capitalist system which has turned them into being a
   nothing is as true now as before: namely for the proletariat conceived of as the sick.68

    SPK called on left movements to embrace their theory of the sick
proletariat, a true surplus class, whose novel inclusion into a relationship of
solidarity with other oppressed classes could both bolster movements and
provide opportunities to present serious and menacing challenges to
hegemonic power. The SPK manifesto, importantly, had a very specific
purpose—it was a rare demand from inside the walls of a psychiatric
institution to embrace and adopt a radical new biopolitical praxis. As Sartre
said in a letter to the group, later used as the foreword to their manifesto,
the only capacity for truly revolutionary interaction of anti-psychiatry lies
within SPK’s praxis. The goal of SPK was to expand and share this praxis.
Through a strategy of multifocal expansion and collective struggle, SPK
hoped to inspire other groups of patients all around the world, recognizing
that liberation of the sick proletariat would never be a movement that could
be contained within the artificial bounds of border and state.
                                      OceanofPDF.com
                                  CURE

   Nations provoke fantasy.
                                                             —Lauren Berlant1

In their 1972 manifesto, Turn Illness into a Weapon, SPK reproduces a
quote from an official report in the newspaper of the State Medical Board of
Baden-Württemberg from September 1971 describing SPK’s occupation of
the university director’s office the February prior. In the report’s hyperbolic
phrasing, the occupation seemed to have incited a now-total war: “The
Medical Board … [brought] into action tanks against the group of armed
madmen there, where … tolerance had made out of a group of lunatics an
armed revolutionary brigade group, ready to go to extremes.”2 Critics
accused SPK of playing “Robin Hood,” seeing themselves as the “saviors
of the mad and poor.”3 Media reports fixated on the drama surrounding
SPK, reporting on it several times weekly, if not daily.4
    The conservative faculty members of the university were not happy
with Walter Ritter von Baeyer’s compromise allowing Wolfgang Huber to
transition out of medical practice while offering continued resources to
group members. Huber’s prescriptions were suddenly denied at the
pharmacy without warning, the administration immediately delayed the
dispersal of promised funding, citing a clerical excuse, and the building
SPK had been granted was in severe disrepair; in the words of one account,
“The agreement was sabotaged from the very beginning.”5 The local press
began to print inflammatory articles about SPK’s activities, spreading
rumors about SPK and in particular about Huber, questioning his politics,
sanity, sexuality, and patriotism. Experts wrote op-eds condemning SPK’s
“radical therapy” practices and urging other doctors to dissuade their
 patients from having any involvement with SPK.6 The coverage drove
membership—but it also increased the persecution of the group.7
     SPK faced censorship not only from within the university and their local
region of Heidelberg, but also from the West German state. In the midst of
the Cold War, they had criticized both the legitimacy of capitalism and the
legitimacy of the state psychiatric apparatus. As the group’s work gained
notoriety for their radical and aggressive protest tactics, they soon drew
negative attention from the national media. The press found the group’s
commitment to “no differentiation between individual illnesses and no
hierarchy among doctors, nurses, and patients” to be laughable.8 Other
faculty at the university were now further aggravated by what they saw as
an out of control experiment being run by a bunch of nonserious laypeople,
with Huber the “only physician in charge.”9 Chris Pross, who was involved
with SPK early on as a medical student, later distanced himself from the
group, blaming the combination of agitator “inexperience” and the
widespread acceptance of taboo and “outsider” topics and behavior as
creating a permissive and politically charged environment and “manic”
group dynamics encouraging revolutionary bedlam.
     Huber’s peers, already bombarded with criticism from the right for their
work in social-psychiatric practice, did not like being criticized from the
left by SPK. These leaders of the German psychiatric reform movement
were insulted at the implication that the community-care model was
complicit in the continuation of institutional violence and warehoused care.
Dr. Heinz Häfner, a senior colleague of Huber’s and a protégé of von
Baeyer, emphasized this when he sourly reflected on SPK in a 2013 op-ed
celebrating his retirement: “SPK likened our reform efforts to the National
Socialists’ euthanasia programme: Community psychiatry is a continuation
of the patient killings. The Institute we were planning was also harshly
criticized: Mr. Häfner is planning to set up a ‘German Central Institute of
Mental Health’ … SPK called it The new Central Institute of Mental
Eugenics and Euthanasia.”10 Häfner remarked that SPK’s communist
“utopian ideology,” to his tremendous and incredulous surprise, had
attracted a noticeably large number of supporters to their anti-capitalist
militant call to turn illness into a weapon.
     In the midst of persecution from the university and the press, SPK
quickly grew, beginning to expand their practice of group “agitation.” After
 the first occupation in February, they had been granted some of their
demands by the university. Dr. Tellenbach, vice chancellor of the psychiatry
department, was charged with coordinating the financial support the
university had promised to the SPK. Tellenbach had little patience for
Huber or his patients and enlisted the assistance of “calm-mannered” and
patient theologian Dr. Rolf Rendtorff to help negotiate with the group.
Negotiations stalled for months. As the university offered more
compromises, SPK refused to acquiesce.11 Administrators had promised
funding, the use of university rooms, and free use of the pharmacy, yet their
promises were only half fulfilled. The rooms offered were in severe
disrepair and required extensive renovation to be usable. The money, which
was supposed to be available immediately to support SPK’s research, took
months to be delivered, and funds were ultimately withheld from March
until early July. On July 6, 1970, fed up with the university’s tactics, SPK
once again occupied the administrative offices, demanding this time an
independent house where patients and their doctor-collaborators could
continue their work without supervision or interference from the university.
    SPK’s request was not taken well by the university administration.
Rendtorff declared their attempts at compromise a failed project,
demanding that Huber and his patients immediately vacate the university
and denouncing SPK, charging that they were now a “collective of hate and
aggression.”12 When Huber and the patients refused to leave, Rendtorff
asked Dr. Horst-Eberhard Richter, head of the Department of
Psychosomatic Medicine at Giessen University, to act as a crisis
intervention mediator. Critics have cited this decision by Rendtorff to
appoint Richter as mediator as a tragically “naïve” result of his higher sense
of “humane instincts as a theologian” warning against giving leeway or
concessions to patientled movements pathologized as always getting out of
hand.13 After several hours spent privately discussing the situation with
Huber and the patients, Richter issued an official recommendation that the
experimental SPK program could continue under supervised conditions in
order to scientifically document their therapeutic model. Richter warned
that the way SPK was currently running its program, outside of university
supervision, was causing “waste and burden” on the healthcare system. He
was highly critical of SPK’s Marxist politics, calling its class rhetoric a
“fanatic tendency.”14 He charged that “pathological dynamics” within the
 group would doom the project to failure if it was allowed to continue to
expand without a formal reintegration into the university healthcare system.
That is, SPK was a waste of money unless the project itself could become
the object of “legitimate” scientific study. Richter noted that he only
supported SPK’s right to practice (and be studied) from a theoretical
perspective, emphasizing that “a direct revolutionary political struggle on
the basis of group therapy for the mentally ill would be an absurdity.”15
    The academic council of the University of Heidelberg formally
established SPK as an academic institution on July 9, 1970. Von Baeyer
commissioned two other independent academics, in addition to Richter, as
supervisors tasked with studying SPK’s work.16 Richter would later write a
book about his role in the scandal, called Die Gruppe (The Group),
published nine years after his initial encounter with Huber and SPK. In the
book he stated that Huber misled him in the initial July conversation,
leading to his endorsement that the SPK project should continue. Die
Gruppe “diagnosed” SPK with what Richter called a “Michael Kohlhaas
complex,” stating that the members of SPK suffered from “grandiose
therapeutic ambitions” that were being suffocated by their mission to
“avenge the suppressed.”17 (Michael Kohlhaas is the main character in a
popular Robin Hood–like story about a sixteenth-century horse merchant
who goes on a murderous revenge spree after being done one too many
unjust wrongs.18) In his book, Richter characterized the “criminality” and
“destruction” of the SPK project as doomed by destiny, further accusing
Huber of planning for an “anarchist underground struggle” as early as June
1970. Richter claimed Huber was driven by self-destructive delusions;
many would later claim that Huber himself was psychotic. Huber’s work
and theories have been massively distorted, with many reframing the
mission of SPK as driven by a fundamental belief that “an act of violence
directed at the state could be instrumental in curing mental illness.”19

                                    —

In truth, SPK was offering a wide variety of what even its harshest critics
have called “practical help,” and was “actually a success story” for a wide
range of people who were particularly vulnerable or poor.20 The group was
split off into several different working groups, called “Working Circles.”21
 Some working circles were for therapy, treatment, skill sharing, or simply
exercise; others had a more practical purpose for SPK’s direct actions, like
the “Working Circle Radio Transmission” that was set up in rotating shifts
with members on radio receivers monitoring police activity and movement
throughout the city to help protect protesting members from the inevitable
brutality of police crackdown.22
    West German authorities would later accuse the SPK working circles of
being an onboarding system for acts of violence, evidenced by the fact that
the group is almost more present in professional and para-academic
“terrorism and security” literature than it is in other academic literature or
popular culture. Terrorist-propaganda researcher and global security expert
Joanne Wright has called SPK’s working circles a comprehensive
educational plan for training potentially violent radicals, stating, “No such
system of higher education in terrorism was ever available.”23 Terrorism
and security experts Christopher Dobson and Ronald Payne share this
analysis, writing that “the patients worked at their therapy just as if they had
been weaving baskets, [then] taught them how to make bombs.”24
    Regardless of whether these assertions are true, what can be proved is
that the group was involved in acts of radical therapy, treatment, and what
we might call mutual aid. A former member explained in an oral history
interview that “SPK was a left-wing counseling center”;25 another called it
“a politically motivated crisis centre.”26 All within SPK, including the
doctor-collaborators, were continually training as “agitators” (what many of
the group’s critics derogatively termed “lay-therapists”).27 Patients and
doctor-collaborators worked together in solidarity, conducting group
therapy sessions called “agitations,” printing pamphlets (including a weekly
series called Patient Infos), and holding protests. Their main goal remained
securing access to medication for members, group agitation, and therapeutic
skill sharing, and facilitating teach-ins to bring more people into their
praxis. But SPK also engaged in other radical anti-carceral interventions,
demonstrating models of community care and intervention outside the
authority of the state and the police. Their efforts in this respect were
enormously successful. As Pross, a critic, begrudgingly noted:
   [SPK] provided a safe haven and holding environment for many, who had no place to go or
   would be locked away in one of the custodial style mental hospitals. Many patients had a
   long record of doctor shopping, failed psychotherapy and being put on waiting lists before
   they found help in the SPK … A former patient told us, she ran away from home as a 17
    year old because she was [abused] by her father and found refuge in the SPK. The parents
   tried to bring her back home with police force, but the group succeeded in protecting her.
   Looking back, she says the SPK saved her life.28

This organizing was made possible in part through the independent space
granted by the university. Despite the supervision of the university’s
assigned academic monitors, SPK was flourishing in its new standalone
facility.
    Many of SPK’s critics identified collaboration between the sick as the
central underlying corruption of the movement—categorically, these critics
argued, the sick could not unite. Tellenbach wrote in a public statement in
November 1970 that the fundamental issue with SPK was “medical duty.”
Did patients have the right to rebellion? Was it ethical for patients and
doctors to collaborate toward a revolution? Was the promise of struggle
toward liberation itself a harm? Tellenbach wrote that Huber had violated
the physician’s code of ethics and had exercised a revolution “on the back
of” patients. By involving patients in activities of political dissent,
Tellenbach explained, Huber had crossed a line:
   Consider what enormous physical and mental forces a struggle for the overthrow of a social
   order requires. It is against medical ethics, it is simply inhumane to exert such a struggle on
   the back of mentally disturbed people. Dr. Huber may limit his struggle on assigning healthy
   people. The sick have no place on the battlefield. It is a macabre game to send them to the
   front line.29

Tellenbach argued that the politicization of illness as an identity was itself
abusive and harmful to the patients. Not only was he critical of the politics
of Huber’s project, he saw what SPK practiced in the independent house as
fraudulent, a lie told to those so ill they cannot tell the truth from lies. He
regarded Huber as a manipulator, wannabe dictator, and master of puppets,
wielding his army of the sick with no regard for their health or safety. If
“the only way to cure them is to foment a Marxist revolution,” then,
Tellenbach argued, Huber was selling a cure that would never materialize.30
    The press, however, saw the arrangement between the university and
SPK as primarily a failure of the university administration to take the
necessary measures to contain the patients. Media reports accordingly
portrayed von Baeyer as weak and overly sympathetic to “left-wing
madmen,” charging that it was a mistake to “let the inmates run the
asylum.”31
 Von Baeyer’s decision to accept Richter’s recommendation and allow SPK
access to a private residence was framed as an abuse of taxpayer funds.32
Huber was smeared as a “cult leader,” and his peers gave comments to
reporters about how he had co-opted vulnerable patients into an improvised
militia to fight his personal battles.33
    In March 1971, Huber began to receive death threats at his home. Hate
campaigns were waged by “concerned” members of the community seeking
to lock the patients back up in the asylum to protect them from Huber. This
framing had an outsized impact on how Huber has been remembered in the
few accounts of SPK that exist. In a 1976 article for Stern looking back on
the events of the seventeen months when SPK operated their group therapy
agitations with university funding, West German writer and novelist Leo
Sievers explained that the press had framed a protest as a political coup,
reproducing claims that the protest was effected and managed by Huber,
who had “his patients force their way into the offices … and occupy them,
to force the administration to continue to pay him.”34 Pross also repeated
this idea of SPK being not a self-directed group but an abuse of patients
who were manipulated into doing Huber’s bidding. Pross’s critical account
of SPK describes the group as “fueled” by Huber’s fears of inadequacy and
his hopeless quest of professional recognition: “Huber saw himself as the
advocate for the underclass of the poli-clinic patient population in contrast
to the luxury clientele in the main hospital … Huber must have developed
his belief that this most vulnerable underclass of the mentally ill was to be
the carrier of a future revolution.”35
    By August 1971, the smear campaign against SPK and Huber had
ramped up. SPK, however, was unfazed by the attacks, and continued to
print weekly public pamphlets, hold teach-ins, and perform daily
therapeutic group agitation. The contents of their pamphlets, in turn,
became the subject of tabloid gossip, and SPK was slammed repeatedly in
the press for being too aggressive in tone.36 Phen-Necker Zeitung and Bild
printed inflammatory stories weekly and sometimes daily criticizing
everything from SPK’s manner of dress and writing to the language on
protest signs, op-eds penned by psychiatric experts questioning their
therapeutic methods, and pieces from “unnamed sources” or “confidential
defectors” speculating about the group’s criminal involvement. As Helen
Spandler notes, rebuttal statements by SPK or their sympathizers were also
 printed in the newspapers, but only after being “rendered unintelligible by
editing.” Local employers began to screen job applicants for SPK
membership, and group members’ families began to urge them to quit. Few
professionals came to Huber’s defense, with many in the anti-psychiatry
movement already beginning to distance themselves from SPK and their
work.37
    University faculty, conservatives, and reformers alike were outraged by
the press coverage alleging that the university was funding its own patient
revolt, and demanded that the board intervene. When the board refused to
act, Huber’s conservative colleagues began offering interviews and
commentary to the press speculating about Huber’s mental health, sexuality,
and the ethics of the SPK project. Many expressed concern about SPK’s
“growing extremism” in which “mental patients were politically
instrumentalized,” and called on the West German state to intervene in
Huber’s “abuse” of his patients.38 Huber was accused of dwelling in a
“mental world divided into the oppressor-exploiters and their collaborators
on one hand, and [SPK] as soldiers of revolutionary justice on the other.”39
Tensions continued to rise, culminating in an order issued by the West
German minister of education on September 18, 1970, banning the
University of Heidelberg from formally incorporating SPK.40 The minister
unilaterally revoked all funding for the group, and SPK was served with a
notice to vacate the independent house that had been granted by the
university in July, only a few months prior.41 In response, SPK sued the
minister on the grounds that the government had violated their
constitutional right to freedom of speech. The suit was procedurally delayed
several times and not heard until late 1972. From November 1970 to May
1971, SPK faced a continuous struggle against their eviction orders. The
coverage of this in the press only further fueled public outrage.
    The press assault on SPK escalated, with reporters levying charges of
sex scandals, clandestine activities within the group, defections, drug use,
and growing threats of patient militarization and revolt, to the great dismay
of the university board.42 The criticism of SPK’s tactics and logic was
vicious, stoking outrage at SPK’s “ungrateful” and unabashed accusations
directed at capitalism. SPK was seen as disrupting not just the quiet peace
and intellectual conservatism of the university, but the very future of the
West German state itself.
      By 1971, the mass denouncement and scandal in the press, alongside
SPK’s continuing perseverance, had made the group a real concern to the
West German state and international authorities. In the 1960s and 1970s,
hundreds of what terrorist researchers often mistakenly term “anarchist
armed struggle groups” emerged throughout both the United States and
West Germany. The most famous were the Weather Underground in the US
and West Germany’s Rote Armee Fraktion (Red Army Faction, RAF),
popularly known as the Baader-Meinhof gang.43 In 1970, the FBI was in
active nationwide pursuit of the Weather Underground and urged countries
throughout Europe to similarly target their own left groups.44 During a 1970
visit to Heidelberg by former US secretary of defense Robert McNamara,
clashes broke out among protesters and police.45
     Rumors begin to emerge linking SPK to the RAF. The belief, which we
understand to be inaccurate, is that after the RAF had suffered several
casualties they “replenished” their ranks with patients from SPK.46 It was
speculated that Huber had heeded RAF’s call for recruits, helping to form
“the core of the ‘second generation’” of the RAF.47 These claims were
repeated in later years: for example, in her 1978 book Hitler’s Children:
The Story of the Baader-Meinhof Terrorist Gang, Jillian Becker mockingly
called SPK the “crazy brigade,” a label thereafter liberally applied to both
SPK and the RAF because of the groups’ speculated association.48 Becker
even went so far as to assert that these groups were part of Hitler’s legacy,
ignoring the obvious fact of the SPK’s anti-fascist and anti-imperialist
agenda, which was stated repeatedly in their published posters and
literature.
     More rumors of SPK’s connections to “domestic terrorism” began to
appear in early 1971. West German police claimed that SPK had attempted
“to bomb a train carrying West Germany’s president, but arrived after it
[had] left the Heidelberg station.”49 SPK would later be accused of two
more failed bombing attempts using devices they were alleged to have
constructed during a special bomb-making working circle. West German
police claimed the group had tested the device by taking the “first bomb to
the Odenwald Forest, exploding it by remote control and proudly taking
snapshots of their success.”50 The US government would eventually
classify SPK as a part of the RAF: “The SPK … terrorists were completely
integrated into the logistical support apparatus of the RAF.”51 According to
 UK terrorism expert Joanne Wright, who is highly critical of both the RAF
and SPK, the RAF perceived its support as coming from “a ‘lowest
common denominator,’” repeating an assertion that would become common
among critics of both groups—that in actuality the members of these groups
were simply rebellious children of the bourgeoisie, which Wright forwards
as a common characteristic of left political tendencies.52 Wright claimed
that the RAF had specifically centered its recruitment on “communes and
narcotics … [targeting] university students.” Everyone who had joined, she
argued, had been individuals vulnerable to “rejection of society,” and
naturally they ended up with “crazy” and “inept” members of SPK.53
    The police suspected that SPK’s working circles had become training
programs for the planned transformation of SPK from a patient group into a
“revolutionary fighting group” with intent to overthrow the government. On
June 24, 1971, West German police began to carry out a series of targeted
arrests across the city, using an unrelated shooting in the same residential
area as the home of an SPK member as the excuse.54 From June 24 to 26,
police arrested, interrogated, and threatened SPK members, and their
homes, offices, and possessions were searched without warrants.55 Later,
when the reasoning for the raids was challenged, the police cited the
suspicion of terrorism and argued that SPK’s status as a “criminal union”
justified warrantless search and seizure according to paragraph 129 of the
German penal code.56 Paragraph 129 was frequently used to hold leftist
dissidents in detention, regardless of charges, by declaring them guilty of
“membership in an illegal organization.” Even if the police were unable to
convict the individual of anything else, this allowed authorities to detain
people indefinitely for mere association. Only a few months prior, this
strategy had been used by the police against members of the RAF. (“The
press had a field day and many an innocent Baader-Meinhof look-alike was
pulled in.”57) As historian Jeremy Varon explains, “Fear of communist
subversion enhanced the imperative the state felt to use extreme measures
to preserve what it saw as the integrity of [West] Germany’s postwar
democratic experiment.”58
    A special task force on SPK was initiated by the West German police
based on evidence from a “key witness” who has never been publicly
identified but who claimed to be a member of the collective’s much-
rumored “inner circle”—or to use the term the US government prefers, the
 SPK “nucleus”—who had allegedly defected from the group.59 The police
surveillance and crackdown on SPK only increased from March forward.
According to communication and whistle-blower theorist Gary Genosko:
“When administrative and legal means failed to dissolve the group, a vote
was taken behind closed doors in the University Senate mandating a public
show of force. Using an unrelated event in suburban Heidelberg involving
the exchange of gunfire as an excuse.”60 A little over a month later, on July
31, 1971, the day before SPK’s eviction date, over 300 militarized officers
descended on the SPK building with machine guns, dogs, and a helicopter,
arresting and sequestering all nine people in the building at the time.61
Huber and his wife Ursula were arrested, their children were taken by the
state, and along with the other members who had been arrested, they were
eventually charged with the “formation of a criminal organization.”62 Many
arrested members were held by the police for long periods of time and
“drugged to make them appear cooperative.”63
    The Hubers and members of SPK were charged with attempted
bombings, forming a criminal organization, wounding a police officer in the
unrelated June 24 shoot-out that predicated the initial wave of arrests,
forged documents, bank robbery, and the possession of drugs and illegal
weapons.64 Ursula Huber was accused of having bugged the university
boardroom so SPK could listen in on academic administrators deliberating
over the fate of their project (we believe this particular accusation may have
been true).65 The conditions of confinement faced by members of both SPK
and the RAF were reportedly designed to deliberately destabilize their
sanity: each was kept “in physical and acoustic isolation in a white cell with
fluorescent lighting on for 24 hours a day for several months.”66 It was later
discovered through the release of a cache of documents related to Huber’s
imprisonment that “the state prosecutor began to inquire about Huber’s
mental health a year before he was due to be released, pushing the idea that
he should perhaps go straight into a psychiatric unit.”67
    Ultimately SPK would be labeled as terrorists, and a distortion of their
praxis would be used to pathologize other revolutionary contemporaries, as
well as groups in the decades following. Additionally, some SPK members
would become the target of international manhunts. Whether these
accusations of terrorism are true or not is immaterial to our account. If SPK
was engaged in explicit, riotous, violent revolutionary activity, then the
 capitalist state accurately identified the very real threat posed by a sick
proletariat—the surplus class—fighting on behalf of their collective
liberation. If this is the case, we applaud SPK, to whom Health Communism
is collectively dedicated. Or, if it is the case that SPK were marked as
terrorists for engaging in mutual aid work and socially disruptive,
emancipatory communal therapy, then their actions are no less laudatory.
Either way, it is no coincidence that the group has been pathologized as
terrorists for their emphasis on emancipatory, patientled, anti-capitalist care
—and that their actions became for some the basis of an evaluatory
framework for how to consider radical political activity as pathology.

                                      —

In the wake of the brutal crackdown on SPK, few came to their defense
from within the anti-psychiatry community. Gilles Deleuze, Félix Guattari,
and Franco Basaglia rallied a small group of their peers to support SPK,
making statements to the media in their own countries in SPK’s defense.
The media insistently asked Guattari in particular to denounce the
therapeutic tactics of SPK. Guattari repeatedly refused, asserting that what
mattered about the project was not its therapeutic tactics but its “utterly
new” approach to political struggle, which Guattari thought “created a way
out of ideology” that had not been attempted before.68 Even some of SPK’s
harshest critics have admitted how convenient it was that “in the midst of
the conflict with the clinic management, the SPK came under suspicion of
supporting the RAF.”69
     In 1972, Deleuze and Guattari led a pilgrimage to Heidelberg for the
trial to show solidarity with SPK, joined by a group of Dutch, Italian, and
French psychiatrists—the few remaining in the anti-psychiatry movement
willing to support SPK’s cause. Deleuze’s former student Pierre Blanchaud
had traveled to Heidelberg and recounted his surprise at running into them
in the square facing the university. “I could see Deleuze and Guattari right
there in front of me! So I shouted, ‘Deleuze, what on earth are you doing
here?’ He replied, ‘Chance!’” Blanchaud notes that Deleuze was clearly
joking, as it was rare to find him outside of France because he hated
traveling, but the “militant goal was important enough to bring Deleuze …
from Paris.”70
      Deleuze and Guattari found in SPK a unique and exciting new kind of
political practice. In contrast to patient groups of the past, SPK led the sick
not to reform, but to revolt. Rather than orient their organizing around
seductive half measures, the patients who led themselves rejected
incremental change. Guattari felt that, beyond the work of Cooper,
Basaglia, and the other anti-psychiatrists, SPK had succeeded in “making
madness the concern of everyone,” despite, he noted, the historical
“reticence of the left to enter into new kinds of alliances with groups that
normally did not march through the streets, attend meetings, and toe the
party line.”71
     Guattari felt that what SPK had done was something “totally new” that
had shaken both the institution of the university and the West German state
to its core. Ultimately, the crackdown in 1971 ended SPK’s broad efforts in
Heidelberg, and it signaled the end of a radical experiment in patient
autonomy coming from within the walls of the institution itself. Guattari
compared it to “March 22 at Nanterre,” explaining that while SPK’s fight
had not captured international attention and sympathy the way that Paris in
’68 had, SPK had nonetheless “rallied forces for a real fight—and the forces
of repression were ready, they saw the thing for what they were!”72

                                      —

Deleuze and Guattari were not the only ones documented to have had
contact and intellectual collaboration with SPK. Italian meta-psychiatrist
Agostino Pirella, in a 1973 letter to Basaglia, compared the work of anti-
psychiatrists David Cooper and R. D. Laing to Italian meta-psychiatry and
SPK. Pirella wrote that he saw many similarities and overlaps between their
ideas, questioning why SPK had been uniquely vilified. “From what I can
gather, it seems to me that they also say things that are right, but that you
(and us) are taken for Marcusian utopianists—(!)”73 Basaglia was in close
contact with SPK after 1972, even hosting former SPK members to study
the Trieste model—which incited an attack on the hospital by local neo-
fascists outraged at SPK’s presence.74 Historian John Foot has found, in
Basaglia’s unpublished writing, allusions to his work on an Italian
translation of SPK’s manifesto.
    Basaglia felt that the censorship of SPK “had historical roots and
meaning,” in part because of the role German psychiatry played in postwar
 Europe. To Basaglia, the suppression of SPK had provided “practical
verification” clarifying the “true meaning” of psychiatry. In an unpublished
type-script, Basaglia wrote: “The same man that German psychiatrists had
‘minutely investigated, codified, diagnosed in his symptoms and syndromes
and so well incorporated in medical science, was eliminated and killed to
safeguard and protect the race and production’ during the second World
War … [Germany] ‘had continued to refine and modernize the techniques
and thinking of the ‘old masters.’”75
     Basaglia, like Deleuze and Guattari, was convinced that SPK had been
targeted for repression because of the “subversive potential” of their direct
actions that disrupted the “rigid scaffolding” of German medical culture.
Basaglia wrote that “the young people of the SPK found their precise role in
German psychiatry when the police qualified their action by blocking it …
The true face of German psychiatry is that of the police who protect and
defend it, whose limits the police are delegated to maintain.”76 In that
regard, Basaglia considered the mission of SPK accomplished in that they
had demonstrated “the crisis of a science” that relied upon the courts and
the police for legitimacy and survival. On the night before Huber’s trial, at a
teach-in in Heidelberg with nearly a thousand people in attendance, the
Italian meta-psychiatry delegation, there to show their support for SPK,
declared their solidarity with SPK’s cause. “All Italy is behind you,” they
pledged, promising never to abandon their German comrades.77
     Von Baeyer, also in attendance, reported a slightly different account of
this demonstration of solidarity. “In the early summer of 1972 [university
administrators] found themselves before a noisy and turbulent audience. If
they could distinguish any of the faces, they were likely perhaps to see one
or other of them again on ‘wanted’ notices.”78 Dr. K. P. Kisker, another
University of Heidelberg psychiatrist observing the solidarity rally,
described it as such: “Air you could cut with a knife, a circus ring, running
the gauntlet feelings, acrid smell of academic hyenas … A prairie of hairy
tufts and beards in the tiered seats and standing in rows. Where there might
be faces, -isms spread from earhole to earhole.”79
     Most anti-psychiatrists and social psychiatrists alike saw SPK as a
liability. Thinkers once associated with the anti-psychiatry movement began
to reject the label, fearing that the radical mass energy was attracting
negative attention to their cause. Laing wrote that he felt the SPK project
 was fundamentally flawed because Huber did not put in sufficient work to
advance a clinical argument for his therapies before attempting to
implement them. Laing lamented Huber’s decision to not first attempt to
“convince others that his methods were better. Instead, his argument was
political. He wanted changes in the clinic so it would serve the interests of
the patients rather than the staff.”80 Other psychiatrists and psychiatry
groups, even those on the political left, denounced SPK “in order to protect
the ‘fragile little plant of social psychiatry’ from the ‘overflowing surge of
enthusiasm for anti-psychiatry.’”81 Many previously sympathetic
psychiatrists felt that the West German government had legitimate reason to
target SPK, pointing to contact between members of SPK, members of the
RAF, and sympathizers of Baader-Meinhof as proof of collaboration among
the three memberships, helping to collapse them into one and the same in
the public imaginary.
     This created a landscape in which all who socialized or overlapped with
any of these radical groups were treated in psychiatric literature as “guilty”
by association, in perpetuity. The formidable media campaign against SPK
had successfully painted their doctor-collaborators both as pawns (used by
the patients to liberate themselves from the asylum) and as manipulators
(asserting doctors had used the patients’ rebellion to further their own
personal or political ends).82 In the trial of Huber and other SPK members,
the prosecutors levied accusations that SPK had “no clinical value,”
claiming that rather than provide therapy, SPK’s group agitation was
harmful.
     On the first day of Huber’s trial on November 7, 1972, Huber, his wife,
and Hausner, the third defendant, were brought into the courtroom “tied
hand and foot” to stretchers, having been held in isolation for fifteen
months. A judge in the trial would later refer to the SPK defendants as “a
little jihad.”83 Guattari noted that most of the people in attendance at the
trial were policemen in plain clothes. When a young man read a statement
of international solidarity with SPK in court, all nonpolice visitors were
immediately expelled. The man who had read the statement, “even before
he had got outside the court building, was arrested, abused, beaten up, and
left without medical attention for hours.”84 SPK’s lawyers were accused of
being complicit in their terrorism: Eberhardt Becker was charged but not
convicted and Jörg Lang was convicted and imprisoned as a result of
 agreeing to defend SPK in court. Guattari adds that the West German police
and courts had tremendous discretion over the circumstances of the trial.
“By treating them first as insane and then as terrorists (because of their
response to police provocation they were compared to with the Baader-
Meinhof group), they could be brought before a special tribunal operating
on Nazi principles.”85 Wolfgang and Ursula Huber would ultimately spend
four and a half years in prison, including nearly a year of solitary
confinement each.86 Some SPK members fled abroad and assumed other
names, fearing further persecution by the West German state.
     In the context of 1970s West Germany, the crackdown on SPK was not
surprising. The existence of a strong student protest movement since 1968
had led to the increased persecution of left-wing groups, with many being
put under precautionary surveillance just for their politics.87 West Germany
experienced a wave of student rebellions in the early 1960s, and some have
accused this initial dissent as having “spread the virus of disobedience” so
deep into German society that it penetrated the “layers” of psychiatric
institutions.88 In the 1970s, West Germans had a major disincentive to
critique capitalism, as a strong ideological commitment to a capitalist
economic system and liberal ideologies of free market trade was seen as
key to the survival of the West German state. The Cold War dynamic also
explains the willingness of other capitalist nations in suppressing anyone
associated with the SPK; both Basaglia and Guattari, for example, had their
homes raided and searched multiple times in the early to mid-1970s by the
Italian and French police, respectively.
     At the time, West Germany was host to several important NATO and
American army bases, which offered a significant stimulus to the local
economies.89 It was theorized that SPK, the RAF, and the other left groups
at the time were seeking to emulate “guerrilla struggle into industrialized
urban centres of capitalist expansion” because they saw the spread of US-
sponsored capitalist pro-industrialist policy as an occupying force.
Historical sociologist Kimberly Mair has done extensive research into the
surprising lack of state documentation “relating to controversial security
measures and other practices taken in response to left-wing guerrilla
activism.”90 Mair’s research has shown that during this time, West Germany
was engaged in a collective process of forgetting its Nazi past, ultimately
 leading to a widespread crackdown on anyone who questioned the success
of the post–Marshall Plan capitalist project.
    The Marshall Plan delivered aid to Europe at the end of World War II
“in accordance with U.S. interests,” providing support while channeling
“profits towards American companies.” It “served ‘as vehicles for the
transport of U.S. imperialist ideology,’” in theory generating surplus
revenue for US corporations while “forestalling communism,” all while
allowing the US to “appear to be a benefactor.”91 The success of West
Germany and its ability to control its dissident left movements therefore
aligned with the US national interest, leading US officials to place pressure
on West German prosecutors to apprehend and criminalize even “fringe
figures.”92 As Jeremy Varon explains:
   The United States had tried to create the Federal Republic of Germany—West Germany—
   largely in its own image, and West Germany saw its alliance with the United States as key to
   both its survival and its redemption; adopting American values was to enter the modern
   family of nations and achieve the long elusive “normality” so desperately sought after the
   catastrophe of National Socialism.93

                                               —

The pathologization of SPK as a terrorist group serves to answer a question
that capitalism itself can’t solve. By connecting SPK and other European
left guerilla movements from the same period, experts on terrorism have
sought to cast left militant movements as “crazy” for engaging in
revolutionary activity.94 Many have even blamed SPK’s activities on “a
breakdown of the modern family,” a theory that the expansion of social
collectivity results from the degeneration of “family ties,” or have otherwise
chalked up the allure of collectivity as the psychic reconciliation of a
“socialist critique of property” with a “culture of general promiscuity.”95
    Left radical groups are therefore framed as coming from without society
despite arising, most often, in urban centers. Academics who study the
philosophy and psychology of terrorism have extensively tracked former
confirmed and suspected SPK members throughout the remainder of their
lives, creating a record not of their work, dissent, or agitation, but a weblike
structure of pseudoscientific ways to explain away all popular left
movements as nothing but the daydreams of madmen. It is for this reason
that we have chosen to reproduce in our account only the names of those
 members and former members of SPK who are either deceased or missing
or have already been discussed in the English-language press.96
    After many SPK members fled West Germany, they were portrayed as
dangerous and moving around Europe with impunity. In 1979, Larry
McDonald, US congressman from Georgia, characterized SPK members as
having “accumulated funds, weapons, and false documents,” adding that
“forgery of drivers licenses, passports, and the like was made a specialty.”97
In 1981, psychologist Jacob Sundberg accused former SPK members who
fled to Sweden of poisoning “quite a few middle-class Swedish
intellectuals, especially young women,” through the spreading of alleged
West German “terrorist doctrines.”98 Sundberg blamed an attempted
kidnapping of Swedish official Anna-Greta Leijon in 1977 on the spread of
SPK’s logic to Swedish youth, decrying “the destruction of the social
infrastructure and … lack of family control in a society characterized by a
general leftist atmosphere.”99 In short, Sundberg argued, SPK demonstrated
that societies that were more permissive of leftist thought were more prone
to enabling left-wing terrorist action.
    Paul Wilkinson, a leading UK academic specialist on terrorism, argues
that SPK’s capacity for deviance was due to their mental illnesses, and that
SPK should actually be seen as the line connecting all left-wing terrorism in
the 1970s—not just the Red Army Faction, but also the Japanese Red
Army, the Weathermen in the US, the Italian Red Brigades, and the Angry
Brigade in the UK. Wilkinson terms their actions “ideological terrorism,”
which he suggests is an “appropriate label” for “weird cults of violence and
hate,” pathologizing all of these unrelated or tangentially related groups as
existing within a taxonomic category shaped by the characteristics of SPK.
Furthermore, Wilkinson echoes Wright’s dismissal of SPK and similar
movements as “the children of affluent and privileged homes” living in a
“fantasy world concocted from neo-Marxist slogans and the ideals of Sartre
and Marcuse.”100
    SPK has been cemented in anti-terrorist academic literature as a
recruitment arm of the RAF, reinforcing and perpetuating the idea that left
movements drew people in with radical messages on healthcare and illness
in order to radicalize them for membership in a renegade army of “lunatics
with guns.” Some, like Pross, have even gone so far as to frame the entire
story of SPK as a terrorist recruiting myth, laughably dismissing the notion
 that SPK was “victimized and destroyed by a reactionary alliance” as
simply part of the selling point of the group’s mythology.101 Nevertheless,
SPK’s mythology has in fact continued to live on, though its current legacy
is not within psychiatry, or in left organizing, but within the language and
pathology of terrorism applied by those who have studied SPK in attempts
to understand their “madness” and their seemingly boundless capacity for
resistance.102
     In a December 1982 conference organized by the Rand Corporation
called “Terrorism and Beyond: An International Conference on Terrorism
and Low-Level Conflict,” SPK was used as a template to create
psychological profiles of radical group dynamics, directly building upon
much of the work initiated by people like Horst-Eberhard Richter in his
initial observations of SPK as a consultant for the University of Heidelberg.
The Rand conference was centered around the question of why “terrorist
groups need action.”103 This conference, and its use of SPK as a key case
study, displayed a long tail of ideological knowledge production geared
toward the maintenance of hegemony against such radical ideas. The nature
of SPK as a group of former psychiatric patients becomes an invitation for
armchair psychologists, allowing commentators to focus on intragroup
dynamics and ignore any of the group’s formative political beliefs or the
material realities of members’ lived existence. For example, as Sarah
Brockhoff, a conservative economist of the political economy of terrorism,
has theorized, SPK demonstrates that left-wing “terrorist” groups are driven
by “impossible” goals “as part of a global struggle between ‘capitalist
imperialism’ and the ‘Third World.’”104 Brockhoff and many others have
used the lesson of SPK to characterize all left-wing political movements as
being unable to be appeased by policy changes and economic incentives.
She states, “While socio-economic incentives—particularly, employment—
may also be helpful against left-wing terrorism, its overall responsiveness to
politico-economic incentives is expected to be weaker, given the more
abstract and non-negotiable goals of this kind of terrorism.”105
     These “non-negotiable goals,” like “foment[ing] a Marxist revolution,”
are portrayed by conservative academics as coming from an inability to
recognize the need for a “separation of private and political spheres” as
“private needs are subordinated to the collective political goal.”106 Fueled
by an “atmosphere of aimlessness combined with the feeling of having no
 future,” left political goals, these experts argue, are reflective of collective
“senselessness and disorientation” in which “politicization becomes a value
itself” and political action “is primarily regarded as an alternative to their
own actual crisis of life.”107 It is not even so much as imagined that groups
like SPK may have understood the reality of their situation—fighting to
bring a future into being.
     The development of the “terrorist profile” of the left movements of the
1970s using SPK’s identity as part of the surplus class has resulted in an
erasure of the legacy of SPK’s work addressing the systems of capitalism
and health. In the late 1970s, after former SPK member Kristina Berster
attempted to enter the United States from Canada, the threat of infiltration
of rogue SPK members was used to justify increasing American “border
security.” Warning that SPK terror cells had breached the US border for the
first time, headlines read: “FBI Hunts ‘Mad’ Terrorists,” “U.S. May Be
Next on Terrorism’s List,” and “International Crackdown Centers on
Anarchists.”108 A 1978 Daily Telegraph article titled “West Germans Want
Terrorist” quotes FBI Director William Webster as saying:
   [Berster] had been accompanied by three other persons at the time, who escaped. It is
   suspected that they included Wolfgang Huber, co-founder of the Socialist Patients
   Collective, and Axel Achterrath, an alleged Baader-Meinhof accomplice, both of whom have
   served German jail terms … Recent German reports suggest that at least some of the
   fugitives on Germany’s most-wanted terrorist list have sought sanctuary in North
   America.109

    SPK in its original form lasted less than two years. Without solidarity
from other groups and allied causes, they were easily and brutally
condemned by the state for their left organizing. Anti-psychiatry is often
assumed to have had a tremendous influence on reorienting the system of
mental healthcare toward meeting the needs of the patient, yet little has
materially changed about not just mental healthcare but all health-care since
SPK’s first Patients’ General Assembly. Capitalism still dominates, and few
are willing to attempt to politicize health toward more radical goals, opting
instead to advocate for incremental reforms and humane policy innovations.
The mission of SPK now belongs to the movements of this century.
                                   OceanofPDF.com
                                    HOST

   When I stand
   On the front lines now,
   Cussing the lack of truth,
   The absence of willful change
   And strategic coalitions,
   I realize sewing quilts
   Will not bring you back
   Nor save us
                                                              —Essex Hemphill1

The biological fascist fantasy that constitutes “health” is of enormous
importance to capital. As we have seen throughout Health Communism,
capital has both shaped health and shaped itself around health. In the
process, one of capital’s most critical vulnerabilities has been left in plain
sight. It is therefore necessary to sever the ties between health and capital.
Doing so requires an understanding of where the vulnerabilities lie—from
which sites to cleave. As we have argued, it is necessary for left political
projects to both center the surplus populations and also to categorically
refute the political, biostatistical, and sociological stratifications that lie at
the center of the very construction of the surplus. Liberation from the state
and capital’s sympathetic capacities of extractive abandonment will require
no less than the total refutation of those categorized as “surplus” as
somehow “less than.”
    We pause for a moment on the definitions of capital’s imbrication with
health. There are already myriad ways of formulating capital’s reliance on
health, including the social determinants of health, and the demands
advanced in the spheres of health justice and carceral abolition. It is worth
addressing with finality how we understand these relationships, and how
health and capital are so linked.
     It is not merely that capital has constructed health; though this is also
true. As we have seen, regimes of biocertification have for centuries marked
delineations of capitalist “productivity” as commensurate with social value.
The corresponding definitions and delineations of the ill/well, able/disabled,
sane/mad, and so on match the arbitrary sociological constructions that
separate “surplus” from “worker”—working class from waste class. The
prescriptions of proponents of the social model of disability, despite its
current trajectory having become denuded from necessary criticisms of the
political economy, therefore hold true: illness, disability, and madness are
categorically social constructions ill-fitting the bodies these labels are used
to demarcate as burden. But it is not that these categories do not exist. The
categoric dismissal of these labels, as practiced in particular by some critics
of health and capital in the mid-twentieth century, can also produce a
categoric dismissal of the bodies that have been so marked. We have seen
social movements, in refuting the stigmas capital places on these
biocertifications, in fact abandon the material needs of the surplus in a fit of
utopian zeal, as though because capital has shaped them, merely stating that
they do not exist will in and of itself undo capital’s violence. The
sociological constructions that constitute these stigmatized categories, and
all stigmatized categorizations under capital, must instead be celebrated. It
is for this reason that we say it is not only that capital has “constructed”
health. Capital has reinforced and weaponized the certification and
demarcations of these identities as principles of valuation. It is only in
refuting this capacity that capital and the state wield that we will finally be
able to shed the mass sociological burden that centuries of eugenic political
philosophy have engrained.
    Illness—you point out—is the only possible form of life in capitalism. It
is similarly easy to get caught here: if these categorizations are social
constructions, their valuations corrupted by capital’s political philosophy,
but nonetheless should be the subject of celebration, what then to make of
the radical assertion that “we are all sick”? On one hand it is undeniable:
health is and remains a fantasy, a subjective dream of an unattenuated
“wellness,” a body state we deny any being has ever known. This literal
explication is, however, abstracted from what it means to recognize all of
us, the body politic, the demos, the surplus, as being ill. Capital has
emphasized and corrupted the delineations between surplus classes for its
convenience; it is immeasurably threatening to capital to see a group of
 those it has deemed to be waste come together in solidarity. Professional
language contemporary to, or directly preceding, SPK elaborates on this
with clarity.
    In 1951, Talcott Parsons published The Social System, a text which can
best be described as a para-philosophical work attempting to ascribe logic,
reason, and moral justification to existing patriarchal and white supremacist
social norms within the US. The Social System was unfortunately an
immensely influential text, enduringly cited for decades in social science
research. One of Parsons’ most famous contributions in The Social System
comes in his definition of “the sick role,” an analysis of the burdensome
nature of the ill. Parsons classified illness—any state of illness, from
permanent disability to a light cold—as, socially, sanctioning “deviant”
behavior. The ill or disabled, according to Parsons, practiced “deviancy” in
that illness allowed for the reprieve of social responsibilities including
labor, work, duties owed to the traditional family structure, and other
normative behaviors.
    It was for this reason, Parsons concluded, that “society” had established
the “physician role” to manage the sick. While the modestly ill could be
attended to by family—but must be goaded into returning to wellness as
quickly as possible, to minimize their period of deviant behavior—the
gravely ill, the disabled, and indeed the “incurable” would be managed by
those in the “physician role.” Only in doing so could the sick be kept siloed
from society, their burdens managed, encouraged toward rehabilitation from
their deviancy, pressured to return to their status as productive members of
society as quickly as possible: to be, therefore, worthy of life.
    The sick role was, for Parsons, “a mechanism which in the first instance
channels deviance so that the two most dangerous potentialities, namely,
group formation and successful establishment of the claim to legitimacy,”
by which Parsons means confirmation of diagnoses, confirmation of illness,
“are avoided.” According to him, “The sick are tied up, not with other
deviants to form a ‘sub-culture’ of the sick, but each with a group of non-
sick, his personal circle and, above all, physicians. The sick thus become a
statistical class and are deprived of the possibility of forming a solidary
collectivity.”2
    Parsons was, in his way, correct. Much as we do with the century-long
litany of revanchists who have decried “socialized medicine” as the onroads
to communism, we embrace Parsons’ paranoiac insistence that deviants, the
 surplus, and the sick form the central class that can bring about the fall of
capital. As we have seen throughout Health Communism, Parsons’
observation that the sick are retained as “a statistical class” and are
therefore “deprived of the possibility of forming a solidary collectivity” is
an accurate description of why and how capital manages its relationships to
its surplus classes and wields with impunity the divisions between them.
     We do not believe in the simplicity of dialectics. But it is easy to
understand projects like SPK’s, and ours, as in part a reaction to the outright
declaration and confirmation of norms on display in works like that of
Parsons, as well as a manifestation of his worst nightmare. SPK’s assertion
that we are all ill—the psychiatrist, who is wage dependent, is a sick person
like each of us—is echoed not only in SPK’s constitution of a radical anti-
capitalist collective of the surplus, but in the very idea of universal illness
being constituent to Parsons’ worries over “the sick role.” According to
Parsons, “To be sick is by definition an undesirable state, so that it simply
does not ‘make sense’ to assert a claim that the way to deal with the
frustrating aspects of the social system is ‘for everybody to get sick.’”3
     It is not necessarily the case that we are all sick. But none of us is well.
The truth of the distinction that capitalist states draw in their demarcations
of worker/surplus is that in the eyes of capital, we are all surplus. That we
must center the surplus in our political projects and demands is therefore
not simply to say, “celebrate the surplus.” It is to show that the capacities of
immiseration, the processes of extractive abandonment, that play out
insistently and invariably on the surplus populations is not merely the fuel
for capital, but is the fate of us all. We are each of us ripped and maimed,
strangled and buried by capital, in one way or another. That entire industries
exist in plain sight to see us along this vast process of endlessly iterative life
chances, to then subject us to extraction when we are surplus and no longer
of use, and to eke out slivers of profit from our eventual deaths, is capital’s
greatest sleight of hand. We are all surplus.
     Capital has formed itself around health, in the process constructing
“health” as a shield, a reason for its behaviors, despite its simultaneous
assertion that health makes no difference to it. Worker health exploitation,
allowing the surplus to die, statistical genocide, social murder, “personal
responsibility” frameworks—the realities of these, and the shifting policies
and “reforms” that manage them, do not constitute an evolving “morality”
to capitalism, some shifting moral universe of the social order.
 Modifications to these processes constitute only the ways capital manages
this sleight of hand, producing its myths of morality and progress. It is not
possible to liberate one another from such forms of slow death without
destroying capital, and it is not possible to truly rid ourselves of capital
without exenterating health from capital.
     It is not simply that capital has formed itself around health and
constructed our idea of health in the process. Capital also resides in health,
as its host.
     This host-body relationship of health and capital can be understood
through an analysis of the social determinants of health and their direct
relationship to the broader political economy. It is present in each of the
accounts we have demonstrated throughout Health Communism; with each
stage, with every evolution of the political economy of health, capital has
come to occupy and replace more and more components of its host. But
capital cannot kill its host body, or it would have nowhere to reside, nothing
to exploit, a barren universe. It is for this reason that capital only fears
health.
     It is up to us to separate them.
                             OceanofPDF.com
                       Acknowledgments

This book has been fundamentally shaped by our ongoing friendship and
collaboration with Philip Rocco, with whom we have been engaged in
constant political agitation for the last few years. Our work together has
touched every idea present in the final volume, and we are forever grateful
for your insight, wit, and energy.
    We are indebted to the incredible community that has formed around
Death Panel, and to all of those who have supported our work, listened, and
pushed us. We are in particular thankful for the friendship and support of
Vince Patti. Vince retired from Death Panel just as we were beginning to
write this book, but to us he will always be a part of it. We also thank our
comrades Sal Hamerman and Charlie Markbreiter, both for the incredible
work they have done in making the Death Panel Reading Group possible,
and also for their friendship.
    We are enormously grateful to the activists, academics, writers, and
others who we have engaged in the topics in Health Communism, both in
private discourse and in some cases very publicly in Death Panel
recordings. To this end, for their work, insight, contributions, and otherwise,
we would like to thank Abby Cartus, Abdullah Shihipar, Adam Gaffney,
Alexander Zaitchik, Arrianna M. Planey, Alex Sammon, Ayesha A. Siddiqi,
Charlotte Shane, Da’Shaun L. Harrison, Dan Berger, Dean Spade, Eli
Valley, Ellen Samuels, Frank Pasquale, Harsha Walia, Jack Allison, Jacob
Bacharach, Jules Gill-Peterson, Jules Gleeson, Justin Feldman, K Agbebiyi,
Karen Tani, Leslie Lee III, Liat Ben-Moshe, Libby Watson, Marshall
Steinbaum, Michael Lighty, Nate Holdren, Nathan Tankus, Noah Zazanis,
OK Fox, Seth Prins, Sophie Lewis, Steve Way, Tim Faust, Vicky Osterweil,
Vivian Negron, Wes Bignell, and Yves Tong Nguyen. We would
additionally like to thank the ACT UP Oral History Project (Sarah
 Schulman and Jim Hubbard) for their invaluable work. This book would not
have been possible without Jasmine Jahanshahi, may her memory be for a
revolution.
    We owe tremendous gratitude to all those who have participated in the
Death Panel Reading Group. The discussions in Reading Group, and what
the group made us feel about how this book could be used, were always at
the back of our minds while writing. While this list will by necessity be
incomplete—some names are missing by request—we would like to thank
“Maddy,” 0carl, Aaron Pozos, Alice Kenney, allie, Amygo, andré, Angelica
Castro-Mendoza, Anna Aguiar Kosicki, annabelle, aquiynoaqui, arend,
Axel, Ayn, beanlar, Becca (BedWords), beckett_, broana, bthans, caitlin,
Calliope, CamdenR, Casey Wait, Charlie Markbreiter, Chase, chelsea,
chepebutt, clarekesh, Connor, conzbrenny, Cy, Daniel Apikoros, Day,
DeltaCortis, Diana Joy, djuna_emse, Elijah Castle, ellery, elsa, emiwe,
gabo, George Battle, gigagondy, hannah-d, hauntology, Hazel Marie,
HumaneEngineer, ineptpanda, J. N. Hoad, jack t, jackiee, jackjackjack, Jada
Reyes, Jolene Zubrow, Jules Gill-Peterson, Jules Gleeson, Karen Tani,
Kerry Doran, Khalil, KnotTheory, LatheOfHeaven, lefu, lēves (nat),
lieLayLain, Lina Work Stoppage, Lucky, Mallory King, mary, Masha, Max,
Max Kren, maxiii, maxymax, mccaffeine, mclare, melon, Mich, mike, mx,
n8, Natalee Decker, NeuroHuman, never not eating (hannah), nice young
man, nina, nino, Noah Zazanis, OK Fox, Olga, Olivia Dreisinger, Precious
Okoyomon, Priscilla, priya, PurpleDandylion, pyrobombus, Quinn,
RaisinTheCat, Rebecca Sharp, ree, River Ramirez, roy, ryyye, S Hipp, Sal
Hamerman, Salt, sam, samr, Scott McKenzie, Shy Fudger, Sidney Ross,
Signy, Sistema, slimecraftconstituency, sloppy, Sophie Lewis, Star Finney,
stardoggie, StreetRangerz, Tarrune, Thai Lu, tinyhands, trickybun, verblox,
Virgil, W Moore, willa, womb_ember, and zoe. We would like to extend a
very special thank you, and rest in power, to Michelle Nitto.
    We also owe a special thanks to our incredible admin team: Aaron,
Angelica, Calliope, Casey, Carly, Charlie, Jada, Kat, Melon, Priscilla,
Rebecca, Sal, Scott, Shy, Lina, and Thai. The Death Panel community
would not be what it is without you.
    Health Communism would additionally not be possible without the
incredible support of our editor at Verso Books, Jessie Kindig. We are
forever grateful that you saw such potential in our project so early, and that
 at each step, where others might have sought moderation, you encouraged
us to make Health Communism the volume it needed to be.
    Finally, we would like to thank the five providers who have worked
with Beatrice for over a decade on her care. Your openness and
collaboration with Bea, working first to identify an orphan disease and then
to manage it, have very literally kept her alive in spite of the US health
finance system. To Jonathan Howard, Mohammad Fouladvand, Brian
Golden, Ed Greaney, and Thomas Berk: we are forever in your debt.
                             OceanofPDF.com
                                           Notes

     Introduction
1   Sozialistisches Patientenkollektiv, Turn Illness into a Weapon: A Polemic Call to Action by the
    Socialist Patients’ Collective of the University of Heidelberg, trans. Anonymous (K. D.), 2013
    [1972], viii.
2   In this, we borrow from Tim Faust’s description of how to evaluate the quality of a federal
    universal single payer, or Medicare for All, proposal. Tim Faust, “What Is Single Payer,” in
    Health Justice Now: Single Payer and What Comes Next (Brooklyn: Melville House, 2019),
    81–2.
3   Vicente Navarro, “What Is Socialist Medicine?,” Monthly Review 38, no. 3 (July–August 1986):
    61–73.
4   Here we echo the words of our collaborator, Philip Rocco, who has repeatedly invoked the
    health “insurance” model as constituting little but an endless procession of negative
    externalities.



     SURPLUS
1   Gilles Deleuze and Fé lix Guattari, Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia (Minneapolis:
    University of Minnesota Press, 1983), 337.
2   Friedrich Engels, “Results,” in The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844
    (London: Swan Sonnenschein & Co., 1892), 95.
3   Lauren Berlant, “Slow Death (Sovereignty, Obesity, Lateral Agency),” Critical Inquiry 33, no.
    4 (Summer 2007): 754.
4   Danya M. Qato, “Public Health and the Promise of Palestine,” Journal of Palestine Studies 49,
    no. 4 (2020): 8–26, 11.
5   Dean Spade, Normal Life: Administrative Violence, Critical Trans Politics, and the Limits of the
    Law, rev. ed., (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2015), 9.
6   See Engels’s Condition of the Working Class in England and Marx’s first volume of Capital.
    There are some accounts that would otherwise situate what we refer to in this text as “surplus”
    as instead encapsulated by Marx and Engels’s term “lumpenproletariat.” We do not necessarily
    agree with this distinction, and believe that “surplus” more appropriately fits both the initial
    designation within Marxism historically while also being more politically salient in mapping a
    population marked for capital extraction to a term with broad colloquial understanding. While
      we will not consider Malthus over the course of this text, further contemporaneous accounts
     portray a similar picture. See John MacFarlan’s 1782 Inquiries Concerning the Poor, or Sir
     William Temple’s 1770 An Essay on Trade and Commerce.
 7   Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (London: W.
     Strahan and T. Cadell, 1776), 98. Thomas Robert Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of
     Population (London: J. Johnson, 1798), 97.
 8   Friedrich Engels, “Competition,” in Condition of the Working Class in England, 85.
 9   Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population, 27.
10   Karl Marx, Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, vol. 1, trans. Ben Fowkes (1976; repr.,
     New York: Penguin, 1982), 612.
11   Roy Lubove, “Economic Security and Social Conflict in America: The Early Twentieth
     Century, Part I,” Journal of Social History 1, no. 1 (Fall 1967): 80.
12   Liat Ben-Moshe, Decarcerating Disability: Deinstitutionalization and Prison Abolition
     (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2020), 13.
13   Jasbir Puar, The Right to Maim: Debility | Capacity | Disability (Durham, NC: Duke University
     Press, 2017), xviii.
14   Ellen Samuels, Fantasies of Identification: Disability, Gender, Race (New York: New York
     University Press, 2014), 179–80.
15   Rosemarie Garland Thompson, Extraordinary Bodies: Figuring Physical Disability in
     American Culture and Literature (New York: Columbia University Press, 1997), 153.
16   Shana Alexander, “They Decide Who Lives, Who Dies: Medical Miracle and a Moral Burden
     of a Small Committee,” Life, November 9, 1962, 102–28.
17   Spade, Normal Life, xiii–xiv.
18   Jim Downs, “The Continuation of Slavery: The Experience of Disabled Slaves during
     Emancipation,” Disability Studies Quarterly, 28, no. 3 (2008).
19   Kim Nielsen, “Property, Disability, and the Making of the Incompetent Citizen in the United
     States, 1860s–1940s,” in Disability Histories, ed. Susan Burch and Michael Rembis
     (Champaign: University of Illinois Press, 2014), 308–20.
20   Dea Boster, “‘Unfit for Ordinary Purposes’: Disability, Slaves, and Decision Making in the
     Antebellum American South,” in Disability Histories, ed. Susan Burch and Michael Rembis
     (Champaign: University of Illinois Press, 2014), 201–17.
21   In brief, the medical model of disability would consider an individual to be disabled by a
     physical characteristic associated with their impairment. The social model considers disability
     to be a largely social relation: defining the disabled not by some perceived lack (the medical
     model), but instead by society’s continued resistance to account for the variety of states of body
     and mind inherent to human beings.
22   Ravi Malhotra, “The Legal Politics of Marta Russell: A Castoriadan Reading,” in Disability
     Politics in a Global Economy: Essays in Honour of Marta Russell, ed. Ravi Malhotra (New
     York: Routledge, 2017), 3.
23   Spade, Normal Life, 38.
24   Marta Russell, Beyond Ramps: Disability at the End of the Social Contract—A Warning from an
     Uppity Crip (Monroe, ME: Common Courage Press, 1998), 98.
25   Marta Russell, Capitalism and Disability: Selected Writings by Marta Russell, ed. Keith
     Rosenthal (Chicago: Haymarket Books, 2019), 126.
26   Sidney D. Watson, “From Almshouses to Nursing Homes and Community Care: Lessons from
     Medicaid’s History,” Georgia State University Law Review 26, no. 3 (2010): 938–9.
27   Russell, Beyond Ramps, 98.
 28   Mariame Kaba, “So You’re Thinking about Becoming an Abolitionist,” in We Do This ’til We
     Free Us: Abolitionist Organizing and Transforming Justice, ed. Tamara K. Nopper (Chicago:
     Haymarket Books, 2021), 3.
29   Ruth Wilson Gilmore, Golden Gulag: Prisons, Surplus, Crisis, and Opposition in Globalizing
     California (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2007), 23.
30   Ibid., 28.



      WASTE
1    Thomas Schelling, “The Life You Save May Be Your Own,” in Problems in Public Expenditure
     Analysis: Papers Presented at a Conference of Experts Held Sept. 15–16, 1966, ed. Samuel B.
     Chase (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1968).
2    Phil Rocco, “Policycraft; or, The Art of the Impossible” (unpublished manuscript, 2021).
3    Thomas Robert Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population (London: J. Johnson, 1798),
     24, 30.
4    George Rosen, “What Is Social Medicine? A Genetic Analysis of the Concept,” Bulletin of the
     History of Medicine 21, no. 5 (1947): 686; James Philips Kay, The Moral and Physical
     Condition of the Working Classes Employed in the Cotton Manufacture in Manchester (London:
     James Ridgway, 1832), 53.
5    Beatrix Hoffman, The Wages of Sickness: The Politics of Health Insurance in Progressive
     America (Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 2001), 47.
6    Ibid., 37.
7    Isaac Rubinow, Social Insurance, with Special Reference to American Conditions (New York:
     H. Holt & Co., 1913), 106.
8    Frederick L. Hoffman, Race Traits and Tendencies of the American Negro (New York:
     American Economic Association by Macmillan Co., 1896), 326.
 9   Beatrix Hoffman, Wages of Sickness, 109.
10   Frederick Hoffman, “Fecundity and Birth Control,” in Some Problems of Longevity (Chicago:
     Spectator Company Publishers, 1928), 17.
11   Frederick Hoffman, “The Health of the Negro,” in Some Problems of Longevity, 37.
12   Frederick Hoffman, The Failure of German Compulsory Health Insurance: A War Revelation
     (Newark, NJ: Prudential Press, 1919), 3.
13   Ibid., 15–16.
14   Beatrix Hoffman, Wages of Sickness, 95, 96.
15   Ibid., 104.
16   Jill Quadagno, One Nation Uninsured: Why the US Has No National Health Insurance (New
     York: Oxford University Press, 2005), 42.
17   Vicente Navarro, Social Security and Medicine in the USSR: A Marxist Critique (Lexington,
     MA: Lexington Books, 1977), 20, 21.
18   Quadagno, One Nation Uninsured, 54, 63.
19   Ibid., 63, 64, 112.
20   Dominque Tobbell, “‘Who’s Winning the Human Race?’ Cold War as Pharmaceutical Political
     Strategy,” Journal of the History of Medicine and Allied Sciences 64, no. 4 (June 2009): 440.
21   103 Cong. Rec. 8430 (1957) (extension of remarks of Hubert Humphrey, “Health, Happiness,
     Hope: The Human Approach to Foreign Relations”).
22   Tobbell, “‘Who’s Winning the Human Race?,’” 444. (Emphasis added.)
 23   Ibid., 469, 470.



       LABOR
1    Craig Willse, “Surplus Life: Biopower and Neoliberalism,” in “Gender, Justice, and Neoliberal
     Transformations,” ed. Elizabeth Bernstein and Janet R. Jakobsen, special issue, Scholar and
     Feminist Online 11, no. 1–2 (2012).
2    Daniel Blackie, “Disability, Dependency, and the Family in the Early United States,” in
     Disability Histories, ed. Susan Burch and Michael Rembis (Champaign: University of Illinois
     Press, 2014), 17–34.
3    See Dea Boster, “‘Unfit for Ordinary Purposes’: Disability, Slaves, and Decision Making in the
     Antebellum American South,” in Burch and Rembis, Disability Histories, 201–17; and Brad
     Byrom, “A Pupil and a Patient: Hospital Schools in Progressive America,” in The New
     Disability History: American Perspectives, ed. Paul K. Longmore and Lauri Umansky (New
     York: New York University Press, 2001), 133–56.
4    See Sarah Chaney, “Useful Members of Society or Motiveless Malingerers? Occupation and
     Malingering in British Asylum Psychiatry, 1870–1914,” in Work, Psychiatry, and Society, c.
     1750–2015, ed. Waltraud Ernst (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2016), 277–97; John
     Brad Williams-Searle, “Cold Charity: Manhood, Brotherhood, and the Transformation of
     Disability,” in Longmore and Umansky, New Disability History, 157–86; and Dale Kretz,
     “Pensions and Protest: Former Slaves and the Reconstructed American State,” Journal of the
     Civil War Era 7, no. 3 (September 2017): 425–45.
5    Loïc Wacquant, “Crafting the Neoliberal State: Workfare, Prisonfare, and Social Insecurity,”
     Sociological Forum 25, no. 2 (June 2010): 197–220.
6    Kim E. Nielsen, “Property, Disability, and the Making of the Incompetent Citizen in the United
     States, 1860s–1940s,” in Burch and Rembis, Disability Histories, 308–20.
7    Parnel Wickham, “Conceptions of Idiocy in Colonial Massachusetts,” Oxford University
     Journal of Social History 35, no. 4 (Summer 2002): 936.
8    The Statute of Laborers, Parliament of the United Kingdom, Statutes of the Realm, 23 Edward
     III, chap. 1 (1349).
9    The Statute of Laborers, Parliament of the United Kingdom, Statutes of the Realm, vol. 1, 307
     (1351).
10   The Statute of Laborers, 23 Edward III, chap. 7 (1349).
11   Ibid., chap. 1. See also Rebecca McCarthy, Origins of the Magdalene Laundries: An Analytical
     History (Jefferson, NC: McFarland Publishers, 2010), 140.
12   Steve Hindle, “‘Waste’ Children? Pauper Apprenticeship under the Elizabethan Poor Laws, c.
     1598–1697,” in Women, Work and Wages in England, 1600–1850, ed. Penelope Lane, Neil
     Raven, and K. D. M. Snell (Woodbridge, UK: Boydell Press, 2004), 15–46.
13   Statute of Laborers, 23 Edward III, chap. 7 (1349).
14   Marjie Bloy, “The 1601 Elizabethan Poor Law,” Victorian Web, November 12, 2002,
     victorianweb.org.
15   Wickham, “Conceptions of Idiocy in Colonial Massachusetts.”
16   Ibid.
17   Robert W. Kelso, The History of Public Poor Relief in Massachusetts, 1620–1920 (Boston:
     Houghton Mifflin, 1922), 15.
 18   Harry E. Mock, “Human Salvage: A Daily Casualty List from Industry Would Show in One
     Year, over Eight Times the Casualties of Our Troops on Europe’s Battlefields. Industry’s Job Is
     to Reduce This Waste,” Nation’s Business 1 (1919): 26.
19   Byrom, “A Pupil and a Patient,” 136–7.
20   Mock, “Human Salvage,” 26.
21   Douglas Baynton, “Disability and the Justification of Inequality in American History,” in
     Longmore and Umansky, New Disability History, 35.
22   Katherine Lord, “The Marblehead Work Cure,” Good Health 46, no. 10 (1911): 863.
23   Marion Fourcade, “The Political Valuation of Life,” Regulation & Governance, 3, no. 3 (2009):
     296.
24   Mock, “Human Salvage,” 30.
25   Charles H. Jaeger, “Trade Training for Adult Cripples,” American Journal of Care for Cripples
     2 (June 1915): 67, 68.
26   Augustus Thorndike, “Industrial Training for Crippled Children about Boston,” American
     Journal of Care for Cripples 1 (1914): 19.
27   Charles Davenport, quoted in “Social Problems Have Proven Basis of Heredity: What the Work
     Done in the Eugenics Record Office at Cold Harbor Has Proved in Scientific Race
     Investigation,” New York Times, January 12, 1913.
28   Boster, “‘Unfit for Ordinary Purposes,’” 210.
29   Williams-Searle, “Cold Charity,” 159.



      MADNESS
 1   Tomi Gomory, David Cohen, and Stuart A. Kirk, “Madness or Mental Illness? Revisiting
     Historians of Psychiatry,” Current Psychology 32, no. 2 (2013): 119–35.
 2   Liat Ben-Moshe, Decarcerating Disability: Deinstitutionalization and Prison Abolition
     (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2020), 39.
 3   Clifford W. Beers, A Mind That Found Itself: An Autobiography (New York: Longman, Green,
     1910).
 4   Bruce Cohen, Psychiatric Hegemony: A Marxist Theory of Mental Illness (London: Palgrave
     MacMillan, 2016), 38.
 5   Gerald N. Grob, “The Problem of Chronic Mental Illnesses, 1860–1940,” in Mad among Us: A
     History of the Care of America’s Mentally Ill (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
     2011), 116.
 6   Ibid., 105.
 7   Gomory et al., “Madness or Mental Illness?” See also Matthew S. Johnston, “‘He Sees Patients
     as Lesser People’: Exploring Mental Health Service Users’ Critiques and Appraisals of
     Psychiatrists in Canada,” Disability & Society 35, no. 2 (2019): 258–79.
 8   Ben-Moshe, Decarcerating Disability, 64.
 9   PhebeAnn M. Wolframe, “The Madwoman in the Academy, or, Revealing the Invisible
     Straightjacket: Theorizing and Teaching Saneism and Sane Privilege,” Disability Studies
     Quarterly 33, no. 1 (2012).
10   Tanja Aho, Liat Ben-Moshe, and Leon J. Hilton, “Mad Futures: Affect/Theory/Violence,”
     American Quarterly 69, no. 2 (2017): 294.
11   Andrew Scull, Decarceration: Community Treatment and the Deviant—A Radical View, 2nd ed.
     (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1984).
 12   Cohen, Psychiatric Hegemony, 35.
13   Andrew Scull, “Madness and Segregative Control: The Rise of the Insane Asylum,” Social
     Problems 24, no. 3 (1977): 341.
14   Leslie Stephen, The English Utilitarians, vol. 1 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
     1900), 123.
15   Cohen, Psychiatric Hegemony, 100.
16   Scull, “Madness and Segregative Control,” 346, 348.
17   Ibid., 348.
18   Cohen, Psychiatric Hegemony, 42.
19   Robert Whitaker, Mad in America: Bad Science, Bad Medicine, and the Enduring Mistreatment
     of the Mentally Ill (New York: Basic Books, 2002), 97.
20   Ibid., 115.
21   See ibid., 126; and Cohen, Psychiatric Hegemony, 52.
22   Cohen, Psychiatric Hegemony, 57.
23   The Willard Suitcase Exhibit Online, suitcaseexhibit.org.
24   Aho et al. “Mad Futures,” 291.
25   Willard Suitcase Exhibit Online.
26   Scull, “Madness and Segregative Control,” 341.



      PHARMACOLOGY
1    Amy Kapczynski, “Intellectual Property’s Leviathan,” Law and Contemporary Problems 77,
     no. 4 (2014): 131.
2    Suzanna Reiss, We Sell Drugs: The Alchemy of U.S. Empire (Berkeley: University of California
     Press, 2014), 186.
3    Frederic M. Scherer, “A Note on Global Welfare in Pharmaceutical Patenting,” in Federal
     Reserve Board of Philadelphia Working Paper No. 03-11 (Federal Reserve Board of
     Philadelphia Working Papers Research Department, November 2002).
4    We find that anti-capitalist assessments of the political economy of health can be prone to
     reducing the role of drug companies, as though they were mere snake oil salesmen. We instead
     assert that pharmaceuticals and therapeutics are of immense importance to capital and thus must
     be seized from its hands. We will not mention the authors we are referencing by name here, but
     much of the discourse happens within biopolitics literature.
5    Innumerable poor arguments are made to this effect; see in particular the work of Atul
     Gawande, whose “overutilization” arguments in the New Yorker, of all places, profoundly
     influenced the Obama White House in the lead up to the Affordable Care Act.
6    Dominique Tobbell, “‘Who’s Winning the Human Race?’ Cold War as Pharmaceutical Political
     Strategy,” Journal of the History of Medicine and Allied Sciences 64, no. 4 (June 2009): 452.
7    Ibid., 446.
8    Gary Gereffi, The Pharmaceutical Industry and Dependency in the Third World (Princeton, NJ:
     Princeton University Press, 1983), 87.
 9   Ibid., 85.
10   Ibid., 107.
11   Tobbell, “‘Who’s Winning the Human Race?,’” 452.
12   Ibid., 451.
 13   Ibid., 450.
14   Ibid., 453.
15   Reiss, We Sell Drugs, 181.
16   Ibid., 268.
17   Ibid., 194, 193.
18   Ibid., 194.
19   Ibid., 204.
20   Ibid., 184.
     Susan K. Sell, Public Power, Private Law: The Globalization of Intellectual Property Rights
21   (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003), 60.
22   Ibid., 96.
23   See Margot Kaminski, “The Capture of Intellectual Property Law through the U.S. Trade
     Regime,” Southern California Law Review 87, no. 4 (2014): 977–1052.
24   Amy Kapczynski, “Harmonization and Its Discontents: A Case Study of TRIPS Implementation
     in India’s Pharmaceutical Sector,” California Law Review 97, no. 6 (2009): 1579.
25   Ibid., 102.
26   “Transcript of Bayer CEO Marjin Dekkers quote at the December 3, 2013 FT Event, Regarding
     India Compulsory License of Nexavar,” Knowledge Ecology International, February 7, 2014,
     keionline.org.
27   Médecins Sans Frontières Access Campaign, A Timeline of U.S. Attacks on India’s Patent Law
     & Generic Competition, 2015.
28   Kapczynski, “Harmonization and Its Discontents,” 1630.
29   Unless otherwise noted, references in this section are to individual interviews as part of the
     ACT UP Oral History Project. Where page numbers are given, these refer to interview
     transcripts. For this citation and those below, see the archived interview with R. Goldberg,
     2003.
30   G. Bordowitz, December 17, 2002; P. Thistlethwaite, January 6, 2013.
31   See Thistlethwaite, 2013; G. Aburto, August 26, 2008; J. Fennelly, January 4, 2010; J. Heffner,
     October 21, 2008; Z. Leonard, January 13, 2010; M.-Y. S. Ma, January 15, 2003; and M.
     Perelman, July 18, 2007. On the finance committee: J. Blotcher, April 24, 2004. On the housing
     committee: see G. Braverman, April 20, 2003; and C. King, January 20, 2010. On the media
     committee: R. Elovich, May 14, 2007. Actions committee: F. Jump, November 1, 2003;
     Goldberg, 2003. On the Latino caucus: see Aburto, 2008; M. Agosto, December 14, 2002; A.
     Juhasz, January 16, 2003; and R. Vazquez-Pacheco, December 14, 2002. On the women’s
     caucus: see Juhasz, 2003; Leonard, 2010; Thistlethwaite, 2013; A. Benzacar, January 5, 2013;
     A.C. D’Adesky, April 15, 2003; G. Franke-Ruta, June 6, 2007; C. Gund, April 20, 2007; A.
     Philbin, January 21, 2003; I. Rosenblum, July 20, 2012; and M. Wolfe, February 19, 2004.
32   See Agosto, 2002; and ACT UP, Civil Disobedience Training, ACT UP Historical Archive:
     Direct Action, n.d.; ACT UP, Research Info Archive, ACT UP Historical Archive: ACT UP
     Research Info, n.d.; ACT UP, Original Working Document, ACT UP Historical Archive, 1987.
33   See Bordowitz, 2002; and B. Zabcik, September 9, 2008.
34   Larry Kramer, “We Are Not Crumbs, We Must Not Accept Crumbs: Remarks on the Occasion
     of the 20th Anniversary of ACT UP NYC’s LGBT Community Center March 13, 2007,” POZ,
     March 14, 2007, poz.com.
35   ACT UP, “An Open Letter to Dr. Anthony Fauci,” 1995.
36   Bordowitz, 2002, 22–7.
37   Benzacar, 2013, 23–30.
38   Goldberg, 2003.
 39   See Wolfe, 2004; Heffner, 2008; and C. Franchino, January 11, 2010.
40   On AZT, see D. Saunders, January 18, 2003. On direct actions, see Blotcher, 2004; Bordowitz,
     2002; Braverman, 2003; D’Adesky, 2003; Fennelly, 2010; Franke-Ruta, 2007; Juhasz, 2003;
     and Perelman, 2007. On pressure to research, see Blotcher, 2004; Saunders, 2003; Wolfe, 2004;
     Zabcik, 2008; D. Barr, May 15, 2007; and G. Carter, April 16, 2007.
41   Carter, 2007; Franchino, 2010; and Vazquez-Pacheco, 2002.
42   Blotcher, 2004; Bordowitz, 2002; Braverman, 2003; Franke-Ruta, 2007; Franchino, 2010;
     Goldberg, 2003; Heffner, 2008; Perelman, 2007; Saunders, 2003; Wolfe, 2004; Zabcik, 2008;
     and S. Lurie, May 3, 2015.
43   Agosto, 2002, 23–30.
44   Saunders, 2003, 23–9.
45   On condoms: J. Griglak, July 19, 2012. On needle exchange: Elovich, 2007; Leonard, 2010.
46   On demand: Juhasz, 2003. On urgency: Agosto, 2002. On support: Aburto, 2008.
47   J. Fennely, January 4, 2010, 26–8.
48   Saunders, 2003.
49   Goldberg, 2003.
50   Wolfe, 2004.
51   Carter, 2007, 50–64.
52   Blotcher, 2004.
53   Wolfe, 2004.
54   Ibid., 98–102.
55   Carter, 2007, 50–64.
56   Barr, 2007, 75–7.
57   Mariame Kaba, We Do This ’til We Free Us: Abolitionist Organizing and Transforming Justice,
     ed. Tamara K. Nopper (Chicago: Haymarket Books, 2021), 167.
58   Bordowitz, 2002, 22–7.



      BORDER
1    Vicente Navarro, “What We Mean by Social Determinants of Health,” International Journal of
     Health Services 39, no. 3 (2009): 440.
2    World Bank, World Bank World Development Report 1993: Investing in Health (New York:
     Oxford University Press, 1993), 56.
3    Howard Waitzkin and Celia Iriart, “How the United States Exports Managed Care to
     Developing Countries,” International Journal of Health Services 31, no. 3 (2001): 500.
4    See Francisco Armada, Carles Muntaner, and Vicente Navarro, “Health and Social Security
     Reforms in Latin America: The Convergence of the World Health Organization, the World
     Bank, and Transnational Corportations,” International Journal of Health Services 31, no. 4
     (2001); and Howard Waitzkin, Rebeca Jasso-Aguilar, and Celia Iriart, “Privatization of Health
     Services in Less Developed Countries: An Empirical Response to the Proposals of the World
     Bank and Wharton School,” International Journal of Health Services 37, no. 2 (2007).
5    Armada et al., “Health and Social Security Reforms,” 731.
6    Navarro, “Social Determinants of Health,” 425.
7    Asa Cristina Laurell and Oliva López Arellano, “Market Commodities and Poor Relief: The
     World Bank Proposal for Health,” International Journal of Health Services 26, no. 1 (1996): 1.
  8   World Bank, World Bank Report 1993, 4.
 9   Ibid., iii.
10   Ibid.
11   Waitzkin et al., “Privatization of Health Services.”
12   Ibid.
13   Laurell and López Arellano, “Market Commodities and Poor Relief,” 4.
14   World Bank, World Bank Report 1993, 56.
15   Ibid., 4. (Emphasis added.)
16   Laurell and López Arellano, “Market Commodities and Poor Relief,” 7. (Emphasis added.)
17   Armada et al., “Health and Social Security Reforms.”
18   Waitzkin et al., “Privatization of Health Services,” 217.
19   Armada et al., “Health and Social Security Reforms,” 747.
20   Waitzkin and Iriart, “How the United States Exports,” 500–1.
21   Waitzkin et al., “Privatization of Health Services,” 212.
22   Laurell and López Arellano, “Market Commodities and Poor Relief,” 5.
23   Ibid., 16.
24   Colin McInnes and Simon Rushton, “HIV, AIDS and Security: Where Are We Now?,”
     International Affairs 86, no. 1 (2010): 228.
25   United States of America v. Jose Luis Vaello-Madero, August 2001, Writ of Certiorari to the
     United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, Brief for Respondent, 1, para 3.
26   United States v. Vaello-Madero, Brief for the United States, 5.
27   Ibid., 5.
28   The Biden administration’s answer to this point is that “the rational-basis test allows a
     legislature to rely on general categories; the legislature need not make ‘case-by-case,’
     ‘individualized’ judgments … In determining spending policy for Puerto Rico, therefore,
     Congress may rationally choose to concentrate on the tax status of the Commonwealth and its
     population as a whole.” See United States v. Vaello-Madero, 21–2.
29   Ibid., 18.
30   Ibid., 30.
31   Mandy Turner, “Completing the Circle: Peacebuilding as Colonial Practice in the Occupied
     Palestinian Territory,” International Peacekeeping 19, no. 4 (2012): 495.
32   Jasbir Puar, The Right to Maim: Debility | Capacity | Disability (Durham, NC: Duke University
     Press, 2017), x.
33   Danya Qato, “Introduction: Public Health and the Promise of Palestine,” Journal of Palestine
     Studies 49, no. 4 (2020): 16–17.
34   Ibid., 11, 13–14. (Emphasis in original.)
35   Ibid., 16.



      CARE
1    We present this history here after several years of independent research into the group and the
     process of their political suppression. While much of the history comes from the group’s own
     account, most has been verified through entries in journals, reports on international terrorism
     and pro-capitalist international relations in the 1970s, contemporaneous West German media
     accounts, and the limited scholarship that does exist. We have chosen to treat SPK’s own
      accounts of their activities as accurate, as many of their described actions and organizing tactics
     have been confirmed in the aforementioned third-party accounts (most of which are highly
     critical or accusatory of the group’s goals, and focus on mapping and pathologizing SPK’s
     criminalization). Arguably the very nature of SPK’s erasure is the root cause for the current lack
     of historical documentation. We hope that this account, and the work we have done in carefully
     teasing out and collecting pieces of the narrative to present it as it has never been told before,
     may be the beginning of a new consideration of SPK’s praxis. Several translations of SPK’s
     manifesto can be found online; we have used a combination of the following: SPK trans.
     Wolfgang Huber (SPK/PF), SPK Turn Illness into a Weapon: For Agitation by the Socialist
     Patients’ Collective at the University of Heidelberg, 1993; and SPK trans. Anonymous (K. D.),
     Turn Illness into a Weapon: A Polemic Call to Action by the Socialist Patients’ Collective of the
     University of Heidelberg, 2013. We have reproduced sections from both of these translations.
 2   SPK tr. Anonymous, Turn Illness into a Weapon, ix.
 3   Jane Ussher, Women’s Madness: Misogyny or Mental Illness (Berkeley: University of California
     Press, 1991), 130–1.
 4   Gerald N. Grob, From Asylum to Community: Mental Health Policy in Modern America
     (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991); Andrew Scull, The Most Solitary of
     Afflictions: Madness and Society in Britain, 1700–1900 (New Haven, CT: Yale University
     Press, 1993); Gerald N. Grob, The Mad among Us: A History of the Care of America’s Mentally
     Ill (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1994).
 5   Nicholas Hervey, “Advocacy or Folly: The Alleged Lunatics’ Friend Society, 1845–63,”
     Journal of Medical History 30, no. 3 (1986): 254.
 6   Ibid., 245–6.
 7   Tom Burns and John Foot, eds., Basaglia’s International Legacy: From Asylum to Community
     (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2020), 23.
 8   An iatrogenic disease is harm done to a patient caused by the actions of medical professionals.
     Illich interpreted this as “treatment is harm”—which we categorically disagree with. Iatrogenic
     disease is now understood as a much broader category than it was when Illich was working, for
     instance, chemotherapy causes iatrogenic disease including hair loss, hemolytic anemia,
     diabetes insipidus, vomiting, nausea, brain damage, lymphedema, infertility, and a whole host
     of other comorbidities. Ivan Illich, Medical Nemesis: The Expropriation of Health (New York:
     Pantheon, 1976).
 9   Thomas Szasz, The Myth of Mental Illness: Foundations of a Theory of Personal Conduct
     (New York: Harper & Row, 1961).
10   R. D. Laing and Aaron Esterson, Sanity, Madness and the Family (1964; repr., Baltimore:
     Penguin, 1970).
11   R. D. Laing, The Divided Self: An Existential Study of Sanity and Madness (1959; repr.,
     Toronto: Penguin, 1976), 93.
12   Erving Goffman, Asylums: Essays on the Social Situation of Mental Patients and Other Inmates
     (Garden City, NY: Anchor Books, 1961); Erving Goffman, Stigma: Notes on the Management
     of Spoiled Identity (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1963); and Murray Edelman, Political
     Language: Words That Succeed and Policies That Fail (New York: Academic Press, 1977).
13   David Cooper, Psychiatry and Anti-Psychiatry (1967; repr., Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 2001);
     and David Cooper, ed., Dialectics of Liberation (1968; repr., London: Verso, 2015).
14   Burns and Foot, Basaglia’s International Legacy, 24.
15   Ibid.
16   Giuseppe A. Micheli, “Not Just a One Man Revolution: The Multifaceted Anti-Asylum
     Watershed,” History of Psychiatry 30, no. 2 (2019): 137.
17   Ibid.
 18   Vicki Coppock and John Hopton, “Anti-psychiatry: Passing Fad or Force for Change,” in
     Critical Perspectives on Mental Health (New York: Routledge, 2000), 75.
19   Gary Genosko, Deleuze and Guattari: Critical Assessments of Leading Philosophers, vol. 2,
     Guattari (New York: Routledge, 2001), 480.
20   SPK tr. Anonymous, “Patients’ Self Organization,” 18.
21   Philip Oltermann, “‘Capitalism Makes You Ill’: The Radical 70s ‘Anti-therapists’ Who Turned
     to Terrorism,” Guardian, February 22, 2018.
22   Christian Pross, “Revolution and Madness: The ‘Socialist Patients’ Collective of Heidelberg
     (SPK)’: An Episode in the History of Antipsychiatry and the 1960s Student Rebellion in West
     Germany,” English synopsis of “Wir wollten ins Verderben rennen”: Die Geschichte des
     Sozialistischen Patientenkollektivs Heidelberg, 2016, 11.
23   Oltermann, “‘Capitalism Makes You Ill.’”
24   M. Rotzoll and G. Hohendorf, “Krankenmord im Dienst des Fortschritts? Der Heidelberger
     Psychiater Carl Schneider als Gehirnforscher und ‘therapeutischer Idealist’” [Murdering the
     sick in the name of progress? The Heidelberg psychiatrist Carl Schneider as a brain researcher
     and “therapeutic idealist”], Der Nervenarzt 83, no. 3 (2012): 311–20.
25   Pross, “Revolution and Madness,” 24.
26   Steven P. Remy, The Heidelberg Myth: The Nazification and Denazification of a German
     University (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002), 158.
27   Leo van Bergen, “Emil Kraepelin, grootvader van de DSM” [Emil Kraepelin, grandfather of the
     DSM], Nederlands tijdschrift voor geneeskunde 159 (2015): A9232.
28   James Walter Dennert, “Emil Kraepelin (1856–1926),” Embryo Project Encyclopedia, 2021.
29   Pross, “Revolution and Madness,” 24.
30   Heinz Häfner, “From the Catastrophe to a Human Mental Health Care and Successful Research
     in German Psychiatry (1951–2012)—As I Remember It,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 127,
     no. 6 (June 2013): 418.
31   Pross, “Revolution and Madness,” 24.
32   Ibid., 3.
33   Ibid., 11.
34   Ibid., 24.
35   Häfner, “From the Catastrophe to a Human Mental Health Care,” 430.
36   Ibid., 418; Werner Janzarik, “100 Years of Heidelberg Psychiatry,” History of Psychiatry 3
     (1992): 5–27.
37   Félix Guattari, Molecular Revolution: Psychiatry and Politics (London: Peregrine Books,
     1984), 67n3; SPK tr. Anonymous, “Patients’ Self Organization,” 18.
38   Helen Spandler, “To Make an Army out of Illness: The History of the Socialist Patients’
     Collective (SPK), Heidelberg 1970/72,” Asylum: A Magazine for Democratic Psychiatry 6, no.
     4 (1992): 5–6.
39   Michael Goddard, Guerilla Networks: An Archeology of 1970s Radical Media Ecologies
     (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2018), 97.
40   Kimberly Mair, “As Autumn Turns to Winter: In Search of the Archive without an Address,”
     Journal of Historical Sociology 24, no. 2 (2011): 134–45.
41   SPK tr. Anonymous, “Patients’ Self-Organization,” 18.
42   Spandler, “To Make an Army out of Illness,” 6.
43   Pross, “Revolution and Madness,” 12; Spandler, “To Make an Army out of Illness,” 6.
44   SPK tr. Anonymous, “Patients’ Self-Organization,” 18.
45   SPK tr. Huber, 35.
46   Ibid., “5) People’s University SPK,” 23.
 47   Spandler, “To Make an Army out of Illness,” 5.
48   Pross, “Revolution and Madness,” 13; Spandler, “To Make an Army out of Illness,” 5–6.
49   Häfner, “From the Catastrophe to a Human Mental Health Care,” 430; SPK tr. Huber, “SPK/PF
     – Sozialistisches Patientenkollektiv (SPK) Patienttenfront (PF): List of Dates,” xiv–xvii.
50   This point has been used by many who have criticized SPK’s tactics and violence as
     demonstrating contradiction within their movement. The criticism is that SPK’s desire or even
     willingness to become a part of the university was evidence that they were hypocritical and
     didn’t really mean what they said about the university and capitalism. Many have portrayed
     SPK using classic derogatory tropes wielded against left movements, like levying accusations
     that they were simply a bunch of disaffected bourgeois rich kids rebelling, that they had no real
     connection to the working class, that they were just a bunch of intellectuals obsessed with
     theory and not organizers on the ground, etc. There has been little evidence to support these
     accusations, yet they are frequently reproduced without citation or explanation as to where the
     analysis or suggestion comes from, other than vague assertions of “connections with the student
     movement,” which is also stated to be “full of rich kids playing Marxism.” We give little
     credibility to these framings of SPK and consider them to be a key component of the
     propaganda campaign against the group.
51   Spandler, “To Make an Army out of Illness,” 6–7.
52   Guattari, Molecular Revolution, 67n3.
53   Pross, “Revolution and Madness,” 14.
54   SPK tr. Huber, “Towards a ‘People’s University,’” 22; SPK tr. Anonymous, “Theses and
     Principles,” 11, 12.
55   SPK tr. Huber, “People’s University SPK,” 24.
56   Ibid., “The University’s Psychiatric Policing Being a Service of Ruling Science,” 26.
57   SPK tr. Anonymous, “The Outpatient Clinic in the Service of Prevailing Science,” 15.
58   Ibid, “Theses and Principles,” 9.
59   Ibid.
60   Ibid., 10.
61   Ibid., 8.
62   SPK tr. Huber, “Identity of Illness and Capitalism,” 84.
63   SPK tr. Anonymous, “Illness and Capital,” 59.
64   Ibid., 60.
65   SPK tr. Huber, “Identity of Illness and Capitalism,” 84; and SPK tr. Anonymous, “Illness and
     Capital,” 60.
66   SPK tr. Anonymous, “Theses and Principles,” 9.
67   Ibid., “Illness and Capital,” 61; SPK tr. Huber, “The Proletariat Which Is a Revolutionary
     Proletariat in the Definition of Illness,” 86.
68   SPK tr. Huber, 86; and SPK tr. Anonymous, 61.



       CURE
1    Lauren Berlant, The Anatomy of National Fantasy: Hawthorne, Utopia, and Everyday Life
     (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991), 1.
2    SPK trans. Wolfgang Huber (SPK/PF), SPK Turn Illness into a Weapon: For Agitation by the
     Socialist Patients’ Collective at the University of Heidelberg (1993), 159.
  3   Christian Pross, “Revolution and Madness: The ‘Socialist Patients’ Collective of Heidelberg
     (SPK)’: An Episode in the History of Antipsychiatry and the 1960s Student Rebellion in West
     Germany,” English synopsis of “Wir wollten ins Verderben rennen”: Die Geschichte des
     Sozialistischen Patientenkollektivs Heidelberg (2016), 14.
 4   Ibid.
 5   Zbigniew Kotowicz, R. D. Laing and the Paths of Anti-Psychiatry (New York: Routledge,
     1997), 81.
 6   Helen Spandler, “To Make an Army out of Illness: The History of the Socialist Patients’
     Collective (SPK), Heidelberg 1970/72,” Asylum: A Magazine for Democratic Psychiatry 6, no.
     4 (1992): 5.
 7   Rand Corporation, Terrorism and Beyond: An International Conference on Terrorism and Low-
     Level Conflict, prepared for the US Department of Energy, the US Department of State, and the
     US Department of Justice by the Rand Corporation (Santa Monica, CA: Rand Publication
     Series, 1982), 178.
 8   Ibid.
 9   Pross, “Revolution and Madness,” 18.
10   Heinz Häfner, “From the Catastrophe to a Human Mental Health Care and Successful Research
     in German Psychiatry (1951–2012)—As I Remember It,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica
     (2013): 430.
11   Spandler, “To Make an Army out of Illness,” 5–6; SPK tr. Anonymous (K. D.), Turn Illness into
     a Weapon: A Polemic Call to Action by the Socialist Patients’ Collective of the University of
     Heidelberg (2013), 5, 32–33; SPK tr. Huber, 59, 149.
12   Félix Guattari, Molecular Revolution: Psychiatry and Politics (London: Peregrine Books,
     1984), 67n3.
13   Even Richter admitted that Huber had been correct in some aspects of the SPK critique, writing:
     “Insgeheim erbt die Medizin und darin die Psychiatrie einiges von den Allmacht-Projektionen,
     die aus dem religiösen Bereich abgezogen werden” (Secretly, medicine, and within it
     psychiatry, inherits some of the omnipotent projections that are being drained from the religious
     realm). Horst-Eberhard Richter, Die Gruppe: Hoffnung auf einen neuen Weg, sich selbst und
     andere zu befreien [The group: Hope for a new way to free yourself and others] (Zurich:
     Buchclub Ex Libris, 1972), 11.
14   Ibid.
15   Christian Pross, “Wir wollten ins Verderben rennen”: Die Geschichte des Sozialistischen
     Patientenkollektivs Heidelberg [“We wanted to run to ruin”: The history of the Socialist
     Patients’ Collective Heidelberg] (Cologne: Psychiatrie Verlag, 2017), 120, 128–9, 254.
16   Richter, Die Gruppe.
17   Pross, “Revolution and Madness,” 16.
18   The story of Michael Kohlhaas is from an 1810 novella by the German poet and dramatist
     Heinrich von Kleist. It is reported to be a favorite of Franz Kafka, Samuel Beckett, and Thomas
     Bernhard because of how it reflects the author’s existentially chaotic life story. A New Yorker
     article by Dustin Illingworth, written on the occasion of a new translation of Kleist’s work by
     Michael Hofmann, described the author’s tragic life as follows: Kleist “fought Napoleon;
     briefly studied law; experienced a ‘Kant crisis,’ in which he despaired of reason; wandered
     restlessly through Paris and Switzerland; broke off his engagement to a German pastellist; was
     arrested by the French as a possible spy; suffered a nervous breakdown; and killed himself, at
     thirty-four, on the shore of the Wannsee, in a suicide pact with a terminally ill friend.”
     Illingworth’s piece also notes an amusing quote from Goethe calling Kleist a “Nordic phantom
     of acrimony and hypochondria.” Dustin Illingworth, “‘Michael Kohlhaas,’ the Book That Made
     the Novel Modern,” New Yorker, May 20, 2020.
 19   Rand Corporation, Terrorism and Beyond, 178.
20   Pross, “Revolution and Madness,” 17; Philip Oltermann, “‘Capitalism Makes You Ill’: The
     Radical 70s ‘Anti-therapists’ Who Turned to Terrorism,” Guardian, February 22, 2018.
21   Charity Scribner, “Red Army Faction,” in Red Army Faction, Red Brigades, Angry Brigade:
     The Spectacle of Terror in Post War Europe, ed. Gianfranco Sanguinetti, John Barker, Charity
     Scribner, and Tom Wise (ebook: Bread and Circuses, 2015).
22   M. H. Syed, ed., Islamic Terrorism: Myth or Reality (Delhi: Kalpaz Publications, 2002), 131–2.
23   Ibid., 132.
24   Christopher Dobson and Ronald Payne, The Weapons of Terror: International Terrorism at
     Work (London: Macmillan, 1979), 69.
25   Pross, “Revolution and Madness,” 18.
26   Joanne Wright, Terrorist Propaganda: The Red Army Faction and the Provisional IRA, 1968–
     86 (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 1991), 105.
27   Vicki Coppock and John Hopton, “Anti-psychiatry: Passing Fad or Force for Change?,” in
     Critical Perspectives on Mental Health (New York: Routledge, 2000), 74.
28   Pross, “Revolution and Madness,” 17.
29   Pross, “Wir wollten ins Verderben rennen,” 397n1582.
30   Barry Rubin and Judith Colp Rubin, Chronologies of Modern Terrorism (New York: Routledge,
     2009), 38.
31   Stefan Aust, Baader-Meinhof: The Inside Story of the R.A.F., trans. Anthea Bell (Oxford:
     Oxford University Press, 2009), 112–3; John Terraine, “Terrorist Profile,” Rusi 122, no. 4
     (1977): 72.
32   On November 9, 1970, West German Minister of Cultural Affairs and University of Heidelberg
     professor Dr. Wilhelm Hahn called SPK “wild beasts who can no longer be tolerated and who
     should, at a minimum, be eliminated.” SPK tr. Anonymous, Turn Illness into a Weapon, 14.
     (Emphasis in original.)
33   SPK tr. Huber, 25.
34   Rand Corporation, Terrorism and Beyond, 178; Leo Sievers, “Die Sturm auf die Botschaft,”
     Stern 12 (1976): 136–42.
35   Pross, “Revolution and Madness,” 10.
36   Some of the documented slogans that we’ve found in our research hardly demonstrate more
     than an astute critique of the capitalist political economy of health: “Comrades, there must not
     be any therapeutic step that has not been proved to be a revolutionary one. Long live the victory
     of the working class! The system made us sick, so let’s give the sick system the death blow!”
37   Spandler, “To Make an Army out of Illness,” 10.
38   Pross, “Revolution and Madness,” 18.
39   Paul Wilkinson, Terrorism versus Democracy: The Liberal State Response, 3rd. ed. (New York:
     Routledge, 2011), 26.
40   Spandler, “To Make an Army out of Illness,” 6-7; SPK tr. Anonymous, 21, 32–33.
41   Michael Goddard, Guerilla Networks: An Archeology of 1970s Radical Media Ecologies
     (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2018), 97.
42   Kotowicz, Laing and the Paths of Anti-Psychiatry, 80.
43   Mark Gallagher, “From Mental Patient to Service User: Deinstitutionalization and the
     Emergence of the Mental Health Service User Movement in Scotland, 1971–2006” (PhD diss.,
     University of Glasgow, 2017), 193, theses.gla.ac.uk/8078/1/2017 GallagherPhD.pdf.
44   Jeremy Varon, Bringing the War Home: The Weather Underground, the Red Army Faction, and
     Revolutionary Violence in the Sixties and Seventies (Berkeley: University of California Press,
     2004), 13.
 45   Oltermann, “‘Capitalism Makes You Ill.’”
46   Jillian Becker, “Case Study I: Federal Germany,” in Contemporary Terror: Studies in Sub-state
     Violence, ed. David Carlton and Carlo Schaerf (1981; repr., New York: Routledge, 2015), 133.
47   Wright, Terrorist Propaganda, 105.
48   Jillian Becker, Hitler’s Children: The Story of the Baader-Meinhof Terrorist Gang, 5th ed.
     (1977; Bloomington, IN: AuthorHouse Books, 2014).
49   Rubin and Colp Rubin, Chronologies of Modern Terrorism, 40.
50   Dobson and Payne, Weapons of Terror, 70.
51   125 Cong. Rec. 25156–7 (1979) (extension of remarks of Larry McDonald, “Terrorism in West
     Germany, Part III”).
52   Wright, Terrorist Propaganda, 103.
53   Ibid., 104.
54   Guattari documents how a main reason the police decided to finally crack down on SPK was
     because of public complaints about the “disorder” caused by patients walking around in the area
     near their independent off-campus building. See Guattari, Molecular Revolution, 67n3.
55   Rubin and Colp Rubin, Chronologies of Modern Terrorism, 40.
56   Spandler, “To Make an Army out of Illness,” 6.
57   Scribner, “Red Army Faction.”
58   Varon, Bringing the War Home, 22.
59   125 Cong. Rec. 25156.
60   Gary Genosko, Undisciplined Theory (London: SAGE Publications, 1998), 105.
61   Pross, “Revolution and Madness,” 18.
62   Andre Moncourt and J. Smith, The Red Army Faction: A Documentary History, vol. 1,
     Projectiles for the People (Oakland, CA: PM Press, 2007), 109.
63   Guattari, Molecular Revolution, 67n3.
64   125 Cong. Rec. 25156.
65   Dobson and Payne, Weapons of Terror, 70.
66   Kimberly Mair, “Cutting Out One’s Tongue: The Red Army Faction and the Aesthetics of Body
     (Anti)Language” (PhD diss., Department of Sociology, University of Alberta, 2009), 116.
67   Oltermann, “‘Capitalism Makes You Ill.’”
68   François Dosse, Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari: Intersecting Lives (New York: Columbia
     University Press, 2010), 332–4.
69   Alexander Sedlmaier, Consumption and Violence: Radical Protest in Cold War West Germany
     (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2014), 115n80.
70   Dosse, Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, 333–4.
71   Gary Genosko, Deleuze and Guattari: Critical Assessments of Leading Philosophers, vol. 2,
     Guattari (New York: Routledge, 2001), 481.
72   Dosse, Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, 332–4.
73   Letter from Agostino Pirella to Franco Basaglia, April 7, 1973, from Archivo Basaglia, in Tom
     Burns and John Foot, Basaglia’s International Legacy: From Asylum to Community (Oxford:
     Oxford University Press, 2020), 234.
74   Unsent letter from Franco Basaglia to SPK member Werner Schork, reproduced in ibid., 235.
75   Franco Basaglia, unpublished typescript, file 11.5, AB, in ibid. Translated by John Foot.
76   Ibid., 236.
77   Ibid., 236; Pross, “Revolution and Madness,” 180.
78   Werner Janzarik, “100 Years of Heidelberg Psychiatry,” trans. R. G. Dening and T. R. Dening,
     History of Psychiatry 3 (1992): 23.
 79    Ibid., 23n19.
80    Kotowicz, Laing and the Paths of Anti-Psychiatry, 80.
81    Foot, Basaglia’s International Legacy, 237.
82    Kotowicz, Laing and the Paths of Anti-Psychiatry, 82.
83    Oltermann, “‘Capitalism Makes You Ill.’”
84    Guattari, Molecular Revolution, 81n3. Guattari also adds that “A medical certificate later issued
      by Karlsruhe Hospital described severe damage, some to the skull.”
85    Ibid.
86    Wolfgang Huber was ultimately sentenced to the maximum amount of time in prison for his
      charge (4.5 years), which was being “head of a criminal organization.” At the time, this was
      seen as a harsh overreach of German legal authority, though many who have studied the
      pathology of SPK’s “terror” have argued this was justified, representing a shift toward a new
      era of proactive counterterrorist state measures.
87    Kotowicz, Laing and the Paths of Anti-Psychiatry, 81.
88    Pross, “Revolution and Madness,” 3.
89    Kimberly Mair, “As Autumn Turns to Winter: In Search of the Archive without an Address,”
      Journal of Historical Sociology 24, no. 2 (2011): 139.
90    Ibid., 140.
91    Sedlmaier, Consumption and Violence, 128–9.
92    Associated Press, “West Germans Want Terrorist,” Colorado Springs Gazette, July 29, 1978,
      35.
93    Varon, Bringing the War Home, 16.
94    Ibid., 13.
95    Rand Corporation, Terrorism and Beyond, 181.
96    Wolfgang and Ursula Huber, missing since 1976; Siegfried Hausner, deceased May 5, 1975;
      Kristina Berster, name released to the American media by the FBI in 1977.
97    125 Cong. Rec., 25156.
98    Susheela Bhan, Terrorism: An Annotated Bibliography (New Delhi: Concept Publishing, 1989),
      132–3.
99    Jacob Sundberg, “Operation Leo: Description and Analysis of European Terrorist Operations,”
      Terrorism: An International Journal 5, no. 3 (1981–82): 197–232.
100   Wilkinson, Terrorism versus Democracy, 25.
101   Pross, “Revolution and Madness,” 9.
102   Klaus Wasmund, “The Political Socialization of Terrorist Groups in West Germany,” Journal of
      Political and Military Sociology 11, no. 2 (Fall 1983): 224.
103   Rand Corporation, Terrorism and Beyond, 117.
104   Sarah Brockhoff, “Essays in Public Economics and Political Economy” (PhD diss., University
      of Freiburg, 2012), 121.
105   Ibid., 126.
106   Rubin and Colp Rubin, Chronologies of Modern Terrorism, 38; Wasmund, “Political
      Socialization of Terrorist Groups,” 228.
107   Ibid., 229.
108   Associated Press, “FBI Hunts ‘Mad’ Terrorists,” Hutchinson News, July 22, 1978, 45;
      Associated Press, “U.S. May Be Next on Terrorism’s List,” Middletown Journal, August 16,
      1978; Associated Press, “International Crackdown Centers on Anarchists,” Harrisonburg Daily
      News, July 22, 1978, 14.
109   AP, “West Germans Want Terrorist,” 35.
      HOST
1   Essex Hemphill, Ceremonies: Prose and Poetry (New York: Plume, 1992), 32–3.
2   Talcott Parsons, The Social System (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1951), 477.
3   Ibid.

                                   OceanofPDF.com
                                           Index

A
able-bodied poor, 48
abolitionist praxis, theory of, 17
ACT UP (AIDS Coalition to
Unleash Power), xvii, 79, 93–106
ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act), 14
ADAPT, 14
addiction, 86, 87
administrative violence, 2
Aetna, 116
Affordable Care Act (US), 196n5
AFL-CIO, physician auxiliary, 36
Agosto, Moises, 98
Aho, Tanja, 71
AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power (ACT UP), 93–106
alienist, replaced by psychiatrist, 67
Alleged Lunatics’ Friend Society (ALFS), 133
American Journal for the Care of Cripples
   Jaeger article, 52–3
   Thorndike article, 54
American Medical Association (AMA)
   activities of in 1950 election, 33–4
   as fighting disability social
      insurance and health
      insurance for the aged, 39
   resistance to reforms, 35
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), 14
anarchist armed struggle groups, 164
Anslinger, Harry, 86, 88
anti-psychiatry movement, 129, 131–8, 140, 146, 151, 153, 168, 169, 171, 178
Associated Manufacturers and Merchants, on malingering, 31
Association of Life Insurance Presidents, Hoffman’s speech to (1918), 29–30
asylum system, 58–9, 64, 65–6, 73–4, 88
 Aus Der Krankheit Eine Waffe Machen (translated as To Make an Army out of Illness, or Turn Illness
   into a Weapon), 128
AZT, 97

B
Baader-Meinhof gang, 164, 166, 171, 172
Banco Bilbao Vizcaya, 116
Banco Santander, 116
Barr, David, 103–4
Basaglia, Franco, 131, 136, 137, 138, 168, 169–70, 173
Bauer, Karl-Heinrich, 141
Bayer, 92
Becker, Eberhardt, 172
Becker, Jillian, 164
Beckett, Samuel, 128
Being and Nothingness (Sartre), 132
Ben-Moshe, Liat, 6, 59, 60, 62, 71
Bentham, Jeremy, 64
Benzacar, Andrea, 96–7
Berlant, Lauren, 1, 154
Berster, Kristina, 177
Bevan, Aneurin, 35
Biden, Joe, 121, 122, 123
Bild, articles about SPK, 162
biocertification, 4, 6–7, 8, 9–10, 12, 59, 60, 73, 80, 107, 112, 115, 123, 127, 180
biomedical intervention, 61
biorehabilitation, 50
Bismarck, Otto von, 25, 29
Black Death, 45, 46
Black Panther Party (US), 146
Blanchaud, Pierre, 168
Boggs Act of 1951, 88
Boland, Edward W., 85
borders, role of, 123–4
Bordowitz, Gregg, 95–6, 105
Brecht, 58
British East India Company, and opium trade, 86
Brockhoff, Sarah, 176–7
Bryson, John, 92
burden of public debt, 21–2. See also debt burden
Bush, Vannevar, 85

C
Cabot, Richard, 51
Califano v. Torres, 121–2
Canadian Medicare, xiv
 capital
   healthcare and social security funds as source of, 116–17, 118
   host-body relationship of with health, 184
   importance of pharmaceuticals to, 80, 93, 196n4
   as keeping people alive, 2
   liberating of health from, 23, 26, 32–3, 78, 108, 115, 179, 184
   as shaping health and shaping itself around health, 179, 180, 183
   SPK’s work as threat to, 131
capitalism
   global health-capitalism, 109, 125
   illness as only possible form of life in, 181
   lives under as revolving around work, 57
   political philosophy of, 22
   as punishing its sharpest critics, 130
   racial capitalism, 68–9
   reformism as inherently preserving violence of, 22
   as requiring redefinition of health, 45
   severing of health from capital as marking end of, 23
carceral preference, 58, 59, 62, 67, 73, 88
carceral protectionism, 59
carceral sanism, 59, 69, 70, 71, 73
Carter, George, 102–3
Cerletti, Ugo, 68
China, opium trade in, 86–7
Cigna, 116
Citicorp, 116
Coggeshall, Lowell, 81, 84
Cohen, Bruce, 60, 67
Committee for National Health Insurance (UAW), 37
The Condition of the Working
Class in England (Engels), 3
Connor, John T., 39, 81–2
Cooper, David, 131, 134, 136, 137, 138, 142, 146, 169
critical psychiatry, 131
critical social psychiatry, 131
curable surplus, 56, 61

D
Davenport, Charles, 54–5
debt burden, xvi, 21–2, 24, 30, 36, 37, 40, 55, 67, 122. See also eugenic and debt burden framework
deinstitutionalization, 66, 69, 73–5, 131, 137, 140, 142, 143, 147
Dekkers, Marjin, 92
Deleuze, Gilles, 1, 138, 168, 169, 170
democide, 1
democratic psychiatry, 131
dependency
    according to Thorndike, 54
   cures for, 50
   pathologizing and criminalizing of, 51, 57
   placing blame for on individual, 56
   deservingness, xii, xvii, 12, 21, 23, 42, 44, 46, 47, 48, 49, 56, 80
deviance
   channeling of, 182
   cures for, 51
   labeling of, 59, 62
   shifting definitions of, 60
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSMMD), 141
dialectical unity, of patient and doctor, 129
Die Gruppe (The Group) (Richter), 158
disability
   according to rehabilitation movement, 51
   early policy regarding state’s role in caring for persons disabled by injuries of war, 11
   guidelines of qualification of, 11–12
   intersection with incarceration, 6
   medical model of, 13, 191n21
   money model of, 13, 15–17, 59, 150
   reversal of, 50
social model of, 13, 147, 150, 180
disability benefits, 5, 35–6
disability insurance, 7–8, 9, 35
disability movement, 147
disability rights, 13, 14
disenrolling beneficiaries, 56
Dobson, Christopher, 159
doctor-patient collaboration, 129, 140, 146–7, 159, 171
Downs, Jim, 11
drug development international control of, 79
   regulation and pricing of, 81
   and Treatment Action Group (TAG), 93
drug patents, 84–5, 89, 90–1, 92
drugs. See also specific ones
   illicit drugs, 80, 81, 85–8, 89
   licit drugs, 85, 89
   wonder drugs, 83–4, 88
the drug story, 39–40
drug trade, 78, 88–9
drug users, 87, 96

E
Edelman, Murray, 136
electroconvulsive therapy (aka electroshock therapy), 68
“Eleven Theses on Illness” (SPK), 149–50
 Elizabethan Poor Laws, 48, 49
Engels, Friedrich, 1, 2–3
English Poor Laws, xvii, 44, 56
Esselstyn, Caldwell, 36
eugenic and debt burden framework, 22, 27, 32, 42, 49, 80, 111, 113, 115, 127
eugenic burden, xvi, 21, 22, 24, 30, 32, 36, 37, 40, 42, 115. See also eugenic and debt burden
    framework
eugenics movement, 2, 54, 55, 56, 67, 129, 141
existential psychoanalysis/psychotherapy, 132
extractive abandonment, xvi, 13, 19, 20, 42–3, 55–6, 59, 68, 73, 77, 78, 80, 87, 109, 116, 117, 119,
    125, 129, 146, 150, 151, 179, 183
EXXEL group, 116

F
Falk, Isidore (Ig), 36
Fantasies of Identification (Samuels), 6
Fauci, Anthony, 95
FBN, 88
Fennelly, Jeffrey, 99
Foot, John, 169
Fourcade, Marion, 52
Freeman, Walter, 68, 69

G
Gawande, Atul, 196n5
Gender Identity Clinic (NHS), xiv
General Agreement on Trade in Services, 110
Genosko, Gary, 166
Gereffi, Gary, 82, 83–4
Germany
  labor movement in, 26–7
  social health insurance system in, 25, 29–30, 37
  See also Sozialistisches Patientenkollektiv (Socialist Patients’ Collective or SPK) global health-
      capitalism, 109, 125
global trade agreements, effects of, 108–9
global welfare state privatization, 110–11, 119
Goffman, Erving, 136
Gore, Al, 118–19
Gorlin, Jacques, 91
Gorz, André, 77
group therapy, 130, 139–40, 142–3, 145, 146, 157, 159, 161
Guattari, Félix, 1, 138, 145–6, 168, 169, 170, 172, 173

H
Häfner, Heinz, 155–6
Hall, Herbert J., 51–2
 Hausner, Siegfried, 172
healing, defined, 50
“Healing Arts” committee (AMA), 34
health
  as capacity to submit oneself to labor, 44
  as capitalism’s vulnerability, xi
  defined, xi
  as defined under and by capital, xv
  host-body relationship of with capital, 184
  liberating of from capital, 23, 26, 32–3, 78, 108, 115, 179, 184
  severing of from capital as marking end of capitalism, 23
  as siloed component of political economy, 37
  social determinants of, xv
health-capitalist model, 108
healthcare. See also mental healthcare
  according to SPK, 130, 151
  aspects of, xv–xvi
  costs of, 80, 110
  as distinguished from long-term care, 75, 76
  privatization of, 112, 113, 116, 117, 118, 119
  state provision of, 112
health communism
  defined, xiii
  use of term, xii
health finance, 27, 33, 76, 187
health industries, 36, 77–8, 109, 111, 112
health insurance advocates for, 32
  companies of as financial institutions, xiv–xv
  eligibility requirements for, 44
  exportation of US principal model of, 110
  German social health insurance system, 25, 29–30, 37
  labor movement and national health insurance program, 35
  national health insurance. See national health insurance
  opposition to for aged, 39
  as precipitating move toward communism, 36
  private markets for, 110, 111, 113, 114
  public option for, 113
  statistical analyses of, 31
  symbiotic relationship among companies of, 109
  Truman’s proposal for, 34
health justice, 2, 22, 26, 27, 79, 105, 106, 108, 148, 180
Hemphill, Essex, 179
Hench, Philip S., 84–5
Hilton, Leon J., 71
Hitler’s Children: The Story of the Baader-Meinhoff Terrorist Gang (Becker), 164
HIV/AIDS crisis, 93–106, 118
 Hoffman, Beatrix, 32
Hoffman, Frederick Ludwig, 28–31, 37
Huber, Ursula, 166, 167, 172
Huber, Wolfgang, 131, 138–43, 144, 145, 146, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 160, 161, 162–3, 166, 167,
   171, 172
Humphrey, Hubert, 38

I
iatrogenic disease, 135, 201n8
I/DD (intellectual and developmental disabilities), 49, 62, 73
IDF (Israel Defense Forces), as manager of Palestine, 124
idleness
    according to rehabilitation movement, 51
    outlawing of, 43, 46, 47
    placing blame for on individual, 56
    as social threat, 45
idle poor, 46, 47, 48
Illich, Ivan, 135
illicit drugs, 80, 81, 85–8, 89
illness
    according to rehabilitation movement, 51
    according to SPK, 149–50, 151–2
    continuum of under SPK, 130
    as only possible form of life in capitalism, 181
    placing blame for on individual, 56
    view of in capitalist political economies, 43
    view of under Christian religious dogma, 47
“Illness and Capitalism” (SPK), 149–50
IMF (International Monetary Fund), 110
impotent poor, 48
incurable surplus, 56, 61–2
India, intellectual property claims by, 91–3
institutionalization, 55, 58–9, 63, 67, 70, 72, 73, 75, 133, 137
insurance. See disability insurance; health insurance; social insurance
intellectual and developmental disabilities (I/DD), 49, 62, 73
intellectual property, 89–93
Intellectual Property Committee (IPC), 90
Inter-American Development Bank, 110
international financial institutions, health insurance reforms advocated by, 110, 111
International Journal of Health Services, on pro-industry reforms, 109
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 110
“Investing in Health” (World Bank), 111–14, 117–18
Iriart, Celia, 116, 117
irredeemable burdens, 21, 22
Israel Defense Forces (IDF), as manager of Palestine, 124
Italy, meta-psychiatry in, 136–7
 J
Jaeger, Charles H., 52–3
Jasso-Aguilar, Rebeca, 117
Jones, Maxwell, 137
Journal of Palestine Studies, Qato article, 125–7

K
Kaba, Mariame, 17, 105
Kapczynski, Amy, 77, 91
Kay, James Philips, 25
Kefauver, Estes, 81, 84
Kefauver hearings, 81–2, 83, 84–5, 89
Kisker, K. P., 170
Kohlhaas, Michael (fictional character), 158
Kraepelin, Emil, 141–2
Kramer, Larry, 94–5
Kretz, Helmut, 139, 143, 144, 145

L
labor/surplus divide, 65. See also worker/surplus binary/divide
Laing, R. D., 131, 134, 135–6, 142, 146, 169, 171
Latin America
   private markets for health insurance in, 110
   welfare reforms in, 116–17
Laurell, Asa Cristina, 109, 111, 113, 115, 118
Leijon, Anna-Greta, 175
licit drugs, 85, 89
living-well, 61
lobotomy, 68–9
long-term care, 20, 74–6
López Arellano, Oliva, 109, 111, 113, 115, 118
lumpenproletariat, 189n6
Lunacy Commission (UK), 133
Lunacy Law Reform Association (UK), 133

M
mad doctor, replaced by psychiatrist, 67
“Mad Futures: Affect/Theory/Violence” (Aho, Ben-Moshe, and Hilton), 71
madness. See also mental illness
  according to anti-psychiatry, 131
  as biologically certifiable category, 58
  depictions of, 72
  described, 59–60
  labeling of, 62
  psychiatric pathologization of, 69–72
  shifting definitions of, 60
   SPK as succeeding in making it the concern of everyone, 168
Mair, Kimberly, 173
Malhotra, Ravi, 13–14
malingering, 7, 22, 24, 30, 31, 32, 33, 41, 43
Malthus, Thomas, 2, 3, 24–5
managed care model, 110, 116
Mao Zedong, 87
Marker, Russell, 82
Marx, Karl, 2–3, 151, 153
Massachusetts Act for the Relief of Ideots and Distracted Persons (1693), 49
mass mobilization, AMA as example of, 34
McDonald, Larry, 175
McNamara, Robert, 164
means testing, 56, 121
Medicaid (US), 7, 16, 24, 35, 36, 74, 113
medical intervention, 50
Medicare (US), 7, 35, 36, 39, 40, 74, 113, 117
Medicare for All, xiv, 40, 79, 113
mental healthcare, 76, 130, 135, 140, 178
mental hospitals, 67, 88, 160
mental illness. See also madness
  causes of, 135–6
  curing of, 158
  mild vs. severe, 61
  modern symptoms of, 132
  of SPK, 175
  theorization of under capitalism, 135–6
mentally ill persons, 58, 62, 63, 66, 73, 157, 162
Mental Patients’ Union, 144
Merck, 81, 82–3, 84, 85
meta-psychiatry, 131, 136–7, 169, 170
middle, bringing of the margins to, 23
Mock, Harry E., 50–1
model-madness integration, 133
money model of disability, 13, 15–17, 59, 150
The Monitor (journal), 31
The Moral and Physical Condition of the Working Classes Employed in the Cotton Manufacture in
   Manchester (Kay), 25

N
NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement), 110
National Association for Mental Health (UK) (now called MIND), 133
national health insurance, 23, 26, 27, 30, 35, 36, 111. See also National Health Service (NHS) (UK)
National Health Service (NHS) (UK), xiv, 35, 40, 79, 117
National Industrial Conference Board, on malingering, 31
National Institutes of Health (US), 111
 national mobilization, AMA as example of, 34
National Society for Lunacy Reform (UK), 133
Navarro, Vicente, xiv, 35, 107, 109, 111
Nazis, 140–1, 142, 173
Newman, Pauline, 26
New Poor Law (1845), 133
New York Times
  interview with Davenport, 55
  on narcotic addiction, 86
Nielsen, Kim, 11–12
Normal Life: Administrative Violence, Critical Trans Politics, and the Limits of the Law (Spade), 10–
    11
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), 110
Not Dead Yet, 14
nursing homes, 6, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20, 74, 75

O
Ogden Corporation, 83
Ongaro, Franca, 136
Opel, John, 90
opium trade, 86–7, 88–9
organized abandonment, 4–5, 13, 18, 59
Oslo Accords, 124

P
Palestine, economic and geospatial controls over, 124–7
Palestinian Authority, 124
Pan-American Health Organization, 110–11
Panopticon, 64
Paris Protocol (1994), 125
Parsons, Talcott, 181–2, 183
Patientenfront (Patients’ Front, or PF), 138
Patient Infos (SPK), 159
Patients’ General Assembly, 144–5
Payne, Ronald, 159
Pelham, David, 141
People’s University, 147–8
Pepper, Claude, 34
“Petition of the Poor Distracted People in the House of Bedlam (concerned with conditions for
    inmates)” (UK), 133
Pfizer, 83
pharmaceutical industry. See also specific companies
  as colonial arm of capitalist empires, 80
  in Europe, 81
  as extrastate international actors, 78
  as fighting drug pricing reform, 39
    moral imperatives of, 81–2
   resisting oppressive control of, 106
   rise of, 78
   role of in Cold War, 84, 109
   role of in reinforcing power of capital and the state, 93
   as threat to global public health, 78
   turning point of in 1950s US, 81–3
   in US, 40, 81, 85
   use of patents by, 84–5, 89, 90–1, 92
   in USSR, 38–9, 40
   as valuable to capital, 80
Phen-Necker Zeitung, articles about SPK, 162
physician role, 181–2
Pinel, Philippe, 64
Pirella, Agostino, 169
Poor Relief Act (1601), 48–9
poverty
   able-bodied poor, 48
   according to rehabilitation movement, 51
   diversion of accountability for, 56–7
   idle poor, 46, 47, 48
   impotent poor, 48
   as morally and spiritually stigmatized, 47
   pathologization of reasons and causes of, 43–4
   vagrant poor, 46–7
Pratt, Edmund, 90
prison-industrial complex, 74
prisons and jails, 6, 17–18, 20, 64, 65, 115
profit extraction, complex web of, 17
Pross, Chris, 155, 159–60, 162, 176
Prudential Insurance Company, 28
psychiatric hospitals, 17, 62, 67
psychiatric profession, 64, 65, 67, 69–72, 130–1. See also anti-psychiatry movement; meta-
     psychiatry
Puar, Jasbir, 6, 124
Puerto Rico, political economy of health in, 119–20

Q
Qato, Danya, 125–7
Quadagno, Jill, 34, 35–6, 37

R
Race Traits and Tendencies of the American Negro (Hoffman), 28
racial capitalism, 68–9
racism, as relational process of statecraft, according to Wilson Gilmore, 18
 RAF (Rote Armee Fraktion, Red Army Faction) (West Germany) (Baader-Meinhoff gang). See Rote
    Armee Fraktion
Rand Corporation, “Terrorism and Beyond: An International Conference on Terrorism and Low-
    Level Conflict” (1982), 176
Rauch, Hans-Joachim, 141
Reagan, Ronald, 25–6
rehabilitation industries/facilities, 14, 17, 57, 61, 63, 152, 182
rehabilitation movement, 50–5, 64–6
Reich, Wilhelm, 138
Reiss, Suzanna, 86, 87–8
Rendtorff, Rolf, 156, 157
Richter, Horst-Eberhard, 157–8, 161, 176
The Right to Maim (Puar), 6, 124
Robeson, Paul, 34
Rocco, Philip, 21
Rosen, George, 25
Rote Armee Fraktion (Red Army Faction, RAF) (West Germany) (Baader-Meinhoff gang), 164, 165,
    166, 167, 171, 173, 176
Rubinow, Isaac, 26–7
Russell, Marta, 13, 14–16, 18, 59, 150

S
Samuels, Ellen, 6
sanism, 61, 62, 70, 71. See also carceral sanism
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 132, 138, 153
Schelling, Thomas, 21
Schneider, Carl, 141
Schulman, Sarah, 98
scientific loafing, 31
Scull, Andrew, 65–6
self-advocacy, 140, 142
self-directed group therapy, 140
Sell, Susan K., 90, 93
sick proletariat, 130, 147, 152–3, 167
sick role, 181, 182, 183
Sievers, Leo, 161–2
slow death, 1
Smith, Adam, 2
Smith, Kline & French, 38–9
social burdens, 21
social control, 35, 68
social epidemiology, 3
social insurance, 9, 25, 26–7, 28, 30, 39, 112
Socialist Party (US), as proposing earliest national health insurance program in US, 26
socialized medicine
   defeat of in US, 33
    defined, xiii
   Hoffman’s lobbying against, 29
   as potentially bringing communism, 37
   struggles for and against, 23, 26, 27, 34, 40
   suppression of, 23–4
social murder, 1, 183
social security, 9, 116, 117, 118
Social Security Administration (SSA) (US), 8, 117, 120–1
Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) (US), 7–8, 9
social-symptomatic model (of SPK), 147, 150–1
The Social System (Parsons), 181–2
social welfare systems expansion of, 32
   as mechanisms for public money to pass into private companies seeking to apply economies of
        scale and generate revenue from mass market care, 17
   privatization of, xvii–xviii
   as ultimate contradiction, 24
   variance in outcomes of in early twentieth century, 34–5
   what is latent in, 22–3
Some Problems of Longevity (Hoffman), 29
sorafenib (Nexavar), 91–2
South Africa, and compulsory licensing, 93
Sozialistisches Patientenkollektiv (Socialist Patients’ Collective or SPK), ix, xi–xii, xviii, 128–31,
    138, 144–78, 181, 182–3
Spade, Dean, 2, 10, 14
Spandler, Helen, 144, 162
SSA (Social Security Administration) (US), 8, 117, 120–1
SSDI (Social Security Disability Insurance) (US), 7–8, 9
SSI (Supplemental Security Income) (US), 119–20, 122
statistical genocide, 1, 183
Statute of Laborers (UK), 45–6, 47–8
Stephen, Leslie, 64
Stern, article by Sievers, 161–2
steroid hormones, synthesizing of, 82–3
Steward, Amelia, 11
Steward, Lloyd, 11
Sundberg, Jacob, 175
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) (US), 119–20, 122
surplus populations
   biocertification and extraction of, 59
   defined, 2–4
   as essential component of capitalist society, 5
   extractive abandonment of, 42–3, 55–6, 146
   institutionalization of, 63
   as made profitable to capital, xvi
   maximizing exploitation of, 2
   precarity of, 4–5
   sorting of, 44
  as source of capital generation, 68
  subjection of as engine of capitalist state, 12
Syntex, 82, 83
Szasz, Thomas, 131, 134–5, 146

T
T&D (Treatment and Data) Committee, 97–103
TAG (Treatment Action Group), xvii, 93, 102, 103
Tellenbach, Dr., 156, 160–1
Thailand, and compulsory licensing, 93
therapeutic political education, 140
therapeutic praxis, 129
Thompson, Rosemarie Garland, 8
Thorazine (chlorpromazine), 69
Thorndike, Augustus, 54
“Three Starting Points of Praxis” (SPK), 148–9
Tobbell, Dominique, 38–40
Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), 89–90, 91, 93, 109, 110
traitement moral (moral treatment), 64
Trans-Allegheny Lunatic Asylum, on certifications of madness, 60
trans rights, 14
Treatment Action Group (TAG), xvii, 93, 102, 103
Treatment and Data (T&D) Committee, 97–103
Truman, Harry, 34
Turner, Mandy, 124
Turn Illness into a Weapon (SPK), 138, 147, 154

U
Union of the Physically Impaired Against Segregation (UPIAS), 133
United Auto Workers, Committee for National Health Insurance, 36
United Kingdom (UK)
  exit from European Union, 40
  lay-work in, 133
  National Health Service (NHS). See National Health Service (NHS) (UK)
  population in public asylums in, 63
  “recovery” rate in psychiatric incarceration, 67
United States (US). See also Medicaid (US); Medicare (US); Social Security Administration (SSA)
    (US); Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) (US); Supplemental Security Income (SSI)
    (US); US Supreme Court
  earliest proposal for national health insurance program in, 26
  National Institutes of Health, 111
  “recovery” rate in psychiatric hospitals in, 67
  state mental health population in, 63
  as supplier of narcotic substances, 86
   view of social health insurance program, 26
United States of America v. Jose Luis Vaello-Madero, 119–23
universal coverage, 115
University of Heidelberg, 131, 138–45, 148, 155, 156, 157, 163, 168, 170–1, 176
Unnikrishnan, Deepak, 42
UPIAS (Union of the Physically Impaired Against Segregation), 133
US Office of National Drug Control Policy, 86
Ussher, Jane, 131
USSR
  pharmaceutical system in, 38–9, 40
  social welfare programs in, 35, 38
US Supreme Court, United States of America v. Jose Luis Vaello-Madero, 119–23

V
Vaello-Madero, Jose Luis, 119–23
vagrancy
  as morally and spiritually stigmatized, 47
  outlawing of, 43
  placing blame for on individual, 56
vagrant poor, 46–7
Varon, Jeremy, 166, 174
von Baeyer, Walter Ritter, 142, 143, 145, 154, 155, 157, 161, 170

W
Waitzkin, Howard, 109, 116, 117
Wald, Lillian, 32
warehousing, 17, 18, 43, 55, 63–4, 70, 74, 75
waste
  formulation of surplus populations as, 21–41
  policing and certifying of, 21
Watson, Sidney D., 16
Watts, James, 69
Weather Underground (US), 164
Webster, William, 177
welfare allocation, 24
welfare systems. See also social welfare systems
  in capitalist social reproduction, 24
  debates around, 28
  as onboarding mechanism to socialism, 25
  privatization of, 110
Wiley, Alexander, 87
Wilkinson, Paul, 175–6
Willard Psychiatric Center (New York), 70, 71, 72
Willse, Craig, 42
Wilson Gilmore, Ruth, 4–5, 13, 17–18, 59
Wolfe, Maxine, 100, 101
 Women’s Auxiliary of the American Medical Association, Reagan’s recording for, 25–6
wonder drugs, 83–4, 88
work cure, 51–4, 57, 64, 67, 74
worker
  as facing constant threat of becoming certified as surplus, 4
  as not part of surplus populations, 4
worker-beneficiary, 56
worker disability insurance, 35
worker/surplus binary/divide, 3, 6, 31–2, 42, 44, 45, 55–6, 57, 64, 65, 66, 74, 79, 88, 115, 183
“Working Circle Radio Transmission” (SPK), 158
“Working Circles” (SPK), 158–9, 165
work requirement, 45
World Bank, 107, 109, 110, 111–14, 116, 117–18
World Development Report (1993) (World Bank), 111–14, 117–18
World Health Organization (WHO), 110
World Intellectual Property Organization, 90
World Trade Organization (WTO), 91, 109
Wright, Joanne, 159, 165, 175

                                       OceanofPDF.com
 