 OceanofPDF.com

 “THIS BOOK IS WISE AND WONDERFUL!
Lawrence Cohen illuminates play…. He speaks to our questions
and hesitations as parents, and offers a bounty of ideas and anecdotes
that convey his generous spirit and deep understanding of both parents
and children. He offers simple things to try, and shows what a
difference play can make…. A lot of hope for parents springs from
these pages.”
—PATRICIA WIPFLER
Director, Parents Leadership Institute
“Too many conscientious mothers and fathers think parenting is all
about homework, car pools, and town soccer and are not experiencing
much joy with their families. Larry Cohen… encourages parents to
‘lose their dignity' in order ‘to find their child,' and then he
demonstrates exactly how that can be done…. You will find that you
can be closer to your children and can enjoy them more. When I
finished the book I immediately wanted to go wrestle with my kids—no
tickling—and let them win!”
MICHAEL THOMPSON, PH.D.

Coauthor of Raising Cain
“According to Cohen, children of all ages have an ongoing need for
connectedness, security, and attachment; playful interaction with
parents is an important way to develop such bonds…. The book
explores play with compassion, but is often so funny that parents will
find themselves chortling out loud with recognition and anticipation.”
—Publishers Weekly (starred review)
OceanofPDF.com

 PARENT TESTIMONIALS FOR
PLAYFUL PARENTING
“Your ideas are so creative and fun and just generally terrific….
It's one thing to read about how important it is to have a sense of fun
as a parent, it's another thing entirely to have it modeled, and in a way
that I can try out immediately. Instead of feeling like I am not being a
good enough parent, it makes me think, Oh, I could do this!”
—ANNE STRAINCHAMPS
“I love your book. It is so gentle and kind—a great antidote to our
stressed out lives and a prescription for making them less so. It is
insightful, accessible, and educational without being pedantic.”
—PAUL HOLLINGS
“I thank you for helping me find new ways to communicate with
my little girl—this was so much more fun than yelling at her!”
—DIANA PARTINGTON
“Your book has had an immediate effect on me and my playing
with [my son]. I am discovering a whole new dimension to being a
parent, which is making me thrive as a mother. And amazingly I can
see the difference on my boy as well. At the risk of sounding overly
dramatic, this has been a truly ground-breaking book for me.”
—PIA LOFDAHL
OceanofPDF.com

 OceanofPDF.com

 CONTENTS

Acknowledgments
Preface
The Value of Being a Playful Parent
Why Children Play . Fostering Closeness Instead of
Isolation . Fostering Confidence Instead of Powerlessness .
Fostering Emotional Recovery Instead of Emotional Distress
. Becoming a Playful Parent
Join Children in Their World
Reentering a World We Once Knew . Providing a
Helping Hand . When Children Are Having a Difficult Time
Connecting with Peers or Adults . When Children Seem
Unable to Play Freely and Spontaneously . When Things Are
Changing in Children's Lives . When Children Are in Danger
. The Importance of Getting Down on the Floor . Why It's
Hard for Adults to Play . I Call It Fathering . A Special Note
About Nonparents . Tuning In to Your Child
Establish a Connection
Connection, Disconnection, and Reconnection . Filling
My Cup: Attachment and the Drive to Reconnect . Playing
Toward Connection . The End of Blissful Eye Gazing .
Finding Connection Everywhere: The Love Gun . Unlocking
the Tower of Isolation . Who Is that Holding You? Moving
from Casual Connection to Deep Connection
Encourage Their Confidence

 Power and Powerlessness . Experimenting with Power:
Playing the Poopyhead Game . Preparing Your Child for the
World . Quieting That Critical Voice . Recovering Lost
Confidence
Follow the Giggles
Laughing Together . Unlocking the Tower of
Powerlessness . Lighten Up the Scene . Making Up and
Playing Dumb . Lose Your Dignity to Find Your Child .
From Giggles to Tears: When Good Play Leads to Bad
Feelings
Learn to Roughhouse
Larry's Rules of Wrestling . Getting Started with Playful
Wrestling . Aggression . The Benefits of Active Physical
Play
Suspend Reality: Reverse the Roles
Reversing Roles . From Tragedy to Comedy .
Storytelling to Heal Fears . Acting and Directing When
Necessary . Fantasy Play . Finding an Original Script
Empower Girls and Connect with Boys
Why I Play Barbie (and Action Figures), Even Though I
Hate It . Connecting with Both Boys and Girls . Boys, Girls,
and Powerlessness . Boys and Feelings . Boys and Girls,
Playing Together
Follow Your Child's Lead
Just Say Yes . Do Whatever They Want to Do . Be Safe
(But Don't Worry Too Much) . Set Aside PlayTime . Take
Time to Recover . Letting Children Take the Lead in Play
Take Charge (When Necessary)
Offer a Gentle Push . Insist on Connection . Challenge .
Introduce Important Themes . Make It Fun . Leading the
Way

 Learn to Love the Games You Hate
Dependence (“I Can't!”) and Independence (“I'd Rather
Do It Myself!”) . Aggression . Sexual Feelings and
Expressions . Invite the Behavior You Hate
Accept Strong Feelings (Theirs and Yours)
Containing Feelings versus Releasing Them . Taking
Time Out for Feelings . Adults' Unfelt Feelings . Handling
Tantrums and Frustrations . Handling Expressions of Anger .
Handling Fear and Anxiety . Handling Children's Tears .
Putting the Brakes on Whining . Experiencing the “Big Cry”
. Encouraging Emotional Literacy Through Play
Rethink the Way We Discipline
Cool Off . Make a Connection . Choose a “Meeting on
the Couch” over a “Time-out” . Play! . Instill Good Judgment
. Look Underneath the Surface, at Children's Feelings and
Needs . Prevent Instead of Punish . Know Your Child . Set
Clear Limits . An Unexpected Hero
Play Your Way Through Sibling Rivalry
Playing with More Than One Child . Every Child Has
Sibling Rivalry (Even If They Don't Have Siblings) .
Siblings and Refilling the Empty Cup . The Hidden Power of
Younger Siblings, and Other Mysteries of Family Dynamics .
Playful Parenting with Siblings
Recharge Your Own Batteries
Having Our Own Turn . Getting Our Own Cups Filled .
Helping Out Other Parents . When Adults Are Locked in the
Towers of Isolation and Powerlessness . Becoming a Great
Playmate . Building a Playful Parenting Community
Notes
OceanofPDF.com

 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Like most psychologists—and most parents—I have learned most of
what I know about children from getting down on the floor and playing
with them. My warmest thanks to all those children, and to their parents,
especially Eileen Ryan and her family. Your names are all changed in this
book, but I hope I have been true to all that you have taught me. Thanks
also to my teachers, especially Holly Jorgenson and Patty Wipfler.
It has been a privilege to be involved in various writing, teaching, and
consulting projects with two gifted child psychologists, Sam Roth and
Michael Thompson. Listening to them and talking with them about children
and childhood has shaped my thinking more than I could possibly convey
through a footnote.
I want to thank Anne Strainchamps for saying, “You should write a
book;” my agent, Josh Horwitz, for saying, “You can sell this book,” and
for showing me how; and my editors, Elizabeth Zack, Ginny Faber, and
Joanne Wyckoff, for making it a reality. I would never have had the nerve to
write a book at all if it weren't for Kathryn Deputat's writing classes and
seminars, and I could not have written this book without the emotional and
intellectual support of the Re-evaluation Counseling Communities. Thanks
also to Kate Bowditch, for careful and thoughtful reading of earlier drafts.
My deepest appreciation goes to my parents and my sisters for a lifetime
of loving support, and to my wife, Anne Fabiny, who encouraged me every
step of the way. This book is dedicated to our daughter, Emma, who
graciously let me take time away from playing with her to write about play.
OceanofPDF.com

 PREFACE

When I began working as a therapist, my clients were primarily adults.
We spent hour after hour talking about their childhoods, and I saw how
important it was for a child to have a good connection with a parent or
another adult. Naturally, when I had my own child, I was determined to
establish and maintain a strong emotional bond with her. I quickly came to
appreciate how challenging this can be. Attachment between parents and
babies is virtually instinctual, but it gets complicated as soon as the child
becomes more active and verbal.
Regardless of whether I was having a good day or a bad day, was in the
mood or not, my daughter, Emma, wanted to play. She wanted to interact
with me when I didn't feel like interacting with anybody; she wanted my
complete attention when I had other things to attend to; she wanted me to
be on call, even if she was playing alone. I was surprised at the intensity of
mixed emotions this aroused in me. More often than I'd like to admit, I'd
find myself wanting to do anything else rather than get down on the floor
and engage Emma's seemingly bottomless need for attention and play. Or
I'd get on the floor and promptly fall asleep—and not just from being a tired
parent. After all, I had already given so much of myself, and now she
wanted me to play.
As time went on, my practice began to shift toward play therapy with
children and support for their parents. While adult therapy tends to cast
parents as the villains, I started to see what a powerful positive force they
can be in their children's lives. And the single most important skill parents
could acquire, it seemed to me, was playing. Fortunately, unlike many
personality changes we might like to make, better playing skills can be
learned pretty easily.
We all know we are supposed to turn off the TV and spend more time
together. But then what? Playful Parenting is a guide to having more fun
with young people of all ages as they tackle new accomplishments, recover
from being hurt, or are simply bursting with youthful exuberance. Through
the practice of Playful Parenting—joining children in their world, focusing
on connection and confidence, giggling and roughhousing, reversing the

 roles and following your child's lead—you will learn how to help them
work through their emotional blocks and how to handle their strong
emotions (and your own). You will also learn how to deal effectively with
sibling rivalry and other tricky problems, and how to rethink your ideas
about discipline and punishment.
Finally, in order to be fountains of hopefulness and enthusiasm for
children, we must find ways to replenish ourselves. Playful Parenting offers
practical help in becoming the best parents, and the most playful parents,
we can be. Parents can learn to balance the serious business of heartfelt
connections with the silliness of wild play. Playful Parenting can help solve
a variety of family difficulties, but it is also for families where everything is
going fine. It helps every child have more fun, and it's great for grown-ups.
After all, we need to play, too.
OceanofPDF.com

 CHAPTER 1

OceanofPDF.com

 THE VALUE OF
BEING A PLAYFUL
PARENT
Play is the essence of life.1

Think about the loving gaze of an infant, the no-holds-barred embrace
of a toddler, the intimacy of a shared bedtime story, or a silent hand-in-hand
walk. These moments of heartfelt connection with our children are part of
the great payoff for the hard work of parenting. Yet this connection all too
often eludes us. We find ourselves locked in battle instead of joined in
partnership. We all know the rest: the inconsolable baby, the toddler in the
throes of a tantrum, the third-grader in a huff over bedtimes, the twelveyear-old sulking in her room.
Children's natural exuberance and exploration often gives way to what I
call “fighting and biting.” Or they hide themselves behind a Game-boy or a
locked door. Meanwhile, our profound feeling of parental love is replaced
by resentment and aggravation, even rage. We nag or punish, or we say,
“Fine, stay in your room.” We yell when we reach the end of our rope, or
just out of habit. All because we feel helpless, rejected, and cut off. We
want to reconnect, as much as our children do, but we don't know how. We
still love them, but we barely remember those melting eye gazes of
babyhood. If we do remember, it is a bittersweet memory, as if that
closeness were lost forever.
Play—together with Playful Parenting—can be the long-sought bridge
back to that deep emotional bond between parent and child. Play, with all its
exuberance and delighted togetherness, can ease the stress of parenting.
Playful Parenting is a way to enter a child's world, on the child's terms, in
order to foster closeness, confidence, and connection. When all is well in
their world, play is an expansive vista where children are joyful, engaged,

 cooperative, and creative. Play is also the way that children make the world
their own, exploring, making sense of all their new experiences, and
recovering from life's upsets. But play is not always easy for adults, because
we have forgotten so much. Indeed, children and adults often seem to reside
in radically different worlds, even within the same household. We find each
other's favorite activities boring or strange: How can she spend all afternoon
dressing up Barbies? How can they sit around all evening just talking?
Parenting and playfulness can seem like contradictions, but sometimes
we just need a little push to find one another and have fun together. I was at
an outdoor concert, dancing off on the side with my nine-year-old daughter,
when a mother and son came over to the dance area. She started dancing a
little, but he just stood with his arms folded, a little too shy to dance now
that he was there. He was about six or seven. His mother said, starting to
get angry, “You dragged me up here, and now you're not going to dance?”
He folded his arms tighter and literally dug his heels in. I thought, We can
all see where this is going. I said, “Oh no, he's doing a new dance,” and I
folded my arms just like his and gave him a big smile. He smiled back and
moved his hands to a different position, which I copied. His mom caught on
right away and started copying him, too. We all laughed. He started moving
his shoulders up and down to the music, and his mother said, “You're
dancing!” Then he started to dance, and he had a great time. We all did
(including my daughter, who waited patiently while I did “the Playful
Parenting thing,” and then wanted my complete attention again). A little
playfulness turned the tide.
This small episode demonstrates that Playful Parenting can happen
anywhere and anytime, not just during designated playtimes. Playful
Parenting begins with play, but it includes much more—from comforting a
crying baby to hanging out at the mall; from waging pillow fights to taking
the training wheels off the bicycle; from negotiating rules to dealing with
the emotional fallout of a playground injury; from getting ready for school
to listening to a child's fears and dreams before bed. Sadly, these simple
interactions can seem out of reach sometimes, or full of complications and
hard feelings.
The fact is, we adults don't have much room in our lives for fun and
games. Our days are filled with stress, obligations, and hard work. We may
be stiff, tired, and easily bored when we try to get on the floor and play with

 children—especially when it means switching gears from a stressful day of
work or household chores. We might be willing to do what they want—like
the mom at the outdoor concert—but then we get annoyed when they don't
play the way we expect or when they demand too much from us.
Others of us may be unable to put aside our competitiveness or our need
to be in control. We get bored, cranky, and frustrated; we're sore losers; we
worry about teaching how to throw the ball correctly when our child just
wants to play catch. We complain about children's short attention spans, but
how long can we sit and play marbles or Barbies or Monopoly or fantasy
games before we get bored and distracted, or pulled away by the feeling
that getting work done or cooking dinner is more important?
When my daughter was in preschool, she made up a great game that
helped me be playful instead of shouting at her to hurry up and get ready.
One morning she came downstairs, hid behind the doorway, and whispered
to me, “Pretend that I'm still upstairs and that we're really gonna be late and
you're really mad.” So I shouted upstairs, “We're late, and I am really mad!”
and I started storming around and stamping my foot. Meanwhile, she was
behind the door giggling, her hand over her mouth. I said, “You better get
down here, or I'm leaving without you. I'm going to go by myself to Big
Oak Preschool!” She started laughing out loud, so I pretended I couldn't
hear her. While letting her sneak out ahead of me, I made a big show of
leaving the house without her, supposedly not noticing she was there. She
got in the car and I pretended I was talking to myself out loud, saying, “I
am so mad. The teachers are going to say, ‘Where is Emma?' And I'm going
to say, ‘She wasn't ready, so I just left without her.' ” She was giggling and
giggling and trying not to let on that she was really there. She was making
getting ready for preschool fun for me!
Pretending to be mad helped me not to be really mad, and playing instead
of shouting helped her get ready faster!
OceanofPDF.com

 —WHY CHILDREN PLAY—

Some children are leaders and some are followers; some prefer fantasy
dress up while others are drawn to ball games. But virtually every child has
an instinct for play that buds immediately after birth and is in full bloom by
the age of two or three. Play is possible anywhere and anytime, a parallel
universe of fantasy and imagination that children enter at will. For adults,
play means leisure, but for children, play is more like their job. Unlike
many of us adults, they usually love their work and seldom want a day off.
Play is also children's main way of communicating, of experimenting, and
of learning.
A child who won't or can't play is instantly recognizable as being in
significant emotional distress, like an adult who can't work or won't talk.
Severely abused and neglected children often have to be taught how to play
before they can benefit from play therapy. Why do we consider child labor
such an abomination? Because it means children grow up without having a
childhood, without play. It's even worse when their labor is exploited so that
adults can have more leisure, as depicted in this nineteenth-century poem
by Sarah Norcliffe Cleghorn:
The Golf Links Lie So Near the Mill
The golf links lie so near the mill
That almost every day
The laboring children can look out
And watch the men at play.
Many experts describe play as a place—a place of magic and
imagination, a place where a child can be fully one's self. As psychologist
Virginia Axline wrote about children in preschool: “They can build
themselves a mountain and climb safely to the top and cry out for all the
world to hear, ‘I can build me a mountain, or I can flatten it out. In here, I
am big!'” 2 I had a great reminder of the basic nature of play at my

 daughter's third birthday party. I had organized all kinds of games to play in
the park across the street from our house, and, of course, being a
psychologist, I explained all of these complicated games to the children,
who stood around looking at me as if I were from outer space. I wasn't sure
what to do. The children were too revved up to go back inside, but they
weren't going for my games. My wife interrupted and said, “Okay,
everybody, run to the other side of the park and back!” They all ran happily
across the park, shrieking and laughing, then ran back and flopped on the
ground, giggling and panting for breath. They looked at me, and one boy
asked, “That was fun, can we do that again?” I got the point.
Nevertheless, I can't quite stop talking about the serious side of play. Play
is fun, but it is also meaningful and complex. The more intelligent the
animal, the more it plays. Unlike slugs or trees, every human learns new
things about the world, and themselves, through discovery and practice.
Some of this learning just happens automatically, by virtue of being alive,
but much of it happens through play. Human childhood has gotten longer
and longer, which means an increasing amount of time available for play.
Play is important, not just because children do so much of it, but because
there are layers and layers of meaning to even the most casual play.
Take an apparently simple game like catch—a child and a parent tossing
a baseball back and forth. Much like observing pond water under a
microscope, close observation of a game of catch reveals a great deal going
on right under our noses. The child is developing hand-eye coordination
and gross motor skills; the pair are enjoying their special time together; the
child practices a new skill until it is mastered, and then joyfully shows it
off; the rhythm of the ball flying back and forth is a bridge, reestablishing a
deep connection between adult and child; and comments like “good try”
and “nice catch” build confidence and trust.
But this straightforward game can also contain strong undercurrents of
feeling. A father I was seeing in therapy described a game of catch during
which his son threw him one zinger after another. He could see how angry
and frustrated his son was by how hard he was throwing the ball. Together
we figured out that perhaps his son was really asking him, “Can you catch
what I throw at you? Are my feelings too much for you? Am I safe from my
own impulses, my own anger?” Another father's son loved to play catch,
but whenever he missed the ball, the boy would dissolve into tears and

 tantrums and say, “I told you to throw it lower—you never listen to me!” In
this case, the child seemed to be using the game as a way to release a pile of
hurt feelings that had nothing to do with baseball.
Not every game of catch, or every playtime with a child, contains all of
these multiple levels of meaning. But all play is more profoundly
meaningful than we usually think. First, play is a way to try on adult roles
and skills, just as lion cubs do when they wrestle with one another. Human
children roughhouse, and they play house. As children discover the world,
and discover what they are able to do in the world, they develop confidence
and mastery.
Play is also a way to be close and, even more important, a way to
reconnect after closeness has been severed. Chimpanzees like to tickle one
another's palms, especially after they have had a fight. Thus, the second
purpose of play serves our incredible—almost bottomless—need for
attachment and affection and closeness.
The third purpose of play for children, and perhaps the one that is most
uniquely human, is to recover from emotional distress. Imagine children
who have had a hard day at school. They come home and one way or
another show you that they're hurting. They talk about it, or they are
irritable and obnoxious. They lock themselves in their room, or they insist
on extra attention. But most often, they spontaneously use play to feel
better. Perhaps they play school, only this time they are the teacher. Maybe
they play a video game and blow up alien enemies for a while. Or they call
a friend and talk about it, which is what older children and adults often do
instead of play. By pretending, or by retelling the story, the scene can be recreated. This time, the child is in charge. Through playing it out, emotional
healing takes place. Escaping into a book or playing a hard game of tennis
can also be helpful after a bad day.
One child I knew, who had lots of reading difficulties, would always
come home from school and do something she was really good at, which
was drawing. Before dinner she would show her parents what she had
drawn. In one sweet moment, she was reconnecting with them, restoring her
sense of competence, and recovering from the frustration and humiliation of
feeling like a failure at school.
Before going into greater detail about these deep meanings of play, let me
repeat that play is fun. Spending time with children is supposed to be joyful.

 My daughter's preschool teacher told me that preschoolers laugh an average
of three hundred times a day. What would happen if we all did that? Let's
have more fun: sing goofy songs, fall over, exaggerate, have pillow fights,
tell jokes. If you are frustrated because you have to remind your child for
the twelfth time to pack her lunch or take out the garbage, next time try
singing the request in a fake-opera voice instead of using the usual nagging
tones. At the very least it will get her attention.
As we shall see, however, Playful Parenting is more than just play. We
can interact playfully, or on a deep emotional level, no matter what we are
doing: working on chores, playing sports, completing homework, hanging
out, watching television, cuddling, even imposing discipline.
OceanofPDF.com

 —FOSTERING CLOSENESS INSTEAD OF ISOLATION—

From the time babies and parents begin to gaze lovingly at each other,
they are starting to use play as a way to connect. Any game that people
enjoy playing together can bring them closer, but some games are actually
about connection. Games like peekaboo, hide-and-seek, and tag all play
with the idea of closeness and distance. I consulted with a family whose son
invented a great connection game. He would have his parents sit on the
couch; then he'd run toward them, landing right between them. They would
then fight over who could grab him first, and it usually turned into a giggly
human tug-of-war. Play is one of the best things ever invented to build
closeness. I think that must be why school-age children, when asked to
define play, focus on the human connectedness of play: Play is what you do
with your friends. 3
My daughter, when she was around five and loved fantasy play, would
sometimes say to me, if I was getting frustrated with her: “Let's pretend
you're the dad and I'm the daughter and you're mad at me.” Well, that won't
be hard to pretend, I would think, but soon we would be laughing instead of
arguing. I thought it was very clever of her to transform, through play,
disconnection into connection. Then I read about the way chimpanzees use
fantasy play, and I was even more impressed.4
Chimpanzees, especially the adult males, fight each other a lot, but they
are also experts at reconciliation. They love to make up. When two chimps
are having trouble making up after a fight, sometimes one of them will
pretend to find something interesting in the grass. He'll hoot and holler and
all of the other chimps will come over to check out what he found. Since
there's nothing really there, one by one they wander off. All except the other
one who was in the fight. The two ex-rivals will continue to excitedly jump
up and down over the imaginary something in the grass. Finally, they settle
down and begin grooming each other, the sign among chimpanzees of
friendship restored.

 If chimpanzees and five-year-olds do it, then I think we can agree that
using play to reconnect is a pretty basic idea. But sometimes children do not
connect or reconnect so easily. They may feel so isolated that they retreat
into a corner, or come out aggressively with both arms swinging. They may
be annoying, obnoxious, or downright infuriating as they try desperately to
signal us that they need more connection. These situations call for creating
more playtime, not doling out punishment or leaving the lonely child all
alone.
When children feel isolated, they can look withdrawn and depressed. Or
they might look hyperactive instead, unable to pay attention, sit still, or
calm down. Either way, the world is not their oyster, as it is for children
who are able to reconnect.
A lonesome child says, “I'm bored.”
A twelve-year-old sobs, “Nobody likes me.”
A parent says, “I don't know what my three-year-old is thinking;
she looks so sad sometimes, but won't tell me what's the matter.”
You try to get your daughter to call a friend, and she screams, “I
can't call her; what if she's not home?”
An eight-year-old child is always on the edge of the playground,
even after he knows the other children well. He says, “I just don't like
to play soccer.”
The most common response by parents to children's isolation is
aggravation or worry. We may focus on the annoying behavior, not seeing
the pain underneath, or we see the pain all too clearly and feel helpless to
fix it. These are difficult moments for any parent. What we need are keys to
unlock the door to that fortress of isolation and help the child out again into
the fields of play. Playful Parenting provides those keys.
While I was writing this chapter, a mother I'd worked with called to tell
me how she'd used the principles of Playful Parenting to reconnect with her
son. Her three-year-old, David, had been out of sorts ever since his mother
and father had returned from a long-weekend vacation they had taken
without him.
“David has been really clingy and whiny,” she said. “Every time I try to
leave the house, or even the room, he grabs on to me for dear life. Yesterday

 I had my weekly tennis game with a friend. It's my only exercise, and my
most precious personal time of the week. As soon as David saw me heading
out the door with my tennis racquet, he grabbed hold of my leg and started
crying for me not to go. I tried to explain that this was ‘Mommy's play
date,' but he clung only tighter. I could tell this was going to escalate into a
major power struggle, and I didn't have the heart to peel him off me and
hand him over to his baby-sitter.
“Then I remembered what you and I had talked about. Instead of pulling
away from David, I lifted him up and carried him to the couch. ‘Okay,' I
told him happily, ‘I won't play tennis. I'll stay here with you and take a nap.
I'm soooo tired. What a comfy pillow.' I yawned and lay down on top of
him and pretended to snore loudly. He began laughing and putting his hand
over my mouth to quiet me. I pretended to wake up and look around,
saying, ‘Where's David? This sure is a lumpy pillow, and squiggly, too!'
Then I pretended to go back to sleep, using him as a pillow and snoring
some more.
“After a few minutes' more giggling, David pushed me off him and said,
‘Go, go—late for your play date.' We had a really sweet hug good-bye at the
door, and he had a fine time without me. When I came home, he had drawn
a picture of me playing tennis with an enormous racquet.”
OceanofPDF.com

 —FOSTERING CONFIDENCE
INSTEAD OF POWERLESSNESS—

What do you think of when you hear the phrase “playing doctor”? Most
people's first association to this phrase involves children's secret sexual
explorations: “You show me yours, and I'll show you mine.” That type of
playing doctor illustrates the way children use play to explore their own
bodies. Though playing doctor and other forms of sexual exploration are
often difficult for adults to handle, it is really just a special case of “playing
house.” After all, there are many rooms in the house, and most children
have a great interest in what goes on in each of them. Through play, they
practice cooking, cleaning, going to work, fighting, taking care of the baby
—every adult activity they see around them. This kind of playful practice,
performed over and over, makes them more confident.
Young children also play to learn about the world. Why aren't we amused
when our toddler drops her food off the high chair for the hundredth time?
Because we know about gravity (and we have to clean it up). She, however,
is extremely amused, because everything about the universe is new and
interesting and open to playful discovery. Including the funny faces and
noises we make trying to get her to stop.
I mentioned before that older children define play as whatever you do
with your friends. However, toddlers and preschoolers define play as doing
whatever you choose.5 This self-determination is part of the power aspect of
play. My niece Bailey, when she was about six months old, had a rattle
shaped like a bunch of grapes. She loved to make that thing shake. Her
parents called her the boss of the grapes. When you can choose what to do,
you are more likely to throw yourself into it.
My daughter and I had a period during her kindergarten year when she
didn't want to get dressed by herself. She thought I was being mean because
I didn't come dress her or keep her company the way I used to do in
preschool. Meanwhile, I thought she was being difficult and uncooperative,

 since I knew she could do it herself. Instead of saying she was lonely, she
would insist that she couldn't get dressed on her own. I was frustrated at this
helpless attitude, this powerlessness. I was also frustrated because I had
better things to do in the morning.
It took me way too long to figure out that nagging wasn't ever going to
help. Finally, out of desperation more than cleverness, I picked up two of
her dolls and I made one of them say (in a nasty voice), “Oh, she can't get
dressed by herself; she doesn't know how to get dressed by herself.” Then I
made the other one say (in a cheerfully encouraging voice), “She can so;
she really can do it.” And then the first one would say, “Oh no, that's
ridiculous; she's just five years old, she can't get dressed by herself.” The
nasty doll would always somehow happen not to be watching as Emma
dressed herself. This doll would say, “You see, she didn't get dressed by
herself,” and the other one would yell back, “She did so! You weren't
paying attention!” Meanwhile, she was not only getting dressed by herself,
she was laughing instead of whining. I was laughing instead of fussing or
tapping my foot impatiently for her to hurry.
After just a few times playing this game, getting dressed on her own
became a habit, and I didn't have to spend every morning making up doll
dialogue. Once in a while after that, instead of being pokey and driving me
nuts, she would say, “Come in and be those people saying I can't get
dressed.” Playfulness turned a time that used to be full of frustration for
both of us into something fun, enjoyable, and confidence-building. Emma
got over her loneliness and reluctance and got used to a new path. Of
course, to get to that point, I had to put in some time up front. As every
parent knows, that time may be hard to find, but it paid off in a very short
while. If I take into account the time I used to spend nagging, fussing, and
supervising, then I really come out ahead.
Children who are frustrated too much, or are unable to use play to master
their world, retreat into what I call the tower of powerlessness. The
meadows and fields are inviting, but confidence is required in order to play
out there. Locked inside this tower, unable to play freely, they may appear
weak and helpless. Or they may bounce off the tower walls, looking wild
and reckless, even aggressive, but feeling powerless underneath. If children
are too afraid of getting hurt, or expect to be rejected, or can't believe the

 world is theirs to explore, then they retreat: “I don't want to….” “I can't….”
“I'm no good at that….” “Timmy's hitting me!”
Ye t powerlessness sometimes expresses itself in confusing ways. As one
worried mother put it, “You say my child feels powerless, so how come he's
getting sent home from school for hitting? How come the teachers are
afraid of him?” Powerlessness is a well-defended fortress, perfect for hiding
out, but it is also good for preemptive strikes: “I hate you. Take that (with a
kick or a shove or a bite)!” “You're stupid.” “I'm only playing if I get to be
the captain.”
Just as Playful Parenting provides the key for helping children unlock the
tower of isolation, engaging playfully with children also helps them build
the confidence it takes to step out of the tower of powerlessness.
OceanofPDF.com

 —FOSTERING EMOTIONAL RECOVERY
INSTEAD OF EMOTIONAL DISTRESS—

Children don't just play doctor as a cover to make their sexual
explorations more respectable. Sometimes when children play doctor they
are actually pretending that someone is sick or injured. This type of playing
doctor is an example of the way children use play to recover from a
traumatic incident, large or small.6 A three-year-old gets a shot at the
doctor's office. She comes home, and what game does she want to play?
Doctor, of course. And who does she want to be? The doctor or nurse, the
giver of the shot—definitely not the patient. And who does she want to give
it to? Well, her first choice is a parent or another adult. If no one is
available, she might use a stuffed animal or doll. And how does she want
the game to go? She wants you to pretend to howl and say, “No, no, no,
please don't give me a shot. I hate shots! No, no, no,” and act as if you are
in an agony of pain and terror.
This response lets the child be in the more powerful position. It is a
simple game of role reversal (the one who got the shot is now the one who
gives the shot), but it is very satisfactory. Getting the shot made her feel
powerless and reminded her of all the little frustrations that she's had, all the
times when she hasn't been able to choose what to do or what to eat or what
to wear—you know, the millions of things that children don't get to decide
in their lives. It certainly wasn't her idea to go get a shot that day. Playing
doctor this way lets her recover because she gets to see you as helpless and
powerless and undignified, while she gets to be the powerful one.
The play shot might be pretend, but the need for emotional recovery is
real. The child chooses this fantasy game because she wants a hand with her
genuine feelings about the actual shot. This isn't just play for fun (though
the child may have lots of fun with it); it is play with a purpose. The
purpose is to go through the incident again, but this time letting the scary

 feelings out—usually through giggles. That's why a child likes to play this
kind of game over and over and over.
We are all familiar with the comic-book sequence: the boss yells at the
dad, the dad yells at the mom, the mom yells at the kid, the kid shoves the
little brother, the little brother kicks the dog, the dog pees on the rug. (I call
this emotional hot potato.) The way out of this cycle is for adults actively to
help children recover. Unlike the child's younger sibling, we can tolerate the
pretend needle without saying, “Why do you always get to be the doctor?”
or without yelling, “Mom, Ronnie's poking me!” Unfortunately, being
civilized adults, we are more likely to say, “Go away, I'm busy” or “Get
away from me, I hate needles,” instead of playing this game with them.
Sometimes, of course, the child does not need a playful approach; he just
needs a lap to crawl into so he can cry about how much the shot hurt.
When children are discouraged or punished for attempting to recover
emotionally in this playful way, they retreat into themselves. They may try
to feel better in less playful ways, like finding a real needle and then
jabbing baby brother or the cat with it. Or they may bury the feelings
temporarily, at least until they have to go back to the doctor, where they
then have a major screaming fit. When we see a child who is fearful, or
violent, or out of control, we usually don't stop to put the pieces together.
We don't think to ask ourselves if she had enough chance to play it through
or talk it through. Usually we just see the problem behavior, which angers
or worries us so much that we don't think about using play to help solve it.
A friend of mine, Lori, was at a playground, chatting with a woman she
had just met and playing with the woman's two young children, a threeyear-old girl and her little brother. Lori is very tolerant of wrestling and
boisterous play, and soon the children were climbing all over her. Their
mother thought the children should settle down. Before Lori could say
anything, the mom whacked the older one, hard. My friend was torn—she's
strongly against hitting children and wanted to tell the mother it was wrong
—but she knew that the mother was in no shape to listen to her right then.
Everyone was upset and angry. So Lori decided to keep an eye on the child
who had been spanked. The little girl immediately picked up a stick and
went after her little brother. Just in time, Lori grabbed her gently, pulled her
aside, took the stick away, and said, in a playful voice, “Ohhhhh no you
don't!” The girl laughed and laughed and wanted to play that game over and

 over. All thoughts of really whacking her brother were forgotten (for the
time being, at least). The mother, who was able to see that my friend had
defused a potentially dangerous situation, without yelling or hitting,
watched them play with great interest.
It is not hard to imagine the punishment this young girl would have
received if she had succeeded in clobbering the baby. The mother then may
have felt totally justified in punishing her severely, forgetting that the
aggression started with her own unnecessary spanking of her daughter.
Instead, the whole situation was handled playfully. The girl's ineffective
attempt to deal with being hit, by passing the hit on to someone smaller,
was transformed into effective recovery, where no one got hurt. And my
friend didn't even have to do much; she just stayed close to the child, made
sure nobody got whacked, and used a relaxed and playful tone of voice. The
little girl did the rest, deciding to play “try to hit the baby” instead of
actually hitting him.
A shot at the doctor's office or a spanking from Mom or Dad are only two
of the thousands of childhood injuries and insults that need emotional
healing. None of us gets all of our needs perfectly met; none of us escapes
childhood without insult or injury. And that's not all. Besides the big
traumas and little upsets, children also need to process the new information
they receive every day. Just think how many billions of bits of data that is
for a child. So much is new to them, and it all has to be sifted through and
sorted out. Play is their favorite way to do this. Luckily, play is one of the
best ways available to heal from those hurts and to process that new
information.
One father who called me for help said that his daughter had several
classmates who were just beginning to learn English. This was fascinating
to her, and for weeks, walking home from school, she would say, “Let's
pretend we speak a different language.” She and her father would speak
gibberish to each other, pretending it was the language of some other
country. The father was a little worried that someone would hear them and
think they were being insensitive, making fun of the children from Russia
and Japan. I reassured him that, in fact, his daughter was practicing being
empathic. She was dealing with something brand new in the only way she
knew how: by playing.

 Happy play can spontaneously heal minor upsets, but when children are
stuck inside their emotional distress, they have trouble playing happily.
Once again, they are locked in the towers of isolation and powerless-ness. It
may be hard to tell which one your child is holed up in. Your daughter says,
“I don't want to go to soccer, I stink at it,” and you wonder whether she is
embarrassed because the other girls are better soccer players, or if she is
having trouble making friends on the team. A first-grade bully hits someone
every time the teacher's back is turned. Is he feeling isolated from his peers,
not realizing that his behavior will only get him excluded more? Or is he
testing his power, seeing what he can get away with, seeing how people will
react?
Some children—those who are really hurting badly—spend most of their
time feeling isolated and powerless, and little or no time playing freely. But
even the healthiest, best-loved children will retreat into these two fortresses
when they feel scared, overwhelmed, or abandoned. Think about when
children are having a bad day. Do they seem unable to play happily, and
instead resort to hiding or attacking or annoying you? Are they just going
through the motions of life, without any real joy or spark? Maybe they're
stuck, repeating the same words or games over and over without any fresh
ideas and without having much fun. Perhaps their play is wilder than usual,
or more reckless. These are signs of isolation and powerlessness.
If they are unable to recover by using play, children may be flooded with
emotions (such as tantrums). They might lash out at others, storm around,
or burst into tears at the slightest upset. Others may withdraw to their room,
or shut all their feelings down (such as by staring blankly at the TV,
compulsively flipping through channels). They seem lifeless and listless.
Often adults overlook this second set of problems. Emotional shutdown,
because it is quiet, can be confused with being “good.” But it doesn't feel
good.
When children lock themselves away in one of the towers and pull up the
drawbridge behind them, parents wonder how to help them. We may feel
helpless and rejected ourselves. We may even go so far as to retreat into our
own fortresses of powerlessness and isolation, which makes us even less
effective in dealing with our children.
“He's a spoiled brat.”

 “I don't know what to do with her.”
“I hate myself when I yell at them, but the next time I just yell
again.”
“Suddenly she's afraid of the water, but I paid for a whole year of
swimming lessons, so she's going to swim or else.”
“Go away, I'm busy.”
Play is one of the best ways to engage with children, pulling them out of
emotional shutdown or misbehavior, to a place of connection and
confidence.
OceanofPDF.com

 —BECOMING A PLAYFUL PARENT—

When I talk to parents about playfulness, someone always says, “I don't
really play much with my children; that's more my husband's job.” Another
frequent comment is, “My children play great on their own. They don't need
me to be involved.” I appreciate these responses, because they challenge me
to explain why play is so important to children, why participating in play is
so important for adults, and why being more playful is possible for any
parent who is willing to give it a try.
I hope the next fourteen chapters provide clear guidance on how to break
through the walls that divide children from adults, to discover ways to meet
heart to heart. Playful Parenting helps with the toughest aspects of
parenting: tantruming toddlers, biting preschoolers, anxious third-graders,
out-of-control preteens. Playfulness resolves our battles over getting
dressed and ready in the morning, soothes our frazzled nerves at the end of
a long day, and restores family harmony. Playful Parenting offers a hand
even when playfulness seems a dream that's out of reach or a joke in poor
taste. When we are exhausted or when we are at the end of our rope, we
tend to think that play will be just more of an energy drain. But when we
engage playfully with our children, we find that suddenly we do have
energy, both for fun and for finding creative solutions to thorny problems.
Many parents tell me, “I could never be as goofy as you.” I am not sure
whether to take this as a compliment or an insult, but either way, it just
takes practice. Contrary to what my daughter might tell you, I had to train
myself to be as goofy as I am today. I had to get over my shyness and
embarrassment about playing on the climbing structure with her when she
asked me to, instead of sitting on the bench with the other parents. As long
as we are grown up enough to handle things like keeping them safe and
getting dinner on the table, our children want us and need us to loosen up. I
don't think it makes sense to leave the playing for others, who are “better at
it.” Why should they have all the fun?

 And if we don't play, we miss out on more than fun. Play is where
children show us the inner feelings and experiences that they can't or won't
talk about. We need to hear what they have to say, and they need to share it.
That's why we have to join children where they live, on their terms.
Children don't say, “I had a hard day at school today; can I talk to you about
it?” They say, “Will you play with me?” If we say yes, they play out what
happened in the best way they know how. Or they don't say anything,
needing us to take the initiative. By the end of the game, we may have
helped them boost their confidence and their inner feeling of being loved—
just what they need to go back to school and solve the problem themselves.
If they don't think we will play, they may not even ask. They just go about
their business, and we go about ours, and we all miss chance after chance to
reconnect.
I spend a lot of my time at work reintroducing play and playfulness into
families that are quite normal and average but that have lost a bit of that
zestfulness and joy. For example, I was a few minutes late when I knocked
on the door of my friend Connie's apartment to play with her and her son
Brian. They had been having some minor troubles—nothing serious, just
typical stuff between a nine-year-old boy and his mother: not wanting her to
hug and kiss him; being sarcastic; talking back; living and breathing sports;
dismissing his mother and everything else female. Brian and I had played
together once before. That time, Connie and Brian came over and we
swapped kids—I did the rough-and-tumble thing with Brian while she
played Barbies with my daughter. This was lots of fun and a big relief for
all of us: finally an adult who knows how to really play; finally a child who
wants to play something I'm good at.
This time, as I knocked on the door, I wasn't sure what to expect. As
Connie shouted, “Come in!” Brian yelled out, “You're late, you idiot!” We
were off and running. I came in and said playfully, “What did you call me?”
I chased him into the other room, where he collapsed onto the couch. I
buried him in pillows. He leaped up and we started a pillow fight. Connie
was sitting next to me, chuckling. She loved seeing his nastiness aimed at
someone else for a change; he loved that he could get away with it without
getting a lecture or a punishment or an end to playtime. I loved it because
Brian was showing us what he was feeling inside. Not directly, but by

 calling me an idiot and whacking me with a pillow, he was revealing what I
call the hard spots, places where he felt pounded or stupid himself.
I whacked Connie with a pillow to get her into the action. It was their
relationship with each other that was important, not mine with Brian. “Oh,
ho ho,” Connie said to me. “So you want me to play, too?” “Yes!” answered
Brian, and we had a great three-way pillow fight. A couple of weeks later, I
talked to Connie about what this playtime was like for her. She felt that it
had greatly improved her relationship with her son, by helping her notice
that he really did still want to play with her and be close to her, even though
he often seemed to push her away. She also realized that she had been
feeling drained from all her caretaking duties—cooking, driving, helping
with homework, chauffering to sports—and she had little or no energy for
play. Getting in some good playtime, though, not only helped her see how
much her son wanted it and needed it, but also how revitalizing this kind of
play can be. Since then they have played much more, and from Connie's
reports, I am not sure who has enjoyed it more.
OceanofPDF.com

 CHAPTER 2

OceanofPDF.com

 JOIN CHILDREN IN
THEIR WORLD
When you are dealing with a child, keep all
your wits about you, and sit on the floor.
—AUSTIN O'MALLEY, 1915

I learned a great game from Jimmy, my eight-year-old neighbor.
Jimmy's little cousin would come visit, and he would take her to the
swings across the street. He would stand in front of her and give her a push.
When she came back toward him, he would stand so that her feet just barely
touched him on the chest. Then he would make a big show of falling over
and pretending to be mad at her. He would get up and say, “You better not
do that again!” She would laugh with delight and he would patiently play
this game with her again and again.
Why is this such a great game? It manages to cover all of the deep
purposes of play, as well as just plain being fun. The contact, or near miss,
is a great way to play with connection. Having the younger child be the
more powerful one builds confidence. Besides, why are toddlers called
toddlers? Because they fall down a lot. Having someone else fall down, in a
funny way, lets the toddler release—in waves of giggles—all her frustration
about walking. Much better than finding another toddler and pushing him
over, or whining to be carried because walking is so difficult.
I often use Jimmy as my model when I think of ways to help children out
of their twin towers of isolation and powerlessness and into the open vistas
of delighted, exuberant play. First and foremost, what Jimmy did at the
swing set was join the younger child in her world. He went to her level and
played in a way that was most fun for her. Playful Parenting begins with an
eagerness to connect with children in the way Jimmy connected with his
cousin, and a willingness to provide children with unlimited refills of love,
encouragement, and enthusiasm. Loosening up—literally and figuratively—
also helps, as most of us adults are rather stiff when we try to get down on
the floor and play. Since fun and laughs are the currency of children's play,

 we may need some work on lightening up a bit. When we get disconnected
from children—and we do, again and again—play is our best bridge back to
deep connection with them. We have to be ready.
OceanofPDF.com

 —REENTERING A WORLD WE ONCE KNEW—

Many adults feel like outsiders to this world of play that children
inhabit, a world we once knew but seem to have forgotten. We may look at
this world wistfully, wishing we could still play the way we used to. Or we
might be glad to finally be an adult, with the children off playing on their
own in the next room, or outside. One of my friends says to his kids, only
half jokingly, “Call me only if someone's bleeding.” Many adults, especially
busy parents, are resistant to the idea of joining children in their world.
They will say to me, “Kids like being on the floor; I don't. If I was meant to
be on the floor, my knees wouldn't be so creaky and I wouldn't mind getting
dirty. Can't children just play on their own, or with a friend, or outside with
the neighborhood kids?” Of course children can and should play by
themselves or with friends part of the time. Leaving children to their own
devices is useful for fostering independence, and very useful for giving
parents a break so they can rest or finish their work or cook dinner. Leaving
a pair or group of children alone lets them work things out on their own as
they play freely, without worrying about adult intervention. Children benefit
from and need this time away from adults. We don't need to move into their
world.
But to fulfill the promise of play, children need adults to play with them
some of the time. This kind of play can be hard, at first, for adults, but it is a
skill that anyone can develop with practice and commitment. It is also fun.
A great deal has been written in the last ten or twenty years about the power
of parents and other adults to harm children. But adults also have the power
to help children. Not just to get out of their way, or to keep them safe from
harm, but to actively help them develop, heal from being hurt, and maintain
close human connections. Since children already use play to connect, to
heal, and to develop confidence, it is a logical next step for adults to play
with them to offer the additional helping hand they need.
OceanofPDF.com

 —PROVIDING A HELPING HAND—

Play is children's main way of communicating. To stop a child from
playing is like stopping an adult from talking and thinking. To control every
minute of their play is like controlling every word someone says. But to
leave children all alone in their play is like spending the day with other
adults and never talking with them.
The adult role in play can be quite minimal—just making sure of basic
safety and being there if needed. Some of our most important parenting
happens when we are in a different room, while our children play happily,
knowing we will come when they call. Maybe they just need an audience
for their skits and magic tricks, or just need someone to fill the tub and get
the funnels out, or drive them to a friend's house. At these times we may
feel more like a servant than a parent. Anybody can do this, why does it
have to be me? But it does make a difference if it is you—children need the
adults with whom they are closest to be nearby some of the time, even when
they don't need much from us.
Brian and Shirley Sutton-Smith wrote a wonderful book in the 1970s
about playing with children. They have a lovely example of what I call the
light touch in participating in play. They call it a play interlude.
In the middle of your vacuuming your little child will suddenly
appear with a suitcase and, going to the door, will wave goodbye. “I'm
going to the hospital. Good-bye. Good-bye.” This small act of leaving
may be repeated twenty times. Your role is to enter into the play just a
little but not too much. Wave good-bye but go on vacuuming. Wave
good-bye and make a mock crying face but then go on with your
vacuuming. Finally go to him and ask, “Have you come home now?”
“Yes,” he replies. Then hug him to pieces, exclaiming how happy you
are.1

 A play interlude is not always enough, of course. The deeply meaningful
aspects of play may happen so easily and spontaneously that no one is even
aware of them (except nosy psychologists like me). Parents and children
use play for these emotionally important purposes all the time, without even
thinking much about it. Just as we can breathe and walk without giving it
any thought, children and adults use play naturally to connect, to build
confidence, and to heal from emotional distress. But meaningful play may
need more effort and more awareness on the part of adults. Children have a
special need of more active participation from grown-ups:
when they are having a difficult time connecting with peers or
adults;
when they seem unable to play freely and spontaneously;
when things are changing in their life (the start of kindergarten, the
birth of a new sibling, a death or divorce in the family);
when they are in danger.
Now let's look at how play can satisfy each of these needs.
OceanofPDF.com

 —WHEN CHILDREN ARE HAVING A DIFFICULT TIME
CONNECTING WITH PEERS OR ADULTS—

Austin was a ten-year-old boy who had difficulty playing happily and
freely. He had trouble with friendships, and it was no wonder; the only
game he ever wanted to play was a rough version of soccer, which involved
lots of tackling and punching. He was quickly running out of anyone who
would play this with him, and he would sulk whenever other children
wanted to play something different. In consultation with his parents, we
decided to set aside special playtimes with each parent that involved a great
deal of playful physical contact. They would wrestle, have pillow fights,
and have piggyback rides around the house, as well as more hugs and more
cuddle time. If Austin started to get aggressive, they took a break, and then
went back to playing. These small changes made a huge difference in his
ability to play well with his peers.
Sitting off alone—unhappily—is another clear sign that a child is having
trouble connecting with others. These children need adults to make an extra
effort at playfulness, designed to lure them out of their isolation and into
contact. They may need practice in playing so that they know how to
interact with their peers. This infusion of love, affection, and attention will
help them enter into peer play with confidence and playfulness. Or they
may just need a parent to patiently pay attention to them as they make their
way out of their bored, listless hole and figure out something fun to do.
Instead, children are often punished or ignored when they are already
feeling excluded and lonely. Sitting alone in one's room is not the best way
to develop better ways to play with friends.
OceanofPDF.com

 —WHEN CHILDREN SEEM UNABLE TO
PLAY FREELY AND SPONTANEOUSLY—

My colleague Sam Roth and I taught a class together for teachers in
after-school programs. We tried to draw a distinction between two types of
play, which require two different levels of adult involvement. We asked the
teachers to describe “good” play, and they listed these adjectives: fluid,
creative, imaginative, fun, adaptive, inclusive of others, and cooperative.
We asked them what children need from adults to continue this kind of play.
They listed safety, a nurturing environment, a home base where they can
check in, play and art materials, and backup conflict resolution if things get
out of hand. Then we asked for a description of play that was a problem for
them, and their list included these words: repetitive, stuck, aggressive,
destructive, boring, or exclusive of others. With that kind of play, they said,
children need adults to provide more structure, information, redirection,
enthusiasm, fresh ideas, calming, extra attention, guidelines and limits, and
help in verbalizing their behaviors and feelings (“say it in words”).
To put it another way, some children seem to know all they need to know
about play, while others need specific lessons in rules, skills, or
sportsmanship. Teaching these lessons is another obvious role for adults. I
am amazed at how often I see children who want to play but don't know the
rules, have never practiced the skills, and can't bear to lose. That makes it
hard for children to play freely and spontaneously. It usually takes a little
adult intervention for the child who is always stuck in left field, because he
doesn't play as well as the others, to get some extra catching practice. The
child who disputes every call, and makes his friends angry with him every
time they play, may need some special playtime focused on sportsmanship.
OceanofPDF.com

 —WHEN THINGS ARE
CHANGING IN CHILDREN'S LIVES—

My friend Linda provides a wonderful example of parents' need to
participate more in their childrens' play when things change at home. She
had just had a third child: the older ones now were clinging to her and
demanding her attention because they felt as if the new baby was taking
away from their time with her. Linda made up a game that they called fillup. She would take each child on her lap and say that she was going to fill
them up with Mommy love. She would start at their toes, work her way up,
and end with a kiss on top of their heads. Then she added another element
—the love egg. Do you know that trick where you pretend to crack an egg
over someone's head by gently tapping them on the head and then spreading
your fingers down their hair? She would call this the love egg and crack it
over them, spreading more love. Both older kids loved this and wanted to
do it every day. This five-minute game helped them to be able to play on
their own and with each other while their mom was busy with the baby; it
also helped them to be loving and warm toward the baby instead of
resentful and aggressive.
OceanofPDF.com

 —WHEN CHILDREN ARE IN DANGER—

When children are in danger, especially from each other, we can see the
need for adult participation clearly. There are times when it is dangerous to
let children work things out on their own. I've done a lot of work with
adults who were sexually abused as children, and Jack's story was pretty
typical. When he was five, he was assaulted by two older boys who lived
next door to him. They had a “game” they played, which they probably
thought was fun. I'll spare you the details. From Jack's point of view it was
traumatic and abusive. Looking back, Jack realized that his tormentors were
trying to deal with their own misery by passing it on to him. Maybe
someone was brutal to them, or just ignored them when they needed help.
They must have had a pile of bad feelings and nowhere to go with them—
except to act them out on someone younger and smaller.
The problem was, Jack was in no position to help them with their anger
and aggression. He was only five. Apparently the parents next door wanted
no part of their boys' aggressive impulses either; they told the boys to get
lost. Well, the boys did indeed “get lost.” They got lost in their painful
feelings—until they found Jack to unleash them on. Unable or unwilling to
intervene directly with the boys, the adults were equally unavailable to
intervene in the “play.”
The abusive boys needed play experiences that would have interrupted
and rechanneled their aggressive impulses. Jack needed help with play also.
He didn't need the same kind of help the older boys did, since he responded
to their violence by being timid and fearful. He needed play that would
have helped him to be more assertive and to trust the world enough to come
out of his towers of isolation and powerlessness. Jack had to wait until he
was an adult before he could recover, and then he used therapy, rather than
play, to aid in the process.
Luckily, most examples of adults helping children through play are not
quite so dramatic, but they do point to the same basic principle: Children's

 difficulties do not always sort themselves out if the children are left alone,
as much as busy parents and teachers wish they would.
OceanofPDF.com

 —THE IMPORTANCE OF GETTING DOWN ON THE FLOOR—

In Playful Parenting, “getting on the floor” may mean literally getting
down on the floor, right where children like to play. Other times we get on
the floor metaphorically, by meeting children on their home ground, doing
what they like to do. For young children this means being at their level, eye
to eye. For older children, it means hanging out on their turf, whether that's
the mall, the ball field, or plopped in front of the TV or computer.
Getting on the floor also means joining in with play that we would rather
ignore or eliminate. One mother, a parent at a preschool where I gave a talk
on aggressive play, was shocked and horrified at my answer when she asked
for advice about her son. Instead of offering ideas to get him to stop his
awful testosterone-driven mayhem (chopping the heads off action figures
and hurling them down the stairs was his favorite game), I suggested that
she join in the play. Enthusiastically. Repetitive play does not change as
long as it is played in isolation, and the mom's disapproval just made him
feel even more isolated. Children need our approval and enthusiasm first,
before they can get out of a rut. So even if the goal is to have him stop that
violent play, the only effective way is to play it with him for a while, which
gives him the elbow room to try out new ideas and new ways of dealing
with his aggressive impulses.
A. S. Neill, headmaster of the experimental Summer hill school in
England, when faced with a student who was sneaking out of the dorm to
cause mischief of one kind or another, was known to wake the child up in
the middle of the night while dressed in some ridiculous outlaw outfit, and
ask if he could come along on the next outing. The child would always say
no and give the headmaster a lecture on proper behavior, and the mischief
would stop.
I think what Neill provided for his students, as they were teetering on the
edge between acting responsibly and getting in trouble, was a special kind
of play. By showing up in the night looking silly, he helped the child think
the whole thing through for himself. When we constantly tell children what

 they should or shouldn't do, they have no room to think for themselves and
are forced to choose between resentful obedience or defiant rebellion.
Playfulness helps them think for themselves, even about serious topics.
There are many resources that parents give their children as they get on
the floor and join in the play. Some are material things, like good toys and a
comfortable room and healthy snacks. Some are intangible, like introducing
a new idea into the game. One of my favorites is when two children are
pounding on each other, and I say, “Pick on someone your own size!” and
put up my hands to fight, with a goofy expression on my face. They both
turn on me and I run away in mock fright, a little twist that changes the
whole nature of the game.
One of my favorite ideas for thinking about different ways of joining
children in their play comes from the work of Leston Havens, a psychiatrist
at Cambridge Hospital in Massachusetts. He writes about therapy with
adults, and one of his most useful and playful concepts has to do with
seating arrangements in the therapy session.2 He uses seating arrangements
as a way to understand different types of therapy. The first psychiatrists sat
across a desk from their patients, creating a formal distance. Sigmund Freud
invented the idea of sitting on a chair out of sight of the patient, so the
patient has to imagine what the therapist is thinking and feeling. Carl
Rogers sat face-to-face, knee-to-knee, which fits with his goal of warm,
genuine communication. Harry Stack Sullivan often sat side-by-side,
shoulder-to-shoulder with his patients, so the two of them could be partners
in facing the scary world outside.
In his own work, Leston Havens takes these models a step further,
thinking about each individual patient and how to sit with them. For some
he wants to be out of kicking range; for others he wants to be close enough
to reach out and touch their arm or knee. I often think about these seating
arrangement ideas when I am deciding how best to join the world of a child
through play. For example, sometimes Playful Parenting involves very close
physical contact, such as wrestling or cuddling. Sometimes the degree of
contact varies during the play, as in chase or tag. Other times the adult and
the child sit across from each other over a board game. The best example of
Sullivan's side-by-side seating arrangement is the way that nontalkative

 boys are known for doing their best talking in the car, staring straight ahead,
while their mom or dad watches the road and listens.
Playing catch usually involves a considerable distance, but the ball serves
as a bridge between the two players. Finally, as we'll see in the story of the
boy behind the locked door in the next chapter, there may be a unique
seating arrangement. It's important to find the approach your child will most
respond to—and you can find this only if you're trying to interact with your
child on their level.
There will always be room for children to play on their own or with
peers. In fact, when young people have had effective adult participation in
play, they can then get even more enjoyment from playing on their own.
But for the times when they need more from us than just a warm body to
give them juice or make sure they don't burn the house down, we need to
understand why it is often hard for us to play.
OceanofPDF.com

 —WHY IT'S HARD FOR ADULTS TO PLAY—

When we were children, the current generation of parents did not play
with adults very much. We spent our toddlerhoods in playpens, our
elementary-school years in front of the TV, our teen years hanging out. Not
that earlier generations had much playtime with adults either, or much time
to play, period. It is only recently that children have had much chance to
play at all. Experts in early childhood development all agree that this
increased playtime has been a great benefit for children. But sometime in
adolescence or early in adulthood we pretty much stop playing, and we may
even forget how. We may replace play with competitive sports, or with
leisure, but these are not as free or spontaneous or imaginative as children's
play. We have lost much of our ability to play—through lack of practice,
and through adult preoccupations and worries—and this loss gets in our
way of being with children.
Nowhere is this loss more painful or poignant for parents than when we
have trouble connecting through play with our children. Too often we hit a
wall, and on the other side of that wall sit our children, waiting for us to
reconnect with them on their turf, and on their terms. We have to take the
initiative in reconnecting, instead of waiting for them or giving up. Since
we don't usually play as much or as spontaneously as children, we have to
choose to play, even if we don't really feel like it.
Unfortunately, if you look back at the list of times children's play requires
more adult involvement (see p. 22), they tend to be the very same times
when we have the most difficulties in playing with our children:
When children are not connecting well with us or their peers, we
usually feel disconnected as well (which may make us sad, mad,
bored, or irritable, rather than playful).
When children's play is repetitive, aggressive, or inhibited, we
usually want to punish them, ignore them, or get away from them—
anything but join in.

 Transitions are hard for adults, too. We have even less time and
attention for children when we are preoccupied with big changes in our
lives.
When our children are in danger, we may be too worried to be
playful (they might be in danger because we were not paying enough
attention to them in the first place).
Maybe we swore we would never be harsh with our children the way
others were harsh with us. Then, just when they need us most—when they
act up and misbehave and call us names and so on—we get angry and
punish them, or feel hurt and block them out. We momentarily forget how
fragile our little ones are, just as they forget about cooperation or sharing or
calming down or following the rules. When things are in upheaval, such as
during the arrival of a new sibling, a move, or a divorce, we are
preoccupied with our own feelings and all the things we have to do, so we
tend to give children even less attention right when they need extra. And so
they act up and we have still less attention for them, the break in the
connection grows wider, and so on. No wonder parenting is often hard!
Plus, we adults have unhealed hurts from our own childhoods, which
sometimes get in the way right when our children need our support. Our
own piles of old feelings interfere with parenting playfully. In turn, that
makes it hard to help children with their emotional difficulties. One mother
I worked with could talk clearly about her daughter's problems (at age five,
she seemed depressed and withdrawn), but she seemed at a loss as to where
these problems came from. After playing with the girl I could see how
much trouble she had in maintaining a connection. Our play revolved
around variations of my coaxing her out of corners, where she would hide
like a scared kitten. When I had finally managed to establish a fairly good
connection with the daughter, I invited the mother to join the game. She was
very stiff and awkward, but both mother and daughter clearly enjoyed the
coaching on how to have fun together.
As I eased myself out of the play, however, the mother was frozen. She
sat in a chair almost paralyzed, unable to play. Confronted with this obvious
emotional block, the mother was able to see how her own difficulties in
connecting had affected her daughter. Before, she had successfully avoided
facing these feelings by simply saying she was too busy or too tired to play.

 The whole dynamic in the family changed as the mother took the initiative
to work through her own obstacles to closeness and connection.
By avoiding playing, this mom had avoided feeling bad, but with serious
consequences for the whole family. It is no wonder that we try to avoid
these feelings, though; they are extremely uncomfortable. What else besides
painful emotion could keep us from playing with children whom we love?
Sometimes parents have to spend some time on the floor actually playing
games their children want to play in order even to recognize the deep
feelings inside that get in the way. As one parent told me, “Playing with my
kids isn't always fun, but I do it anyway because I know in the end we are
all happier. Also, the more I choose to play with them their way, the more
likely they will go along with some of the things I want to do.”
When we play with our children, there's often more that we feel than
simply being bored by the game, or too tired even to play at all. Some
parents get angry, responding to children's play with rigid rules, harsh
discipline, and violent outbursts. Some adults are fine until a child starts to
cry or makes a mess—which, of course, is bound to happen eventually—
then they explode. Others feel competitive, having to build a higher tower
or a better Lego structure than their child. Others feel helpless, afraid to
wrestle, for example, for fear of getting hurt, or feeling awkward, as if their
playing muscles had gotten flabby from lack of use. Children need us to
make a big effort to overcome all of these feelings and play the games they
want to play, the way they want to play them. If there are adults who can
play with children all day without having any of these feelings, I haven't
met them yet.
Chapter fifteen will go into detail about releasing these feelings, and
other chapters will show how to play well in the meantime, but the brief
solution is this: Talk with other parents honestly about these feelings. Talk
about what your childhood was like, when you were the age your child is
now. Take time for yourself to get recharged as a parent so you can have
energy to play with your children without your own emotions getting in the
way. And last, give yourself some credit: This is hard work and we all get
bored, exasperated, and angry at times.
Before leaving the topic of adults and play, let's take a closer look at two
groups that tend to be shoved off to the side when it comes to children's
growth and development: fathers and nonparents.

 OceanofPDF.com

 —I CALL IT FATHERING—

In the words of John Updike, who often writes about the alienation of
husbands and fathers, “If men do not keep on speaking terms with children,
they cease to be men, and become merely machines for eating and for
earning money.” Obviously Updike was making an understatement;
fathering takes more than just being on speaking terms with our children.
But he captures the way our society pulls fathers away from the center of
their families. And for what? To be cogs in the economic machine. The
nurturing abilities of fathers are seldom acknowledged, and even more
rarely encouraged.
Fathers often feel marginalized within families—pushed out of the
middle of family life and over to the fringes—assigned by themselves or
others to a narrow range of roles that may or may not include playing. The
title of this section, “I Call It Fathering,” comes from a conversation I had
with my mother when my daughter was a newborn. My wife was out and I
was home alone with Emma when my mother called. She said, “Oh, so
you're baby-sitting?” As politely as I could manage, I answered, “I call it
fathering.” She realized immediately what she had said and apologized. I
realized that when she was a child, and again as a mother of young children,
fathers' active involvement with their infants was so minimal that it could
fairly be called baby-sitting. Given this history, it is no wonder that many
fathers feel as if they are sitting out the game on the sidelines. Many books
on parenting reinforce this separation of the father from the family, saying,
for example, that the most important thing a father can do for his child is to
love and support the mother.
Fathers are parents and they are men; unfortunately, they get much more
training in being a man than in being a parent. Some of that masculinity
training actually gets in the way of fatherhood, especially with connecting
playfully or on a deep emotional level. Untrained in nurturing, men feel
helpless. And most men hate to feel helpless.

 Once, when my daughter was a baby and my parents came to visit, my
father was holding her when she started to cry. She had just eaten and
wasn't wet, so when he started to give her back to me, I said, “There's
nothing I would do that you aren't doing.” He was amazed. He had always
thought there was some mysterious thing you do when a baby cries,
something he didn't know how to do. My father is not alone in believing
there's a mystery to parenthood; even men of my generation are confused
about their role. One of the best developments of the last ten years or so is
the greater participation of fathers in the nuts and bolts of child care. When
my daughter was in kindergarten, there were three of us in one classroom
who were at-home dads.3 Many of the other fathers in the class were very
involved in school and at home. Still, all working parents, but especially
fathers, have trouble reconnecting with the world of the family after work.
Feminist authors have decried “the second shift,”4 the way working mothers
come home to do the housework and child care, even in most two-parent,
two-income homes. They are right: this is an unfair burden on women, but
it is also a disaster for men, to be left out of the loop of day-to-day
parenting.
My friend Michael and I started a fathers' group when our children were
a few months old. At first we would hang out with our babies and talk, then
we started chasing after our toddlers, and then we watched our preschoolers
play while we once again got a chance to talk. I recommend a group like
this to every father. When the children were infants, many of the fathers
would leap up to race home with the babies as soon as they started to cry.
They thought they had to get them to their mothers to nurse. I had to wean
the fathers off this, if you will excuse the pun, and explain that babies cry
for many other reasons besides hunger (most of these babies had nursed
right before the group anyway). And, even more important, the fathers were
missing out on a great joy of fathering: holding a crying baby as he or she
releases all those feelings—the only way a baby knows how to talk—and
then settles down in our arms. These men had all held their babies more in
the first few months than their own fathers had held them their whole lives,
but they still couldn't stand to hold a crying baby.
At the other extreme, some fathers completely disconnect from their
families, perhaps breaking off contact and never realizing the hole they left

 behind. They may stay, but remain emotionally distant, not playing unless
they feel like it, not really connecting. Real fathering takes a commitment to
the everydayness of parenting. Ironically, some men experience this
everydayness only after a divorce. They become part-time fathers, but for
the first time they must do every aspect of parenting on the days when they
actually have their children. Men tend not to believe that they are loved or
valued; we are prone to feeling replaceable, interchangeable. I have listened
with sadness to so many men who are shocked when they discover, years
later, that their families really wanted and needed them. The children, once
grown, are themselves shocked to realize that their fathers would have
loved to have been close to them, but didn't know how, or didn't feel they
had the time or energy.
On the other hand, fathers have always been children's main playmates
for rough-and-tumble play. Rough-and-tumble play with Dad has been
found over and over to be good for children, as long as it isn't too rough.
For example, boys who wrestle around with their dads get along better with
other children. Dads are famous for jazzing things up, throwing babies in
the air, engaging in special-occasion play. These activities are great, and
children need this kind of play. But fathers and children need the ordinary,
everyday interactions, too.
Fathers, and men more generally, have the potential to make an
enormous, positive difference in the lives of children. Children need the
traditional strengths of fathers, namely roughhousing and other forms of
physical play. They also need for men to expand their repertoires—to
cuddle, comfort, and play dress up. Why is catch the prototype father-son
game? I think it's because playing catch is about bridging a distance, and
distance is what boys and men struggle against. As more and more men
choose closeness over distance, fathering won't have to have a separate
section in books about parenting.
OceanofPDF.com

 —A SPECIAL NOTE ABOUT NONPARENTS—

If fathers are marginalized—outsiders to the world of children's play
and development—nonparents are often marginalized even more. Mothers
are supposed to do everything and be everything, with little or no support.
But nonparents play a unique role in the lives of children. Did you have a
favorite uncle, or friend of the family, who would get down on the floor and
play Monopoly with you, or show you card tricks? An aunt who took you to
tea when you were a preteen and were desperate to be treated like a grownup?
Many of the examples in this book involve parents with their children,
but the principles apply equally well to friends, baby-sitters, grandparents,
teachers, play therapists, and so on. In fact, many of these games and
activities are especially suited to adults who are not parents. Parents and
children often get stuck at an impasse with each other, which makes
playtime less than fun. Soon one or both of them avoids playing altogether.
Other adults can often intervene in these situations to “unstick” the play and
get things going again. One thing I do frequently in my work with families
is make a connection with the child through play, and then invite the parents
in, coaching them on connecting with their child and making the most of
the playtime. I think the key factor in this work is not my special expertise
as a psychologist, but my presence as an outside adult who uses play as a
bridge to reconnection.
When my daughter was very young, for example, my wife and I were a
bit uncomfortable with too much mess. We didn't even realize this until our
friend Tina spent some time alone with Emma. We came home to find her
delightedly playing in the soup, with a bowl of it dumped over her head and
pools of it on the counter. It took someone who was not hung up on mess to
offer her this type of play.
Not that playing is always easy for nonparents. For the same reasons that
parents have a hard time playing, it can be awfully hard for nonparents, too.
Not having children of their own, they may have more energy and more

 patience for the spots where parents and children butt heads. On the other
hand, they may be less used to the daily fact of spending lots of time with
children, or they may be confused about their role. As parents, we need to
remind these adult friends how special and important they are to our
children.
Because our society doesn't take play very seriously, we don't pay our
play professionals very well. Day-care providers, camp counselors, afterschool program teachers, recreation department workers, and so on are paid
absurdly low wages given the important work they do and how well they
usually do it. They are often treated more as baby-sitters than as experts on
children and play. Some countries have a tradition of “play leaders,” welltrained and well-paid adults who supervise adventure playgrounds, modeled
after a Danish playground in the 1940s that was basically a junkyard where
children could build forts and tree houses, light fires, and cook and play.
“Effective play leaders need to possess technical expertise and creative
curiosity, knowledge of children, a sense of humor, leadership capability,
and community involvement skills…. They need to know the basic
principle of affirming children's play.”5 Sadly, these types of playgrounds
never became popular here, probably because they were considered ugly
and unsafe.
One last story about nonparents: I knew a couple who lived on a street
with lots of children but who didn't have any themselves. Their porch and
yard became a congregating point for the children in the neighborhood,
mainly because the husband was so playful. One time the wife asked
everyone if they wanted lemonade, and after she went in to make it, one of
the children said to her husband, “Your mom is really nice.” Nonparents,
even if they are recognized as being adults, can be accepted as “one of the
gang” in a way that parents generally can't. And children benefit from a
thoughtful, respectful adult who can be seen as an ally rather than as the
enemy.
OceanofPDF.com

 —TUNING IN TO YOUR CHILD—

In 1952, a group of researchers was studying primate behavior by
closely observing a colony of Japanese macaques. To supplement the
monkeys' diet, the scientists tossed sweet potatoes onto the beach. J. Gary
Bernhard writes about these monkeys in his book Primates in the
Classroom.6 The monkeys loved the sweet potatoes, but they didn't like the
sand on them. A young female of the group discovered the idea of washing
them in the sea. Since monkeys don't have schools or formal education, the
researchers were interested in how this knowledge would spread through
the colony. The first to learn was this monkey's mother. Bernhard quotes
one of the observers: “This is understandable, since practically the only
adult animal to be interested in the behavior of a one-and-one-half-year-old
female is her mother.”
The breakthrough next passed from the mother to her other offspring, the
original monkey's siblings, because these monkeys all paid close attention
to their mother. It passed then from these older siblings to their peers. These
older juvenile monkeys spent most of their time playing as a group, and part
of play is watching your playmates to see what they are doing. The mothers
of these playmates learned next, by watching them, and then the playmates'
siblings. Out of a large colony, all but thirteen (who were all—surprise!—
adult males) eventually learned the sweet-potato-washing trick. Bernhard
says, “The adult males were not resistant to the idea on principle; they
simply did not notice what was going on in a way that would affect their
behavior.” They had “more important” things to pay attention to, so they
kept on having to eat sandy sweet potatoes. The young monkey who started
the trend became known as the Genius Monkey after she also figured out
how to separate grain from chaff by tossing it in the water, where the chaff
sank and the grain floated. That knowledge spread by the same pattern
through the colony.
This story can be read as a fable about the importance of adults “tuning
in” to children. We often stop paying close attention to children, especially

 once they do not require our constant care. After all, like the adult male
macaques, we have more important things to think about. Children need
time alone and on their own; they need to develop independence. But they
also need someone to tune in to their feelings and their discoveries. They
probably aren't inventing new ways to wash food, though, so what exactly
are we supposed to tune in to?
The first thing to notice is what children need. Do they need help figuring
something out? Are they too sleepy or hungry to think clearly? Do two
children need a break from each other for a while? Do they need to be
outside where they can be louder and wilder? Maybe they need more
attention. I'm always amazed when adults say that children “just did that to
get attention.” Naturally children who need attention will do all kinds of
things to try to get it. Why not just give it to them?
When human children are overlooked, the consequences are more severe
than having to eat sandy sweet potatoes. Being overlooked in this way
causes loneliness, and being completely overlooked can cause the most
severe forms of mental illness. A strange and wonderful book called The
Singing Creek Where the Willows Grow: The Mystical Nature Diary of Opal
Whiteley7 is an example. Opal Whiteley was a childhood genius who, at age
nine, wrote an amazing diary about her remarkable love for nature.
However, she spent her last forty years in an asylum in England. No one
recognized her genius, and indeed, her parents barely acknowledged her
existence except to scold her. She tells heartbreaking stories of being
ignored, misunderstood, and beaten, all because no one thought to ask her
what she was thinking. It turns out that what she was thinking was
altogether extraordinary.
My friends Laurie and David, a single mother and her ten-year-old son,
have for years been playing what they call the lava game. In the lava game
they wrestle on the bed, pretending that the floor is covered with molten
lava. The goal of the game is to stay safely on the bed instead of falling into
the lava. When Laurie told me about this game, I was struck by one thing
she said: “Sometimes we rescue each other and sometimes we push each
other in.” When I asked her more about it, I could see that they used this
game to address important themes in David's life, such as loss, danger,

 rescue, and aggression. Without thinking much about it, the two of them
adjust the game to the prevailing emotions of the moment. That's tuning in.
Remember those science-fiction stories in which there is some device
that instantly translates all the languages in the world (or the universe) into
English? That's a good metaphor for tuning in to what's really going on with
children. I call it the universal translator. You take any troubling or
annoying or infuriating message from the child, whether it is in words or
behavior, and you translate it in your head into something that you can deal
with more effectively. For Playful Parenting purposes, it is especially useful
to translate whatever you hear or see into the language of closeness and
isolation, confidence and powerlessness. Here are some examples:
The original version: Whenever he walks into the after-school program, a
six-year-old boy hits his favorite teacher and then runs under the table.
The translation: “I want to get close to you, but closeness is scary for me.
Besides, I'm angry and you probably hate angry kids, so I'll hate you first.”
The thoughtful response: “You know, I wonder if you hit me and then run
under the table because you kind of want to get close to me, but you're kind
of not sure. How about if we shake hands or give each other the high five
whenever you come into the room?”
The original version: “This homework is stupid.”
The translation: “I'm frustrated because I haven't mastered
fractions yet. Can you help me?”
The thoughtful response: “I'd love to help you with fractions.”
The original version: “I hate you!”
The translation: “I haven't figured out yet how to be mad at
somebody I love; it's confusing.”
The thoughtful response: “I love you, and I get confused, too, when
I'm mad at somebody I love.”
Another time to try to translate in this fashion is when children's behavior
just doesn't seem to make sense. In order to find the sense, we have to tune
in carefully. In a seminar for after-school teachers, Frank brought up a
difficulty he was having. He has an artificial eye, and many of the children

 ask him about it. He reported that he has no trouble with this, and he gave
great examples of talking about it at just the right level for children of
different ages, from kindergartners up to fourth-graders. The difficulty was
that many of these children would keep asking him about it over and over
and over. At first he would go through it again, assuming they had forgotten
the details of the story. But after a while it began to feel annoying and
intrusive. Besides, he didn't understand why the kids did that, and as a
veteran teacher, that was troubling to him. He was reluctant to suggest that
the kids were just being obnoxious, but I could sense that he was leaning in
that direction. From the way Frank talked about the situation, I guessed that
the children experienced a very close, warm bond with him when he told
them the story. Later, wanting to experience another shared moment with
him, they ask for the same story again. Children rarely say, “Hey, that was
great, let's do something else.” They almost always say, “Let's do that
again.” We talked about a few ways to tune in and translate what these
children might really be saying. I'll just give a couple of our ideas here:
The original version: “What happened with your eye?” (asked for fourth
time)
Translation, version 1: “Hey, Frank, remember that wonderful moment
we shared last month when you told me about your eye? I felt so good that
you answered me in such a relaxed, honest way instead of telling me it
wasn't any of my business, and I felt really close to you. Could we do that
again?”
The thoughtful response: “I already told you that story a few times, so
let's do something else fun together.”
Translation, version 2: “I have all kinds of fears and worries and
anxieties about people getting sick or getting hurt, either me or people I
care about. It's hard to talk about these things. I don't like to let on that I'm
scared, and I don't want anyone to think I'm being silly to worry about it. So
instead of bringing up my worries directly, I'm going to ask you about your
eye again. You see, when you talked to me about your eye, I could tell that
you were someone who is calm and relaxed about this topic.”
The thoughtful response: “I see you're real interested in my eye. Since
you keep asking me to tell you about it, I'm guessing maybe you have some

 other questions or thoughts that we haven't ever had a chance to talk about.”
Tuning in does not mean questioning our children about every little detail
of their lives. Instead, tell an interesting story from your day; they might
respond with a story of their own. Another mistake we make (I catch myself
doing this frequently) is cutting them off when they are talking about
“unimportant” things, or when they are chattering away about nothing, or
when they are repeating themselves. Then, later, we expect them to tell us
what we want to hear. That's not fair. We have to listen patiently to their
way of telling things, even when it is excruciatingly dull to us, if we want
them to get around to telling us the good stuff. Understandably, they want to
know that we are really listening and aren't going to interrupt them or scold
them, before they are going to share anything important with us.
–
The heartfelt connection we all yearn for is locked away within our
everyday routine as parents, teachers, and friends. But human connections
are always changing, flowing from connection to disconnection to
reconnection. Playful Parenting can be a guide through these rapid changes.
When we join children in their world of play, we unlock the door to their
inner lives and meet them heart to heart.
OceanofPDF.com

 CHAPTER 3

OceanofPDF.com

 ESTABLISH A
CONNECTION
Now stop!” Max said and sent the wild things off to bed without
their supper. And Max the king of all wild things was lonely and
wanted to be where someone loved him best of all.
—MAURICE SENDAK,
Where the Wild Things Are

In Maurice Sendak's Where the Wild Things Are, young Max's mother
sends him to bed without his supper for “making mischief of one kind and
another” and behaving like a “wild thing.” Max imagines his bedroom as a
fantasy land of wild things who make him their king. After a while, though,
Max becomes lonely and wants to return to the place “where someone
loved him best of all.” Sailing home, he finds himself back in his room
where a warm supper is waiting for him—the sign that all his mischief is
forgiven and the connection with his mother is reestablished.
This story has endured for two generations because children and parents
alike are moved by the full circle of human connection: the child violates
the parent's rules, is punished, then uses fantasy to play out his feelings—
confident in the knowledge that he can return home to his mother's love. In
Where the Wild Things Are, we don't actually see the reunion of Max and
his mother; we just see the warm supper and imagine the rest. That's fine for
a children's book, but I think adults need a bit more concrete explanation of
how actually to go about this complicated business of connecting and
reconnecting.
OceanofPDF.com

 —CONNECTION, DISCONNECTION,
AND RECONNECTION—

The drama of connection, disconnection, and reconnection is repeated
constantly throughout infancy and childhood. We spend the first nine
months directly connected to our mother, sharing her blood and oxygen
supply. Then we have to give up all that warm connection so we can have a
life of our own. As soon as we come out into the cold air and bright lights,
we immediately try to reconnect with our mother for warmth and touch and
food. After that, we're looking around again, checking out what else there is
in the world.
Connection is easy to recognize but hard to define—perhaps because we
experience it in so many different forms at different stages of our lives.
Between infants and their primary attachment figures, this bond is
sometimes called eye-love,1 that deep gaze into each other's eyes, that free
flow of emotions, that profound sense of belonging here and belonging
together, almost melting into one being. Throughout childhood,
adolescence, and adulthood, we are continually connecting, disconnecting,
and reconnecting with parents, siblings, friends, and spouses. Later we
follow this same pattern with our own children. In between is the famous
stage of “leave me alone but first drive me to my friend's house.”
If all goes well, the eye-love between infants and parents is replaced by a
less blissful, but still solid, connection. You and your child are able to talk
or play or hang out easily together, enjoying each other, relatively in tune.
These moments can be quiet times, like just before falling asleep, or active
playtimes. The next level is a more casual connection, an unspoken bond
that may be noticed only when it's gone, replaced by conflict or distance.
At the extreme are the most alienated types of disconnection.
Disconnection can be a nightmare of painful isolation, withdrawal, and
lashing out. I learned the most about disconnection when I worked with
men in and out of prison for violent crimes, but even normal, healthy

 children have moments when they lose that thread of connection. They
retreat into towers of isolation when they feel lonely, afraid, or
overwhelmed. We may not even know that they feel disconnected, since
children rarely come up to us and say, “I feel isolated.” When we ask why
they are bouncing off the walls, they don't say, “Because I'm lonely.”
When everything is going smoothly, Playful Parenting is about having
fun together. The rest of the time, Playful Parenting is all about drawing
children out of their isolation. Play is children's natural way of recovering
from their daily emotional upheavals, so the more fluent we can become in
the language of our child's play, the better we can help them complete the
circle of reconnection. Reconnecting can be as simple as a baby and mother
looking fondly at each other after an outburst of tears has subsided, or a hug
after a long day of school, or shaking hands to seal the deal after tough
negotiations over a new bedtime. Reconnection might require a bit of rough
and tumble, or getting on the floor at children's level, or spending time
doing what they most like to do. In some cases family therapy or play
therapy may be needed, if the obstacles to connecting as a family are too
big.
OceanofPDF.com

 —FILLING MY CUP: ATTACHMENT
AND THE DRIVE TO RECONNECT—

Child psychologists talk about attachment theory all the time, but it still
isn't well understood by parents.2 To help explain attachment, I like to use
the metaphor of filling and refilling a cup. The primary caregiver is a child's
reservoir, a place to start from and return to, in between explorations. The
child's need for attachment with them is like a cup that is emptied by being
hungry, tired, lonely, or hurt. The cup is refilled by being loved, fed,
comforted, and nurtured. Besides food, warmth, and loving physical
contact, a caregiver's refilling includes soothing when the child is upset, and
playing and talking when he or she is happy. Mirroring is a simple game in
which the baby's cup is filled by reflecting back his facial expressions,
smiles, noises, and feelings. As babies grow, their explorations take them
further and further a field, but those whose cups have been consistently
filled always carry a strong sense of security within them. They are securely
attached.
Children who are not securely attached, on the other hand, tend to be
either anxious and clingy, or withdrawn and shut down. They may not feel
safe, even with the people closest to them, or they may be unable to venture
out confidently. They might appear adventurous, but insecurely attached
children are more likely to be reckless than truly adventurous. Their cup is
empty, or nearly empty.
Between return visits for refills, children with a secure attachment can
soothe themselves, can handle their emotions, pay attention, connect well
with peers, and feel good about themselves and the world. Parents are often
quite confused when their toddler bursts into tears at pick-up time, and the
day-care provider says, “She's been great all day; I don't know why she's
crying.” Yet this behavior is actually a sign of secure attachment. When
they are with strangers or day-care providers, securely attached children

 “save up” their bad feelings for when they reunite with their primary
attachment figure. (Gee, thanks!)
The infant whose cup is filled to overflowing with affection, security, and
attention is lucky indeed. Little upsets may spill some out, a long hard day
may drain the cup nearly empty, but the caregiver is always there for a
refill. As children get older, just thinking about the caregiver can refill the
cup. In fact, securely attached children can get their cup refilled from
friendships, from having fun, or from learning something new and
interesting in school.
Of course, no one escapes childhood with a perfect attachment history.
We all had moments, or even long periods, of frustration and unmet needs.
We sometimes wondered where our next refill might be coming from. Our
cups stayed empty, or nearly empty, for too long, and we weren't always
sure how to get them filled again.
I find it very helpful to look at children's behavior in terms of how they
deal with their cups, especially when they are approaching empty. When
children are bouncing off the walls, I think of them as racing around trying
desperately to get a refill. Instead, they end up sloshing out the little they
have left in their cups. Other children demand constant topping off, coming
to adults for the tiniest thing—to repeatedly tattle on their playmates, for
example. If their cups aren't totally full, they go into a panic. Occasionally,
children will clearly need a refill but won't be able to get it. They lock the
cap on their cups so they won't lose the little that is left, but then they can't
get a refill very easily. Lacking confidence in the refilling process, they
might refuse a hug, or refuse to go to bed, or refuse to sit and eat dinner.
Another group is not able to sit still for a refill; being near empty makes
them antsy, but being antsy makes getting a refill even less likely.
One behavior that aggravates adults is when children steal (by force or by
wits) from other people's cups. They might do this by actually stealing
another child's belongings, by hitting, by bossing others around, or by
conning a less-powerful child into letting them have the first turn with the
best toy. Lately, I have seen more powerful boys pressure less powerful
boys into unfair trades of Pokémon cards, and I think of it as a primitive
version of accumulation of wealth. Acting up and getting punished can be a
way of getting a bit of a refill when it seems that a free fill-up is
unavailable. I think this explains the cliché that bad attention is better than

 no attention. A nasty refill is better than none at all. Unfortunately, the
usual response, to ignore these children, makes them only more desperate
for a refill.
Children who seem to have leaky cups are annoying to adults, especially
to teachers, who have twenty or thirty other children to care for. The more
you cuddle them, the more they cling to you; the more you give, the more
they seem to need. They never get a full refill because their leaky cup can't
contain everything they get and store it up for later. The metaphor of the
leaky cup also helps explain children who try to punch you when you go to
give them a hug. Like drowning swimmers who fight off the lifeguard, they
are so disoriented by being left empty that they react aggressively when you
try to give them a refill. Meanwhile, children with a secure attachment
usually seem to have a full cup. They know how to get a refill, sometimes
by simply asking, “Can I have an apple?” or “Can I have a hug?” These
children also tend to share freely from their own cups instead of competing
for every drop. They take care of younger children and help out their
friends.
For infants and their main caregivers, attachment—the original filling of
the cup—is created inside the intimate space of gazing into each other's
eyes, cradling, rocking to sleep, and bouncing on the knee. Attachment also
includes exploring the world, first by looking around, then on hands and
knees, then on foot, on a bicycle, in a car. Most of this exploration takes
place through play. A scraped knee or an altercation with another child may
send a young person to the safety of the parent or teacher, but if they
manage to get their cup refilled, they are back at play, often with renewed
energy and enthusiasm. If the caregiver is not available, or their own
reservoir is empty (or stingily guarded), these children won't get their
needed refill. Then they may not feel safe enough to play. Or, burying those
scared, insecure feelings inside, they might strike out recklessly or
aggressively, becoming the terror of the playground.
Through the daily upsets and frustrations of life, as well as through major
illnesses, traumas, and losses, young people's cups get depleted. Their cups
empty faster when they are yelled at, hit, neglected, or harshly punished.
Children count on us for refills, and they feel hurt and betrayed when we
knock their cups over instead. This betrayal is even worse when an adult
actually cracks a child's cup, through abuse or neglect. A cup with deep

 cracks in it is hard to ever refill. This child may need a full repair, which
takes a concerted effort by parents and/or good therapy. Children whose
cups can't hold a refill are so used to being on empty that they actually look
empty—that cold hard look of “nobody home,” which signals that they may
be either deeply depressed or dangerous.
But even the most loved and well-cared-for child, with no major losses or
traumas, whose cup is in good shape, seems to have a bottomless need for
love. His or her cup may be intact, but it still needs almost constant
refilling. Therefore, the most important thing we have to offer to our
children is our ability to make them feel loved, respected, wanted, and
welcome.
Filling and refilling the child's cup is the basis of heartfelt parent-child
connections. It isn't something that happens once, but over and over again,
in countless mini-interactions over a span of years. I agree with Stanley
Greenspan that attachment isn't just about being connected, it's about
getting a big kick out of being alive and out of interacting with other human
beings.3 So a real refill can occur only between humans—not between a
child and a television set or computer, no matter how “interactive” it may
be. Years of research have shown that the key to secure attachment is
responsiveness—a sensitive response to the child's needs by the caregiver.
Video screens can offer many useful things: entertainment, information,
even distraction from stress. But they can't make goofy faces, give hugs, or
provide a deep sense of safety and security.
OceanofPDF.com

 —PLAYING TOWARD CONNECTION—

Research into primates shows that our closest biological kin play for
many of the same reasons we do. Bonobo chimps, for example, tickle and
chase one another, tease one another, and have even been seen to play a
game that looks exactly like blindman's bluff. Even more significantly, like
humans, they play to reconnect after connection has been severed. Some
psychologists believe that many expressions of affection evolved from the
message “I could hurt you, but I am not.” Kissing means “I could be biting
you, but I am not;” caressing means “I could be hitting you, but I am not.”
Waving and shaking hands both say, “Hey, look, I don't have a weapon.” In
other words, pretend playing at aggression is a very real way to reconnect
or show affection.
For very young children, mirroring is a perfect connection game: just do
exactly what the baby or toddler does. My favorite way to get a smile from
a serious-looking baby is to match their serious expression exactly. One
toddler, the baby brother of my daughter's classmate, would sometimes
shake his leg as he sat in his stroller outside the classroom. One time I
started shaking my leg the same way, and he cracked up. He started going
faster, and I went faster. More laughing. After that, every time he saw me
he'd start shaking his leg. His mother would say, “Hey, Larry, he's doing
that leg thing again,” and I'd look over and he'd be shaking his leg like
crazy, trying to get my attention. Older kids love this game, too—in the
nature of Simon says or follow the leader—as long as you are careful that
they don't feel teased. Mirroring can create a fun moment of closeness or a
deeply felt connection.
Mirroring does not have to stop when children get older. I will often try
to stand or walk exactly like an older child, both as a way to connect with
them and as a way to “get into their shoes,” especially if they don't talk
much. It's important to make sure the child does not feel mocked, but most
of the time they are amused or even proud, like the boy at the concert whom
I described in the first chapter. He started out too timid to dance, but with a

 little mirroring ended up leading the dance rather than feeling too shy to
jump in.
Even abstract concepts like cause and effect are learned by babies
through play and close relationships. There's a game in which the baby
gurgles, the parent repeats the noise, and the baby smiles. In the “advanced
gurgle” stage, the baby gurgles, the parent gurgles, the baby gurgles,
everybody smiles. Before a baby can pull the string on a toy in his crib, he
pulls at his mother's and father's heartstrings—the first building block of
play.4
The ultimate connecting game for babies is peekaboo. Peekaboo not only
builds closeness, it plays with the very idea of closeness in a dramatic way
—now you see me, now you don't, now I'm back. Peekaboo reflects the
delicate balance of connection and loss of connection, presence and
absence. If you're old enough to remember the guy with all the spinning
plates on The Ed Sullivan Show, you know that a precarious balance can be
immensely entertaining. It's not quite so much fun for us as for our baby,
because we know that we are still there, even when we're hiding behind the
blanket. But baby is just figuring that out. We know that baby is there even
though we ask, over and over again, “Where's baby? Where did baby go?”
And we're not really surprised when we exclaim, “There she is! There's
baby!” But baby is surprised, at least a little, each time. Eventually, the
surprise gives way to delighted collusion, like six-year-olds who like to
sustain the idea of the tooth fairy even if they know it's their mom or dad
fiddling around under the pillow with the loose change.
In peekaboo, the baby can symbolically lose the connection and then
quickly regain it. If you experiment with the time it takes to say peekaboo,
from half a second, say, to two or three seconds, you can find exactly the
length of time that brings the most giggles. Too short and there's no
mystery; too long and it's too scary; and there you have the essence of the
human romance with connection and disconnection and reconnection.
OceanofPDF.com

 —THE END OF BLISSFUL EYE GAZING—

Mirroring, cuddling, talking, and singing to babies, showing them the
world in child-size pieces—these are the prototypes of play, the forerunners
of all the fun times that children and parents will have together, from hideand-seek to late-night talks to hikes in the woods. Luckily, babies can get us
to smile just by lying there. As psychologist John Briere says: “Babies emit
cuteness so that adults will emit smoochums.” In fact, babies who won't or
can't connect on this level are generally identified early, and perhaps
diagnosed as having autism or a related disorder.
Sadly, when older children don't connect, it often goes unnoticed. For
some reason, after the initial bonding stage between infant and parents,
distance and awkwardness set in. Adults seldom play with older children
with as much freedom and ease as they did during those early games of
peekaboo. Not many parents have experienced that profound bliss of deep,
loving eye gazing with a child over age two. Not many even know it's
possible to regain. It's as if we don't really expect those close connections to
last. When I encourage parents to engage their children age three, or six, or
even older, in soulful eye contact, they usually start out quite skeptical, but
if they persist through the initial rejections, and get to that deeper level of
closeness, they find it to be one of the most rewarding exercises.
Fortunately, when the disconnection is not severe, children give us many
opportunities to reestablish the connection. The problem is, we often
misread these invitations. I blush to think of all the times I have pushed my
daughter away when she wanted to cuddle, because I was busy, or I thought
she should be doing her homework, or I felt annoyed by her demands for
attention. Then other times I ask her how school is, and it's like pulling
teeth. I don't always put two and two together. If I don't connect on her
terms, why should she connect on mine?
Sometimes the adult and the child figure out the connection business
together, by trial and error. My nine-year-old nephew doesn't talk a lot,
especially about what is on his mind or what may be bothering him. I

 always used to try to cajole him into talking, by begging and pleading or by
joking with him about it. That was fun, but it didn't get him to say much.
Then one time on a family vacation I just sat with him. It was early in the
morning, and we were the only ones up. I held out my arms and he climbed
onto my lap and sat there. Neither of us said a word for more than half an
hour. I usually hate long silences and hate sitting around “doing nothing,”
but this wasn't boring. We were truly close. When everyone else came down
for breakfast, I said, “Great talking to you.” We both laughed, but I meant
it. With no pressure to communicate my way—using words—we were able
to connect just fine.
OceanofPDF.com

 —FINDING CONNECTION
EVERYWHERE: THE LOVE GUN—

Once I realized how important connection is, I started seeing it
everywhere, even in the most unlikely places, like down the barrel of a
squirt gun. One of my daughter's friends came over to play one day. He was
six. He quickly found the only gun in the house, a squirt gun, and aimed it
at my face. He had “the look,” perfected from watching movies and TV, the
look that says, “I've got a gun, and you don't.”
Fortunately, I knew the squirt gun was empty, so I had a little time to
think while he was taking aim and waiting to see what my reaction would
be. I remembered all my conversations with parents about how much young
boys love to play with guns, and what (if anything) can or should be done
about it. One thing I knew was the importance of making a connection with
these boys, to insert some connection into the play, no matter how
aggressive or solitary the play appears to be, because boys are especially
prone to feeling isolated. And, of course, their aggressive play tends to
isolate them more.
So, thinking all those things (in the space of about two seconds), I said,
“Hey, you found the love gun.” He hesitated a little, thrown off by my
response. He even looked at the gun in a puzzled way, shocked that this
weapon of destruction might have anything to do with love. I said, “Oh,
yeah, when I get shot with that gun, I just have to love the person who shot
me.” And I opened up my arms wide and took a step toward him with a big,
goofy, lovestruck grin on my face.
He fired the gun once, squealed in delight, threw the gun to the floor, and
ran out of the room laughing. I chased him and hugged him when I caught
him, hamming it up about how much I loved him. He was laughing and
laughing. My daughter picked up the gun then and shot me, and I left him to
chase after her, putting my hand to my heart and making up bad poetry
about my lifelong devotion to her. For at least a half hour, the two of them

 took turns shooting me, running away, saying, “Yuck, go away, stop loving
me,” and giggling up a storm.
The next time this boy came to our house a few weeks later, I had
forgotten about this episode. He went straight for the gun and aimed it at
me. I said, “Don't aim that at me,” in that familiar, annoyed, grown-up
voice. He said, with that patient voice children use when they realize they
are talking to a clueless adult, “But it's the love gun.” I remembered, and we
played the game again. More giggles.
Since then I have played this game a lot, both with gun-toting boys and
when children's play turns to kicking, punching, biting, or spitting. “You got
me with a love kick, now I have to hug you.” Sometimes they'll say, “No,
this is a hate gun.” I just say, “Oh, it must be broken because it's making me
love you.”
Of course, this approach is only for aggressive play, not for situations
when children want to directly express their feelings of anger or frustration.
In these cases, it is very important to hear them out, to allow the feelings to
come out, rather than try to cheer them up or cajole them out of feeling bad.
This disclaimer is especially true for girls, who are given so many messages
not to be angry. I watch carefully to make sure the child is not feeling
humiliated by my response to their play. I also make sure that I don't get
hurt, but I generally do that by holding them close rather than by sending
them away. Whether playing or listening or holding, the key is to push for a
close and meaningful connection.
The game of love gun has infinite variations: If they barricade themselves
in a room, I slip love notes under the door and beg and plead to be allowed
in. If they laugh and start sending messages back, I know I'm on the right
track. If they come at me with both arms swinging, I say, “Oh, you want to
dance, I'd love to dance,” and I take both their hands and start dancing and
singing. It seems like a cliché to say that all of those behaviors adults find
so annoying or threatening are just attempts to make a human connection,
but this game shows how true it is.
In fact, I couldn't begin to list all the children's games that are about
connection. Chase, tag, follow the leader, and hide-and-seek are obvious
examples. Play these games with your child—you'll not only have fun,
you'll notice an improvement in your relationship with them. One of my
favorites is a game I call you'll never get away. I say, “You'll never be able

 to get away from me, never in a million years!” The child comes over to
check this out. I hold on to them, and after a little struggle I let them escape.
Very simple. To make it more interesting, I pretend not to notice for a
minute that they have escaped: “You see, you'll never get away…. Hey, how
did you do that?” If they like it (and I have had success with this game with
two-year-olds up to eleven-year-olds), I keep it up, saying, “Okay, you think
you're so strong. This time I will use the famous Franklinheimer Maneuver;
no one has ever gotten out of that,” or something equally goofy, and they
manage to get out again. With some children, I gradually increase the
resistance so they must increase the effort it takes them to get away—they
seem to thrive on the growing challenge. If they don't like to be held, I
pretend to hold them with my “psychic powers” and dare them to try to
escape.
A mother in a parenting class reported this dialogue she had with her son
after a class we had on connecting through play:
“We need to do some connecting. How do you want to connect?”
“What do you mean?”
“Well, we seem to be disconnected. You want to be wild when I want to
rest; you want my attention when I have to make dinner; you want to go
watch TV when I want to spend time with you. Stuff like that.”
“So what are we supposed to do about it?”
“ We could have a cuddle, or play a game together, or wrestle, or
something….”
“Can I jump on your bed?”
“Sure, let's make it a game.”
“Okay, how about if I jump on the bed and you have to try to catch me.”
They proceeded to have a very fun, giggly playtime together, with lots of
hugs and cuddles (this was a boy who ordinarily avoided hugs from his
mom like the plague). This reflects one of my basic rules of Playful
Parenting: It works best when the adult provides the insistence on
connecting, but the child actually sets the terms of how the two are going to
connect. Notice how this mother pointed out the need to connect but didn't
impose any particular way. Instead she listed some vague possibilities, just
to explain the concept, until her son jumped in with an idea.
OceanofPDF.com

 —UNLOCKING THE TOWER OF ISOLATION—

I was getting ready to leave a boy's house after a great first session of
play therapy, when he called after me, “You're a stinker.” I came back
around the corner and he stepped back, worried that I would scold him. I
whispered to him, “Shhh, don't tell anyone my secret name—only my
closest friends call me Stinker.” He replied, as expected, “Mommy! Larry's
secret name is Stinker!” I said, “Hey, you gave away my secret name,
waaah!” He laughed, then got suddenly serious: “You're a stinker, and I hate
you.”
By this time I had figured out that he just wanted me to stay longer. I've
noticed that, for some reason, most people don't recognize “You're a
stinker” as a child's version of an engraved invitation to be close. It really
means, “I like you.” I guess it's the same language junior-high boys use to
show they like a girl. So I said, “Oh, I had a great time playing with you,
too, and I really like you, too. It's hard to say good-bye.” He thought about
this for a moment, then said, in a very relaxed tone of voice, “Could we just
do the sock game one more time?” I said that we could. After we played
that game again, he proudly walked me out to my car and waved wildly as I
pulled out, saying to his mother, “He's coming back again next week.” The
key to unlocking the tower was just translating his insult into a request for
some connection.
In this next story, there was literally a locked door between the child and
myself, but nevertheless a connection was reestablished. I was starting a
play-therapy session with Gerry at his house. As soon as we started playing,
he ran into his room, closed the door, and locked it. Now a lot of people
would think that's the end. How can you keep playing after that? You can
either force the door open, or you can leave. In Playful Parenting, however,
there is a third option. Keep inviting the child to connect, but offer to do it
their way, on their terms. In this case, after a few minutes of confusion and
futile knocking on the door, I wrote love notes and passed them under the
door. Gerry couldn't read yet, so I would write them and then read them out

 loud to him. I would say, “I love you; please come out and play,” and stick
it under the door. He'd rip it up and throw it back under the door at me. The
one word he could write was “Boo,” so he'd write “Boo” on a piece of
paper and slip it out; then I'd scream “Aaagh” and act real scared. Then I'd
come back and write a new note, again reading it out loud as I slipped it
under the door: “I'm scared, but nothing can keep me away from you.” This
was a very fun game, but the emotional issues involved ran deep.
I had been asked to come play with Gerry because he was refusing to go
to his grandmother's. His parents were planning to leave him with her for a
few days so they could have more time to pack for an upcoming move. His
little sister, though, was going to stay with the parents because she was still
nursing. Obviously this stirred up a cauldronful of feelings in him: sibling
rivalry, unfairness, the upcoming transition of the move, being left behind,
and so on. Let me stress that this was a happy, well-loved child. He loved
his grandmother and usually couldn't wait to go visit her. His feelings were
strong but totally normal.
When he first locked himself in his room, Gerry insisted that he was not
going to his grandmother's and I couldn't make him. And besides he hated
me and I was stupid. After a half hour of note passing, Gerry called through
the door, “Okay, I'll come out, but no hugging.” Since I had never
mentioned anything about hugging, I took this as my cue, and implored,
“Oh, please, just one little tiny hug.” He giggled and ended up spending the
last fifteen minutes of my visit cuddling in my lap.
I told him I had to leave, but I'd see him after he came back from his
grandmother's. He yelled, “I'm not going!” I said, “Oh no, does this mean
we have to do the whole door thing again?” We both laughed. By the time I
got home, a few minutes later, his mother had left a message on my
answering machine. As soon as I left the house, Gerry started planning his
visit to his grandmother's. He began to pack and made a list of toys he
would bring. His cup of attachment, emptied by the strain of feeling as if he
were going to be left behind by his parents, was filled by a round of play
that addressed this theme directly.
Reconnection takes persistence. One of my nieces and I have a little
ritual when I see her. I say hi to her, and she ignores me. I keep saying hi, in
a relaxed and cheerful tone, until she says hi back. We then laugh about
how many times it took. Sometimes I'll try saying it in funny voices. I insist

 on contact, but it is a gentle insistence, not a harsh and punitive one. This is
a good game for us because I love her feistiness (her favorite expression last
year was “I don't want to, I don't have to!”), but I also want to make sure we
connect. Eventually, we always do, and we have a great time together. Often
by the forty-seventh “hi,” her siblings and cousins are gathered around,
wondering how long it's going to take, and everyone is giggling. Of course,
this amount of persistence can't be achieved all the time, or else with some
children you would be doing nothing else. But now and then it is important
to stick with it.
Any play can be the doorway to connection. When a child pretends to
shoot you and says “You're dead,” try falling over dead, in a dramatic death
scene, right on top of him. Grab his leg and beg him to bring you to a
doctor. If the child squirms away, go into even more dramatic death throes
that bring you right back on top (as long as the young person giggles and
enjoys the game, of course). If your daughter calls you a stupid idiot, try
being so stupid you can't tell her from a pillow, and try to take a nap on top
of her. I sometimes refer to this aspect of Playful Parenting as “it takes a
village idiot to raise a child.”
When preteens act cool, pretending you don't exist, ask them if you can
have the gum they are chewing so you can get close to them any way you
possibly can. That's guaranteed to get a rise out of them. (You don't have to
really chew it if they do hand it over, unless you are a stickler for full
authenticity.) Or start a pillow fight with them, or a wrestling match. Even
the most disconnected behavior usually leaves some window open
somewhere for connection.
If reconnecting is so great, then why is it so hard? When people
disconnect, they often have to struggle through a pile of bad feelings, like
terror or abandonment or loss, in order to restart a connection.
Reconnecting can thus be very painful emotionally, so children tend to
avoid it. Adults often shy away from reconnection for the same reasons.
The intensity of the feelings may be too much for a child, so they lock
themselves deeper in the tower of isolation. Better to be lonely than to face
directly all those tender feelings.
In the last chapter I talked about the value of tuning in to your children.
In terms of connection, tuning in to a child fills her cup, and tuning out
empties it. So even if we don't like what we see when we tune in, we still

 have to tune in first. They need to feel connected and confident before they
can make any positive changes. So once again, get down on the floor and
play what they want to play. With older children, tuning in may mean
sitting with them and listening to the music they like and watching the
movies they rent. Yuck. But do it.
OceanofPDF.com

 —WHO IS THAT HOLDING YOU? MOVING FROM
CASUAL CONNECTION TO DEEP CONNECTION—

Besides play, being close also involves many types of nonplayful
interactions between parents and children, such as comforting and holding
children when they are crying. The title of this section comes from an
ongoing series of episodes between my wife, our daughter, and myself.
When Emma was two, Anne began her internship in family medicine,
meaning that she was at the hospital all night every fourth night. This went
on for a few years. When she would come home, Anne would be totally
exhausted from working thirty-six hours; I would be tired from singleparenting, and Emma would act as if nothing had happened. She would say
hello to Anne and then go back to doing whatever she was doing before.
At first, nothing seemed amiss, but it was. It became apparent only on the
days Anne was less tired than usual and she tried to get Emma's attention
and play with her. At that point, Emma would studiously ignore and avoid
her. When Anne picked her up, she would look anywhere but into her
mother's eyes. Watching Anne try to make eye contact while Emma
squirmed around was both funny and sad. At the same time, we noticed that
Emma wanted only me to put her to bed, give her a bath, read to her, and so
on. Many times, given how tired Anne was from being up all night, we just
went along with this. Sometimes, even the next night, she wanted only me.
Slowly, we began to put the pieces together and realized that the two of
them needed some concentrated attention on reconnecting. My job, as the
relatively well-rested parent and the one whose connection hadn't been
disrupted, was to help them.
What we had was a casual connection between parent and child rather
than a deep connection.5 Children who have not been terribly traumatized
can generally go about their business fairly well for a while with only a
casual connection, and the effects of the lack of deep connection may not be
seen right away. So Emma could say hello and keep on playing happily,

 though she was, in fact, disconnected from her mom. The pain of this
disconnection was buried, and we saw what was happening only when
Anne insisted on connection.
Our first step was to have family cuddles, with my encouraging Emma to
look at Anne and notice that she was back. Often Emma would cry for a
while, and then she would seem much happier and more relaxed. At first we
thought that meant we were done, but gradually we realized that the
connection was still not fully restored. No, she'd be eager to get back to
playing, but she still wouldn't look at Anne. She had released some of her
sadness about missing her mom, enough to be able to play, but not enough
to allow a deep connection.
One time, Anne was holding Emma, who was saying she wanted me to
give her a bath and put her to bed. Emma was ignoring her mother so
blatantly that I asked, “Who is that holding you?” She said, “Daddy.” Anne
and I both said, “What?” Emma looked right at me—from Anne's lap—and
said, “Daddy's holding me,” and then gave a big smile. Anne and I looked
at each other, halfway between bewilderment and indignation, while Emma
laughed and laughed. Finally she said, “Mommy's holding me,” and put her
head on Anne's shoulder. Sigh. Over the next few months this question—
Who is that holding you?—began to run like a thread through our efforts to
reconnect. We could always tell where things stood by Emma's answer.
Sometimes just asking the question let her hold on to Anne and cry about
having missed her. Other times, she would say “Daddy” or “Nobody,” and
then look over her shoulder to see if Anne would give up, or if she'd keep
insisting on connection. When she said, “Googoohead is holding me,” we
knew we were in for some serious giggling. Whichever way it went, if we
persisted (which was hard, given how tired we adults were), it would
always end with Emma saying, “Mommy's holding me,” and looking
deeply into her eyes. Connection reestablished.
I think this interaction played out the way it did because the traditional
roles were reversed. Because Anne was the mom, she wasn't going to let
their connection slip away so easily. Because I was the dad, I knew I didn't
want to have the “honor” of always being the one to put her to bed, read to
her, change her diaper, and on and on. I started wondering how many
fathers, who come home tired after work, just say “the hell with it” when
their children push them away and resist connection. It is easy to miss the

 fact that children really do want to connect when they look as if they want
to be left alone. The child thinks, Dad cares more about work than he does
about me. Besides, I miss him so much it hurts. So I'll play it cool and make
him come after me. Dad thinks, I'm just a paycheck. The hell with this. If he
wants to play with me, he knows where to find me.
In more ordinary, everyday types of interactions, play creates an
opportunity to express love and nurturing, gently repairing the wounds of
earlier conflicts or upsets. One mother I worked with started a routine with
her daughter of tenderly putting all the Beanie Babies to bed each evening.
On days when this mother and daughter had been fussing and whining at
each other, this ritual was especially poignant and sweet, as it seemed to
relieve the tension for both of them. The mom could say things to the
stuffed animals she might not be able to say directly to the child, such as,
“We had a hard day; I hope you have sweet dreams.” The child might say to
one of them, “You've been very naughty; you have to sleep under the bed,”
allowing her mom the chance to say, “Oh, I think she feels real sorry and
she could be in bed with the others; what do you think?” There is no end to
the ways people can use play to mend a relationship that matters to them.
OceanofPDF.com

 CHAPTER 4

OceanofPDF.com

 ENCOURAGE THEIR
CONFIDENCE
“I will never give up!”
—EMMA COHEN, AGE FOUR

One day I was wrestling with my daughter when she was around four
years old. We were playing a game we had played a few times before, in
which she would try to get past me to the couch and I would try to stop her.
I tried to get her to plow through me, making contact and using her physical
strength instead of trying to trick me and sneak around the side. As we
wrestled, I added more and more resistance, making it harder and harder for
her to push past me and get to the couch. She had to use more and more of
her strength, and she was wrestling hard.
At the same time that I was trying to get her to exert her power and build
her physical confidence, I was also encouraging her. An important part of
wrestling with a young person is playing both of those roles, not getting so
caught up in the competition that you forget whose side you are on (theirs!).
I could see her beginning to get a little frustrated and starting to think about
giving up. I tried increasing my encouragement, but that didn't seem to help.
My next thought was to try to push her into a powerful position, by getting
her annoyed with me just enough to fight her hardest, while still knowing
that this game was for her, that I was on her side. I started pretending to
taunt her using an exaggerated, obnoxious voice, saying, “Why don't you
just give up? You'll never make it to the couch.”
At that she stopped wrestling, stormed out of the room, and disappeared
around the corner. I thought for sure that I had blown it; I had pushed too
hard or gone too far. Perhaps I hadn't made it clear enough that I wasn't
really teasing her, but rather egging her on in a friendly way. All those
thoughts were racing through my head as I thought about whether to chase
after her and apologize, or give her time to cool off. Before I could decide,
she came back around the corner with her fists raised triumphantly in the air
and a wide smile on her face. “I will NEVER give up,” she shouted, as she

 tackled me and used twice as much strength as she had before to try to
knock me over.
She had an easy time getting past me, because I was bowled over by her
burst in confidence. I asked her what happened, and she said, “I went to the
power room and got more power.” Later she explained that she had
pretended to put a special lotion on her that would give her more power.
Like Dumbo the elephant, who discovered that he could fly even without
his magic feather, she had discovered a self-sustaining source of confidence
and power.
For months after that day, we would both get a big laugh out of my
pretending to forget her magnificent line as she entered the room. “I will
sometimes give up?… I will kind of give up?… I will give up only if it's too
hard?… What was it?” She would throw her fists back up in the air and say
it again, radiating self-confidence, “I will never give up.” Years later, she
still returns to the power room when she faces a special challenge,
particularly physical challenges like being tired on a hike with a long way
yet to go. And when playing is hard for me—when I get bored or tired or
frustrated—I often duck into the power room myself and decide again never
to give up. Then I can go back to playing with heart.
OceanofPDF.com

 —POWER AND POWERLESSNESS—

The power room is an example of using play—in this case, wrestling—
to promote confidence. Sadly, when I look around at children, I see too little
of this quality. I see children who are scared, timid, and intimidated. They
are fearful of speaking their own minds or even thinking their own
thoughts. I also see plenty of recklessness, bravado, violence, nastiness, and
bossiness, but none of those is really self-confidence. Where is the true
power? Why is it so rare?
The answer starts with our society, which is ambivalent about power. We
seek it and admire it, but we mistrust it. We are especially ambivalent about
power in children. We applaud the “good” kind of power, like when a child
stands up for a friend, but we don't really want them to stand up to us. We
want them to be assertive, self-assured, and poised, but not abusive, bossy,
or pushy. We admire physical strength and gracefulness, courage and selfconfidence, while we punish aggression and bullying. Adding to the
confusion, mothers are often accused of letting their children have too much
power—by spoiling them and not disciplining them enough. At the same
time, empowerment is a buzzword in psychology, and all efforts are
supposed to be made to empower children.
We use the same word—power—to apply to vastly different things. To
avoid confusion, unless it is obvious, I generally use the word confidence to
refer to the positive side of power—the power to stand up for what is right,
the power to be adventurous (within safe limits), the power to know your
own inner strength, the power to achieve a goal, the power of happy play.
On the other side is powerlessness, which often looks like passivity,
inhibition, timidity, fearfulness, whining. Another type of powerlessness,
what I call pseudo-power, offers up a hollow imitation of power. This
category includes biting, hitting, threatening, bossing, stealing, intimidating,
and reckless disregard for safety. Playful Parenting helps children out of the
traps of powerlessness and pseudo-power, tipping the balance in favor of
true power, confidence, and competence.

 Fortunately, development is on our side, since most children experience
waves of the healthy kind of power as they meet the world and make it their
own. The first wave of confidence comes from the infant's power to get his
basic needs met. The baby exposes his vulnerability and love and cuteness;
the caretaker responds with food, shelter, love, and warmth. At first, infants
experience themselves as all-powerful: I cry and milk arrives at my lips. I
smile at a face, and it smiles back.
But then, frustrations and disappointments inevitably start to mount for
the infant. I cry, and nothing happens. I cry some more, and still nothing
happens. I smile, and nothing happens. I want something, and it doesn't
appear. Mom wants something different from what I want. A little of this
frustration is necessary for a child to develop, but too much leads to
powerlessness. Infants also face an enormous number of things that are out
of their control: when and how their needs are met, whether their caregivers
are happy or sad, where they go and what they see. Of course, they have
some power—they can cry or fall asleep or close their eyes or reward good
parental behavior with a smile—but they clearly don't call all the shots.
Infants learn just about everything through interaction. It has become a
cliché to say that the parent is the baby's first and best toy, but I think it is
true. Physical closeness, with lots of eye contact and an animated tone of
voice, teaches babies about the most important element of their world—
other humans. These everyday playtimes also allow the child to process the
nonstop streams of information coming in through their senses. Swinging,
rocking, and riding in the stroller teach them about gravity and motion.
Making the rattle shake and then stop, making it disappear and reappear—
these simplest magic tricks teach the baby the basic rules of the universe,
things we take for granted.
The second wave of confidence is the toddler's power to say no, to assert
herself as a separate being. If this power is respected but safely contained
(with firm, loving limits), then the growing child can assert her own identity
without hurting anyone, including herself. The toddler also continues the
infant's incredible pace of learning about the world, and making it her own.
Just watch a toddler with a busy board, or on a climbing structure, or in a
play group, and you'll see minute-by-minute strides in developing
competence and confidence.

 When parents are scared or annoyed by this growing independence and
assertiveness, they may crack down too hard, squashing the child's spirit.
One consistent finding of research into child abuse is that physical abuse
increases dramatically when children reach eighteen months to two years in
age, right when they are starting to have a will of their own. Instead of
seeing toddler willfulness as a child's healthy drive toward independence,
these parents interpret it as defiance and disrespect and so-called willful
disobedience. The response is excessive punishment or violent outbursts. If
parents don't provide any limits, and the toddler rules the roost, the child
can feel out of control, a different type of powerlessness. The middle
ground is to recognize and even enjoy the burst in independence, while
providing the safety and structure of clear limits.
The third wave of confidence is the child's power to make his or her
place in the world, including in the world of other children. Starting in
preschool and extending into adolescence, children learn to play games, to
swing on monkey bars, to make friends, to read and write. Their world
explodes with new things, new people, and new ways to feel either
powerful or powerless. For some children, winning and losing become
emotionally charged. All children experience frustration as they go through
school—whether it is the strain of mastering fractions or the anxiety of not
fitting in with the group. As adolescence approaches, young people are
sucked into the youth culture, which offers them a complex mix of
empowerment and disempowerment. They choose a style of music and
clothing that horrifies their parents, but are they truly exerting their own
power, or just slavishly following the dictates of the fashion and
entertainment industries?
Powerlessness creeps in as a result of the setbacks children experience as
they strive to feel confident and self-assured. They can't do things as well as
their older siblings or their peers, so they feel frustrated. They are criticized
and punished and given grades, so they feel judged. They are flooded with
messages about how they are supposed to behave, how they are supposed to
look, what they are supposed to buy, so they feel inadequate. The combined
effect of these feelings leads children to retreat to the fortress of
powerlessness, either down to the hidden dungeons (passivity), or up to the
battlements (aggressive pseudo-power).

 The Playful Parenting approach to confidence and powerlessness helps
children and parents at every stage of this developmental sequence. All of
these healthy aspects of power, these opportunities for competence and
confidence, can be fostered through play and playfulness. No one slides
through childhood without some feelings of frustration, helplessness, and
powerlessness. When powerlessness rears its ugly head—and it inevitably
will—Playful Parenting can help children back to confidence and
competence.
OceanofPDF.com

 —EXPERIMENTING WITH POWER:
PLAYING THE POOPYHEAD GAME—

I wish I had a nickel for every time I've been called a poopyhead. I've
been called many other names, but that one best captures the overlap
between the young child's two great loves: bathroom humor and namecalling. These are both very much related to power: the power to control
one's bodily functions and the power to hurt someone's feelings. I have
developed two simple games to play with these themes. When I am called a
poopyhead, I say, “Shhh, don't tell everybody my secret name!” Like
clockwork, they shout out, to whoever may be listening, “Larry's secret
name is Poopyhead!” I say, “Ha-ha—I was just kidding, my real secret
name is Rice Krispies Cake” (the sillier the better, since the object is to
break the tension about name-calling with some serious giggling). “Larry's
secret name is Rice Krispies Cake!” “No, no, I beg you, pleeeease don't tell
anyone!” I've played this game with some children for hours.
The other game is just as simple. The child says some word that mom or
dad doesn't want him or her to say—usually a body part or a bathroom word
or an obscenity. I say, “Well, you can say that all you want, but if you say
Bobbledyboo you're gonna be in big trouble.” “Bob-bledyboo!” “Oh, ho,
ho,” I say, “now you're in trouble.” I say this lightly, not in a mean, scary
way, as I chase the child around the room. Occasionally, an inhibited child
needs a whispered hint that it really is okay to say Bobbledyboo, that I will
just pretend to get them in trouble. Simple, huh? It always works. They not
only giggle like crazy and love the game, but they actually stop being so
obsessed with saying those other words.
These games are not simply reverse psychology. It isn't just a matter of
manipulating children's rebellion into getting them to do what you want.
The poopyhead game lets children experiment with power—the power of
words and the power to break rules. Instead of having them experiment on
other children, which always causes hurt feelings, let them try out that

 name-calling and bathroom humor on you. This helps us step out of the
power struggle and into play.
Speaking of power struggles, a man in my fathers' group told me about a
game he invented for his daughter when she was little and didn't want to
have her fingernails or toenails trimmed. My friend discovered that trying
to force her didn't work, because she would fight and squiggle around.
Either she'd get hurt or he'd be too afraid of hurting her to get near her with
the scissors. The new game was called stop and go, and it went like this:
Dad started a few feet away, holding the nail scissors. He told her that when
she said “stop,” he would stop immediately, and he wouldn't go again until
she said “go.” If she didn't say “go” after a short while, he could say it
himself, but he would still have to stop when she said “stop.” She couldn't
just say “stop-stop-stop-stop” real fast (this rule was added later, as she tried
to test the limits of the game). When she said “stop,” he would stop in his
tracks as if he were frozen, which always brought a giggle or two (already
they were way ahead, since nail-cutting had never been associated with
giggles before). When she said “go” he would inch toward her.
Eventually the nails got cut, and, even more important, they had fun.
Stopping on a dime when she said “stop” built the trust that he wouldn't
hurt her or force her. Putting her in charge of his coming forward loosened
up the whole situation. He decided when it was nail-cutting time, but she
was in charge of how fast it would be done. Parents often groan when I tell
this story, saying, “Where am I going to find the time to play a game every
time I have to cut fingernails, or change a diaper, or give a bath?” They
conveniently forget the amount of time they are already spending fighting
or pleading or being annoyed. I believe it is always worth the investment of
time up front, even if your ultimate goal is to have to spend less time on
these mundane activities. Actually, though, it can become such a fun game
that it no longer counts as a chore.
OceanofPDF.com

 —PREPARING YOUR CHILD FOR THE WORLD—

Bill Harley, a children's entertainer, said about his third-grade teacher:
Mrs. Nottingham was from the old school. She was very strict….
She taught us all sorts of things, math, spelling, reading, but what she
really taught us was, it's a cold, cruel world.1
Many parents subscribe to some version of this cold-cruel-world
philosophy, believing they have to prepare children for the hardships of life
by getting them used to it. But if life is really that difficult, then we don't
need more beatings and humiliations and losses than we will get anyway.
What children really need is to be secure and self-confident, and that comes
from being loved and well cared for. Not protected from every little bump
and bruise, but not toughened up either. Toughening people up in order to
help them face the world's dangers hasn't worked too well, as we can see
from the epidemic level of violence among boys and men, who get the coldcruel-world message relentlessly. The ones who take the message to heart
seem the most prone to violence. I still remember vividly the first time I
saw the slogan on a Vietnam-era military cap: “Kill ‘em all; let God sort
‘em out later.” I think that is the logical end point of the cold-cruel-world
training. Be prepared for that world out there where you can't trust anyone
and you're totally on your own and danger lurks behind every bush.
Of course, some people go too far the other way, trying to protect their
little angels from the world, cushioning them from every blow. That doesn't
prepare them for life either; it just creates fearfulness and timidity. We
prepare children best by both nurturing them and challenging them. My
metaphor for this combination is bricks and mortar; you can't build a strong
wall with just one or the other. Children gain an inner strength—the mortar
—from being loved and nurtured, having their needs met, knowing they are
loved no matter what. They get a different kind of confidence—the bricks—
from being challenged and playing their hardest. If they are treated with

 tenderness and respect while they overcome increasingly difficult
challenges, they are truly prepared for the world. For example, I might keep
encouraging children to try something new, like Rollerblading, but offer to
hold their hand for as long as they want me to.
A group of four-year-olds were asked if they'd rather play with playmates
or parents. Most of them chose their parents. Are you surprised? With their
parents, they said, they could win, they could be in charge. Other children
don't usually give in to make the playing field more level.2 By bossing their
mom or dad around, or beating them at basketball, they get a refill of their
attachment needs, and then they can go out and manage the more-or-less
level playing fields with peers.
The idea of preparing children for the cold, cruel world is a significant
factor in the realm of winning and losing at games. The effect is strongest in
sports, but it is also present in games like chess or checkers. Fathers tend to
take the cold-cruel-world approach more than mothers, and especially with
their sons. Many fathers insist to me that they never let their sons win,
because boys need to be prepared for competitions with peers, who won't
throw the game to them. But a grown man going full out against a child isn't
exactly fair either. What does that prepare you for? Oh yeah, the cold, cruel
world.
Take the question that I am asked over and over again, “When do I stop
letting my child beat me at checkers?” This is one of my favorite questions,
even though there isn't a simple answer. You want to accomplish so much
with a simple game of checkers. You want him to enjoy himself; you want
him to improve his skills; you want him to be a little competitive but not too
competitive; you want him to be a good sport when he wins and a good
sport when he loses; you want him to know that his peers aren't going to let
him win like you do.
In general, you start out letting them win, and then slowly play harder
and harder. But it may go back and forth for a while, and even when
children can beat you fair and square, they may still want to play by the
“special rules” now and then. Sometimes they want to win; sometimes they
want a challenge. I think the best thing is to follow their lead. You may have
switched to fair play, or maybe you've started playing medium-hard, and
then a game comes along and the child signals that he or she wants to win.

 Or maybe it's the other way around. You've been letting the child win, and
he or she starts to signal that more of a challenge is in order. Children
probably won't come right out and say it, so be alert for subtle signals, like,
“This is boring.” Or, “Did you let me win?” You can answer, “Well, I didn't
play my hardest; do you want me to?” Maybe they gloat over winning, even
though you let them win. You could say, “Should I play my hardest so you
don't win all the time?” Then see how it goes. If it goes well, over time they
will balance the enjoyment of winning—even unfairly—with the enjoyment
of a challenging match—even if they lose.
You may also need to spend some time directly on the child's feelings
about competition. Children will signal that they need special attention to
these feelings about winning, losing, and competition by being very upset
over losing a game or very obnoxious about winning. In that case, switch
gears from playing the game to playing with these themes. For example, set
up a game where they will always win, and pretend to be a ridiculous figure
of a sore loser. Or brag about how great you are, then miss every shot—
whatever helps them laugh and release that feeling of life or death over the
outcome of the game. Make up a game with a funny rule, like, “No hitting
me with this pillow,” and then act goofy when they—surprise—hit you with
it. “You cheated! Waaah!”
Kevin, age five, had just started playing soccer, and he was very excited
about it. I arrived for our play-therapy session, and he had on his shin
guards and cleats and was holding his ball, waiting to play soccer with me.
We went outside, and he marked off the goals. Before we started to play, he
said, “Be easy, I'm just a kindergartner.” I said, “Okay,” and I took my cue
from this—he didn't want too big a challenge, at least at first. He wanted to
gain confidence. So I didn't play very hard. I let him score goals and didn't
score any myself.
When I started trying a little harder on defense, he got nervous. He said,
“Freeze,” and I froze in place, while he dribbled around me and scored. I
said, in a pretend-outraged tone, “Hey, how can I defend the goal if I'm
frozen?” He said, “That's the rule, you freeze when I say so until I unfreeze
you.” Then he kicked the ball backward through the goal and said, “I get
another point if I kick it backward through the goal.” I said, “Oh, do I get
that, too?” “No, just me!” Big pretend tantrum from me: “Waaah, that's not
fair.” Big giggles from him. Eventually, he started letting me get the ball

 once in a while, but I made sure at first to be bumbling and incompetent. I
would dribble up near his goal, then pretend to be spending a lot of time
lining up my shot, bragging about how I was going to score a goal. I would
take so long that he would come and kick it away from me. I would pretend
to be surprised and upset, and he would giggle like mad. Finally, one time
he came down the field and didn't tell me to freeze, so he actually had to get
by me in order to score.
After that, I think he felt a little more confident, because instead of
looking nervous about the game, he started taunting me. He'd say “Nannynanny-boo-boo” when I had the ball and “Ha-ha-ha-ha-ha” when he scored
a goal. Children do this to each other all the time, trying to spread out their
feelings of humiliation and incompetence. Usually everyone ends up feeling
bad and spreading it around even more. Sadly, some coaches and parents
add fuel to the fire by yelling at or humiliating the children. I assume since
Kevin was not a strong player that he had either gotten this treatment or
feared getting it. When children pass on this cruel teasing to me, my
favorite response is to pretend to cry, in a very fake way, “Waaah!” Kevin
laughed a lot when I did that. We played a while longer, and he announced
the score was seventeen to three.
I played dumb. “Wait a minute, who has seventeen?”
“Me!”
“And who has three?”
“You!”
“Aw, I was afraid of that.”
Kevin called a pause in the game to take a break, shouted “Huggy!,” and
ran over to me. This was our tenth session and the first time he hugged me,
so I think it must have been because he felt so safe and confident from the
way we were playing soccer. Before that, he would always show affection
in more subtle ways, like stomping on my shoes (so I couldn't leave) or
taking my watch (so I wouldn't know it was time to go).
I think the key point of this story is that there were actually two games
going on simultaneously. One was the soccer game, and one was a
confidence-building game. The power game involved playing with the
themes that were important to him: competence and incompetence,
humiliation and self-esteem. Through this two-in-one play, he had the
chance to feel powerful and strong. He giggled away his feelings of

 inadequacy. A different child may have wanted me to play my hardest so he
or she could master the game of soccer by seriously practicing moves and
skills. That's fine, too; you just have to take your cue from the child. As I
explained to Kevin's mother after the soccer game, his rules, which tilted
the game so unfairly in his favor, gave him the chance to play through his
feelings about not being the best at soccer. At recess, being one of the leastathletic kids, he felt as if the deck was stacked against him; so, with me, he
set up the opposite situation.
Rob, at nine years old, is very different from Kevin. An excellent athlete,
he is extremely competitive and is devastated by losing. He can't handle it
at all. He wants to play goalie in soccer, but only in the first half, because he
knows he'd crumble if he were responsible for the team's loss. In terms of
children's need to fill their empty cup, Rob is in a hard spot. He loves
sports, but his cup is filled by winning and emptied by losing. He doesn't
have his cup filled just by playing. He doesn't have a cover that keeps it
from being spilled when he loses. He needs some Playful Parenting play in
order to get his cup refilled—the cup of confidence and feeling good about
himself, the cup of feeling as if he's part of a team, part of the world,
lovable and admirable, able to play his best but not devastated by losing.
I suggested to his dad that sometimes, instead of playing soccer or
basketball or whatever sport, that they play “the winning and losing game.”
This is a game where the focus is on playfully addressing the emotional
layer underneath. It can be any game at all, as long as there is playful use of
the ideas of winning and losing.
For example, flip a coin, heads or tails; if you lose, go into a
Shakespearean death scene because you lost. “Alas, my life is over
henceforth, for it hath come up tails….” If you win, announce that you are
the greatest coin-flipper in the history of the universe; do a little victory
dance, and then act real surprised when you lose the next toss. Or, if you
can't think of any way to play with those themes of winning and losing,
competence and incompetence, just say, “We're going to play the winninglosing game, so I can give you a hand with how hard it is for you.” “How
do you play that?” “I don't know, you got any ideas?” “How can I have
ideas, I don't even know what you're talking about.” “Any game where the
idea is to have fun with me losing or you losing or pretending it's real
important who wins and who loses.” They'll eventually come up with some

 great ideas. Try them out. If they don't come up with anything, say, “I lose, I
couldn't think of anything. Your prize is a cuddle,” and then give them a big
cuddle (or at least chase them around the house trying to give them one).
OceanofPDF.com

 —QUIETING THAT CRITICAL VOICE—

Unfortunately, an extreme emphasis on winning, losing, success, and
failure has pervaded childhood, even childhood play. Free play has all but
disappeared in this time of lessons, team sports, paid indoor playgrounds,
television, and computers. Once the experts discovered that play is good for
learning, our society has started to take play and make sure it is always
educational, productive, and competitive.
Nickolder's parents gave her swimming lessons at ages 2 and 3, but
each lesson was met with resistance. By the time she was 4, she still
did not know how to swim, but did like to dabble in the water at the
wading pool. Her parents arranged private lessons with a favorite
preschool teacher. With each lesson, Nickolder grew more reluctant to
return to the pool. The more external pressure put on her to learn, the
more resistant she became. By Nickolder's fifth summer, her parents
gave up their goal and decided to just let her play and be with friends
in the shallow end of the pool. Soon, Nickolder started to really enjoy
playing in the water. Then she began to imitate others who could
swim. Within a few days, she could swim for six feet.3
Adults are famous for taking all the fun and playfulness out of learning
swimming or math. Even worse is our tendency to criticize children. It
happens so much we don't even notice it. Criticism is a nasty habit, difficult
to break. We feel as if we are being so helpful, but it is really no help. All it
does is install a little voice in their head—or sometimes a very loud voice—
that will criticize them ruthlessly and relentlessly for the rest of their lives.
You may have a voice like that in your own head. I was in a writing
workshop, and the teacher, Kathryn Deputat, read us pieces from an old
letter she found in the attic of the old farmhouse where we were having the
class. The letter was beautiful and still rang true after a hundred or so years.
At the end of three pages, the writer of the letter apologized, “This is a brief

 and stupid note.” Kathryn wanted us to notice how persistent the critical
voice is.
Children do this all the time—putting down their own work or their own
abilities. And they often criticize each other mercilessly. (Of course they do
—they learned it from us!) Sometimes, if we're lucky, they just need a little
encouragement, a smile or a nod. This lets them ignore the critical voice
and go on with their creative flow or their learning process. But if the
critical voice inside stops them from even trying, if it convinces them to
give up on drawing or soccer or math or horseback riding or writing poetry,
then we have to do more. We have to insist that they keep at it, that the
critical voice is not the truth or the last word. Faced with a firm
contradiction—“I know you can do it… you're a great artist”—the critical
voice will often make a last gasp for control. When we say this to children,
they often cry or yell at us or insist they are stupid, they are bad at drawing,
they hate math, they will never be good at sports.
All we have to do is listen, and maintain our confidence in them, while
they release these feelings. This may not sound too playful, but listening
patiently to these outbursts is a crucial part of Playful Parenting. The
process of growing up and learning things and mastering new skills brings
lots of frustration, and this frustration is released by giggles (when you're
lucky) or by tears (when it's too strong a feeling to come out in laughter).
Too bad children don't come up to us and say, “I'd really like to pursue
my interest in sculpture, but there is a voice in my head that tells me I'm no
good at it. Will you help me?” Instead they say, “I'm just not interested in it
anymore.” We, therefore, need to be detectives and sniff out the difference
between a real change in interests and giving up because of feelings of
powerlessness. “We have to find ways for [children] to tell their own
stories, paint their own pictures, construct their own worlds, act out their
own scenarios, and keep their own dreams alive.”4
OceanofPDF.com

 —RECOVERING LOST CONFIDENCE—

Child psychologists have noticed for many years that play serves an
especially important role in children who have been traumatized. When
children have been in a car wreck, or an earthquake, or live in a violent
home, they act out these traumas in their play. Barbara Brooks and Paula
Siegel, in a book about helping scared children, write the following:
They make toy cars go through endless collisions or make blocks
fall down over and over or have one doll hit another doll…. Following
Hurricane Andrew, the very young children played London Bridge…
over and over…. Play is one of the few tools that young children have
to express their feelings…. In the aftermath of the Northridge
earthquake… preschool kids… built great towers of blocks on the
table and then gave the table a powerful shake to knock over the
blocks.5
On a smaller scale, these kinds of games are repeated every day by
children everywhere. Most children gravitate automatically to play that
helps them master the big and little upsets of their lives, just as we adults
like to talk to our friends about the aggravations in our own lives. When
children seem to be struggling, adults can facilitate their recovery of
confidence by playing with them.
Let's say you and your spouse have been arguing a lot, and you're afraid
it is affecting your child. But your child doesn't want to talk about it, and
you're not sure how to bring it up. Next time you're playing house, you can
make the mom and dad dolls argue with each other, in a kind of silly way.
That gives the child the chance to pick up the theme, or drop it, whichever
she wishes. She may have another doll tell the parents to make up, or she
may say that she's running away from home, or give some other hint about
her feelings. For an older child, whom you think may be struggling at
school about rejection by the “in group,” you might say, “Let's start a

 Beanie Baby club and the other dolls want to join.” Anything the child
needs to master, playing a game about it can help.
In a wonderful book on toddlers, Alicia Lieberman notes that play “gives
the child a safe space where she can experiment at will, suspending the
rules and constraints of physical and social reality.” For example, the child
(helped by the parent, if necessary) can give a story a happy ending, or
make himself the victor or the hero. This process is called mastery because
the child is now “the master rather than the subject.”6
Lieberman gives the example of Cecelie, fifteen months old, who was
upset that her parents were going out, even though she was being left with a
well-liked sitter. Cecelie made up a game of hide-and-seek and played it
over and over with the sitter. Playing with the ideas of disappearance and
return helped Cecelie remember that her parents would come back. In
another fairly typical scenario, Lieberman describes a twenty-month-old
boy, upset after hearing that girls don't have penises, who covers and
uncovers his with a cup—to master his fear that he might lose his.
There are some things that are so predictable and inevitable, faced by
almost all children, that it is hard to call them traumas. Nevertheless, they
are painful and they sap a child's confidence. Losing a friend, having a
secret betrayed, and being teased are just a few examples. As parents, we
want desperately to help children escape these hard lessons of life, or at
least master them when they do happen. We know that lectures don't really
work, but we keep giving them anyway, just in case, because we aren't sure
what else to do. A playful approach is much more helpful.
Take keeping a secret—not an easy task for most children (or adults).
Emma and Te d were in the backseat. They were nine and had been good
friends since kindergarten. Ted said to Emma, “Do you want to know a
secret? It's something Eric told me and made me promise not to tell.”
“Umm, okay,” Emma said.
“You can't tell anybody because Eric will kill me.”
I jumped into the discussion at this point, because I could see the
inevitable disaster looming down the road better than they could. But I
resisted the strong temptation to give a lecture about secrets and betrayal
and friendship. Instead, I said, in a very lighthearted way, “Soon everybody
will know the secret, because they only tell it to people who promise not to

 tell anybody.” They both laughed. I thought they were getting the point, but
I wanted to switch to play mode. So I opened my window and pointed to a
person walking down the street, saying to Ted and Emma, “Should I tell
that person a secret?” They laughed and said yes. I said out the window,
“Hey, I'll tell you a secret if you promise not to tell.” They cracked up
because I was saying this to a stranger out the car window. Soon we were
all shouting out the window, “Wanna know a secret? Don't tell anybody!”
and laughing. Now, don't get me wrong: These two children, like all their
peers, were still going to experiment with telling secrets, even when they
had promised not to tell. But at least they had a chance to laugh about the
tense burden of keeping a secret. A shared laugh is a big improvement over
a moralistic lecture that falls on deaf ears… which brings us to the next
principle of Playful Parenting: following the giggles.
OceanofPDF.com

 CHAPTER 5

OceanofPDF.com

 FOLLOW THE
GIGGLES
In my mind there is nothing so illiberal, and so ill-bred as audible
laughter…. I am neither of a melancholy, nor a cynical disposition,
and am as willing and apt to be pleased as anybody; but I am sure that
since I have had the full use of my reason, nobody has ever heard me
laugh.
—LORD CHESTERFIELD, Letters to His Son (1774)

Despite Lord Chesterfield's advice to his son, sharing laughs together is
essential to Playful Parenting. For a parent who wants to use play to build
closeness and confidence, giggling is a sure sign that you're on the right
track. Following the giggles means simply that if something makes the
child giggle, then you do it again. And again, and again, and again. All
kinds of laughs are wonderful, but there is something about the delighted
and infectious nature of giggling that makes it a special hallmark of
playfulness.
Getting the giggles started isn't all that difficult. You make funny faces at
the baby. You play chase with a two-year-old and you stumble and fall right
at the last minute and can't catch her. Or, you're running away from a sixyear-old and you let yourself be caught, with howls of “Oh no, I can't
believe you got me.” You grab a pillow and start a pillow fight with your
ten-year-old. You put on your teenager's clothes and jewelry and adopt her
hairstyle, the ensemble that drives you crazy, and see how long it takes until
she looks up from the TV and notices.
In general, when the adult exaggerates and really hams it up, that almost
always makes children laugh. Being goofy and silly usually gets giggles,
also. If you want them to get the giggles, don't talk in a regular voice if you
can talk in a funny voice; don't talk at all if you can sing; don't stand up
when you can fall over. With young children especially, funny faces, funny
voices, and falling down are the key elements of getting the giggles

 flowing. If you feel self-conscious about being so goofy, pick up a stuffed
animal or an action figure and make it say silly things in a humorous voice.
The older children get, the bigger the challenge they pose in the giggling
department. You can't just fall over or make a goofy face for a guaranteed
response—but don't be afraid to give it a try. You may get an eye roll
instead of a giggle, but it's worth a shot. You can also experiment with
being outrageous or with telling jokes. Since most older children try hard
not to cry, or they feel badly if they do, I like to get giggles by pretending to
cry, in a very fake way, especially if they hit me or insult me. “Waaah, I'm
telling my mommy that you said I was bald.”
The unexpected response is a basic technique of comedy, both in the
theater and at home. So don't go into your preteen's room to tell her, for the
tenth time, to clean it. Go in and scream, “Girl Power!” and sing a Spice
Girls song (complete with dancing, of course). If you don't get a laugh, at
least she'll say, “Okay, okay, I'll clean my room, just please never do that
again!”
Pillow fights are good for inspiring giggles, though with older children,
pillow fights may shift into more serious play about power and strength.
Children from four or five up through teens often like the sock game. Each
person tries to take off everyone else's socks while keeping his or her own
on. This game is fun with two people, and a riot with three or more.
It is worth some trial and error to find what makes each child laugh—
though all comics have tough audiences and days when they totally bomb.
If you are having trouble, try being more enthusiastic, more energetic, more
wild than usual. Remember that young children may not get subtle jokes or
high-brow humor. They are more likely to crack up by just the mention of
the words fart or poop or butt. (Of course, some of us adults don't have any
trouble staying on that level of humor.)
Some children, even very young ones, do prefer more refined types of
humor. The key is to know your children. Read books together. If they do
watch TV, and I know most do, watch it with them, so you know what they
are seeing. Then you can determine how it affects them, and you can crack
jokes about it. I was watching cartoons at a friend's house with their fouryear-old. Every time a commercial came on, she'd say, “I want one of
those.” I started beating her to the punch, saying, “I want two of those.” We
started outdoing each other with how much we wanted each toy, and we

 promised to buy each other everything we asked for. We had a ton of fun
and laughed more during the commercials than during the cartoons.
Ask children to try to get you to laugh—you'll get a good picture of what
they think is funny. A few of my favorite giggling games involve trying
hard not to laugh. It's nearly impossible, like trying not to think of an
elephant. The easiest game is a staring contest, where the first person to
laugh or smile—depending on the rules—loses that round. Another one is
called the serious and solemn occasion. Each person takes turns saying,
“This is a very serious and solemn occasion,” with a perfectly straight face,
trying not to laugh. Good luck!
I'm sure most of the ideas I've just listed, about how to bring on the
giggles and follow them, are old news. Everyone knows how to laugh and
how to get children to laugh. The reason I am saying it anyway is that we
often forget the importance of laughter. We are especially forgetful, or
especially serious, when we are dealing with children who are being
obnoxious or aggressive or uncooperative, and when we have run out of
patience and good humor. Stress doesn't help much either. But these are the
very conditions when Playful Parenting is most useful.
On one level, the association between laughter and play is self-evident.
Play is fun, and laughter is the sound track of having fun. On another level,
though, there are profound relationships between giggling and the deeper
purposes behind children's play. Laughing can be a sign of connection
between people, a sign of successfully completing a challenging task, or a
sign that a child no longer feels miserable or hurt. Giggles and belly laughs
are the natural way that children and adults release fears and embarrassment
and anxiety. Parents can use this technique of following the giggles to
lighten up a conflict or a tense moment.
Before moving on, here's one note of caution about giggles. Tickling may
bring laughs, but if it involves holding children down and tickling them
against their will, don't do it. It may bring giggles, but these don't really
count because of the feeling of powerlessness from being made to laugh
when you don't want to. It is too easy for this type of tickling to become a
power struggle where the stronger person wins. This feeling of being
overpowered is very different from the other kind of tickling, the good kind,
like a little chuck under the baby's chin or the game where you or your child
tries hard not to laugh while being gently tickled. Many men are fond of the

 hold-'em-down-and-tickle-'em game, because when we were young, that
was one of the only games we got to play that allowed us to have close
physical contact without outright violence.
OceanofPDF.com

 —LAUGHING TOGETHER—

Sharing a giggle is a basic way to join and connect with children.
Laughter automatically brings people closer. My friend Margaret, who is
from New Zealand, always laughs as a way of saying hello, and it instantly
bridges the cultural divide and the time since we've seen each other last. So
laughing together makes a connection, and making a connection often
brings a laugh. In other words, laughter is a key to the fortress of isolation.
Indeed, one of the hallmarks of depression in children is the inability to find
humor and enjoyment in life.
I have already described the staring contest, where two people stare at
each other and see who laughs or smiles first. This game combines eye
contact with giggles, two of my preferred methods of connecting. Another
game, which I call the tragic Shakespearean death scene, combines giggles
with physical contact, the other great way of being close. In the death scene,
a child pretends to shoot you, or hits you, or sticks out his or her tongue, or
says “I hate you, you're stinky,” and you grab your chest and fall over—
right on top of the child, in a highly exaggerated and drawn-out death scene.
Falling over makes them laugh, while falling (gently!) on top of them
brings the closeness and usually escalates the giggles.
Another game inspired by Shakespeare is the love-potion game, based on
A Midsummer Night's Dream. Titania, queen of the fairies, is given a love
potion in her eyes, which makes her fall madly in love with the first
creature she sees, no matter how monstrous. That's exactly what children
need: they feel monstrous sometimes, and they need to feel loved regardless
of what they say or do. When we engage with them on their terms, they can
take off the monster mask and return to their true selves, cooperative and
joyful. So one way to induce heavy giggling is by singing corny love songs,
reciting corny love ballads, and making up corny compliments. Being on
your hands and knees looking desperate helps with this one. Yes, I know it
sounds horribly embarrassing and undignified, but no one ever said
parenting was going to be like having tea at Buckingham Palace. I like to

 use the love-potion game when children are trying to be gross—like when
they're showing their half-chewed food or saying bad words. “Oh dear
darling, that is the most beautiful sight I have ever witnessed. May I please
get my sketch pad and draw a picture of it to have forever… ?” Sometimes
all you have to do to get giggles is say “thank you” when you get insulted. I
remember my niece Sarah, when she was about seven, saying to her mother,
“I told Larry he was weird, and he said thank you! That is so weird!” Then
she ran back over to me laughing, ready to tell me I was weird again.
If there are two adults available, pretending to fight over the child is
always fun. “I've got the head.” “Ha-ha, I've got the feet, that's the best
part.” “No, he's all mine, I love him so much.” This human tug-of-war is
another example of a game that combines physical closeness and laughter,
as well as exaggerations of affection. The funny thing about children is that
in spite of how well we may love them, they often feel unloved or
unlovable. Maybe they don't feel unloved all the time, and maybe they are
not devastated by it, but almost every child feels this way some of the time
to some degree. Funny exaggerations of love and affection are a good way
for many parents and children to express their deep feelings for each other.
It fills the empty cup, because the goofiness of it catches them off guard.
When children are together in a group, they will often sail off into waves
of giggles or gales of laughter. For some reason, adults usually refer to this
as infectious laughter, as if we are afraid of catching it. Cherish these times.
They build a powerful bond between children, and with us if we share them.
Think of the contrast between this wonderful kind of group glee and the
horrible kind of group laughter, which is aimed brutally at an outcast or
scapegoat.
The first kind is inclusive; it draws everyone in. The second kind uses
laughter as a weapon of rejection and exclusion. In the same way, fun
imitation of children brings giggles, but its mean counterpart is a nasty kind
of teasing that hurts feelings. We have all watched children imitate one
another in both fun ways and hurtful ways. Imitation, if it is done
thoughtfully, can bring a terrific sense of closeness. If done in a meanspirited way, it builds walls between people. You can tell which way it is
leaning by whether the child giggles or not. Don't imitate children to annoy
them or teach them a lesson. Instead, do it to join them, to follow their lead
and express your deep desire to be close to them. Laugh together.

 OceanofPDF.com

 —UNLOCKING THE TOWER OF POWERLESSNESS—

Children sometimes laugh when they successfully complete a
challenging task, like climbing a mountain or riding a bike the first time
without training wheels. They also laugh when they are scared—but not too
scared. They laugh at things that are a little bit naughty—but not too
naughty. Sometimes children, and adults, laugh when they aren't supposed
to, such as at a funeral, or if someone trips on the street and hurts himself,
or during a lecture on war crimes. This is a natural response, a release of
fear, embarrassment, and tension through laughter. While we do need to be
sensitive to other people's feelings, and no one likes to be laughed at or to
hear someone laugh at things we hold sacred, we also need to understand
the nature of human emotion. Laughter is a spontaneous way to release
strong emotion, even when something isn't funny. When Charlie Chaplin
slips and falls on his butt, with that pained expression on his face, everyone
laughs; it is human nature. If we invite children to laugh at us during
playtimes, they are less likely to laugh at other people in a rude way. So fall
down a lot and pretend to cry loudly, “Waaah!”
Using Playful Parenting, we can help children release all this emotion in
ways that aren't hurtful to others. We do this by just spending lots of time
giggling together, but also with some specific techniques. To help children
with fears, for example, it often helps to play as if you are the one who is
scared, and really exaggerate it. Make sure they don't feel mocked or
humiliated. It helps if you don't imitate them exactly, but just take the
general idea and exaggerate it.
With an eleven-year-old boy who is fearful, I pretend that I am scared of
everything. And I do mean everything: pencils, the letter Q, lightbulbs,
video games, anything that happens to be in the room. He'll ask what time it
is, and I'll say that I don't know because I'm scared to look at my watch. He
thinks this is hysterical. This type of play lets children get some distance
from their fear, and the distance allows them to release the fear through
giggles.

 A less dramatic way to act incompetent is to play chase and let the child
have one narrow escape after another. This game is even funnier if you
pretend to be shocked and confused. “How did you do that? I had you! This
time I'll really get you.” Then you miss again, of course, unless they laugh
harder when you catch them and then somehow accidentally let them slip
away.
Why is this so funny? The outrageous claims make the adult into a fool,
which is funny enough, but especially since it helps them feel more
powerful. Children often try to make each other feel helpless, powerless,
stupid, or incompetent so they don't have to feel that themselves. That
usually ends in conflicts and upsets. No one comes out ahead when one
child tries to feel powerful at another child's expense. This is another reason
adults need to participate in this kind of play—so that children won't do it to
one another.
By making their escape harder and harder, but still letting them get away
in the end, I am playing at the edge of the child's development. This edge is
usually a very funny place. Let me explain: If you can get things just right,
where the task is neither too hard nor too easy for the child, then he or she
is really amused by it. My favorite example of this is from a film I saw in
graduate school about stages of child development. In one clip, children of
different ages were shown a large doll, which was wearing a blindfold. The
psychologist asked, “Is the child easy to see or hard to see?” Younger
children looked very serious and said, “It's hard to see.” Older children
looked annoyed at the stupid question and said, “It's easy to see.” At just the
right age, children laughed and laughed and laughed. Right on the edge of
understanding this linguistic mix-up, they found it very funny. In the same
way, with a baby just the right age, if you show them a fork, then put it
behind your back and bring out a spoon, you'll be rewarded with happy
surprise and a signal to do it again. Too early, and they just reach for it and
say “gah-gah”. Too late, and they look at you sideways as if to say, What
are you trying to put over on me?
A few years later, as children learn that some words have a special power
to freak out grown-ups, you can get big laughs just by saying certain words
or by pretending to be horrified when you hear them. You know the words I
mean. If the real bathroom words or swear words bother you, make up your

 own words, make them “forbidden,” and then play at being shocked and
horrified when you hear them.
Moving up a few more years, I get big squeals out of kindergartners and
first-graders by saying I want to marry Barbie, or Barney. Again, playing at
the edge of the issues that are developmentally “hot” for them at that
moment gets the big laughs. We never grow out of some of these
developmental edges. Look at magic—it plays with the basic ideas of
reversibility, object constancy, and object permanence. Tying a knot is
reversible, while cutting a string isn't, so magic rope tricks are funny. Object
permanence means a scarf should stay a scarf and not change into a dove.
Object constancy means that something that disappears under a cup should
be there when the cup is lifted. Even though we learned these basic ideas
when we were infants, we still enjoy magic and sleight of hand because
they play with this edge.
OceanofPDF.com

 —LIGHTEN UP THE SCENE—

One thing I do when I start to get a little bit frustrated with a young
person, as an alternative to saying “I'm going to send you to your room” or
something like that, is to make a mock threat that lightens up the situation
and turns it into play. When this works well, I feel like an alchemist who
has taken a block of lead and turned it into gold. Here's a sample threat: “If
you do that one more time, I'm going to pour water on my head.” I pick up
the glass of water, put it above my head, and they laugh. I don't actually
pour it! They say, “Yeah, do it, do it!” But by then the whole tone has
changed. Now we're both laughing instead of being frustrated and locked in
combat.
But it's important to remember that this is a mock threat. Real threats and
angry tirades lock in frustration by scaring children, practically ensuring
that they will shut you out. Funny mock threats, especially if they are aimed
at yourself, release frustration. Once that frustration is released, cooperation
is much more likely. Real threats communicate: I'm mad at you, it's your
fault, and you had better shape up. The predictable result is defensiveness
and conflict. Mock threats mixed with humor can communicate: I'm not
happy with how things are going between us and I want us to fix it. The
result this time is a relaxing of the tension and a willingness to meet each
other halfway. Many parents say, “I can't play like that when I'm mad.”
Well, if you are too mad to play this little game, you are probably too mad
to be making real threats, also. We don't do our best parenting when we're
that mad, so we may as well lighten up. Take a break so that you can cool
down (maybe pouring that water on your head will help, after all!).
To turn tense situations into play, try being light and a little outrageous. I
find that it helps to pretend to scream when I want to really scream. There is
a subtle but important distinction between a pretend scream of frustration
and a real one. The real ones scare our children and make us feel worse.
Pretend ones can delight our children and pull them back together with us

 into a team. I can't really describe it without a sound track, so just try faking
an overly exaggerated but not scary scream.
OceanofPDF.com

 —MAKING UP AND PLAYING DUMB—

Giggles can also be a part of making up if you have not been able to
avoid a conflict. Often it is the adult who doesn't want to let go of the
struggle. We want endless remorse and reparations and apologies from our
child before we are willing to connect again. We refuse to laugh, as if our
lightening up would be a reward to the child for bad behavior. But laughter
is healing. Remember, for most difficulties between parents and children,
the real problem is lack of connection, so the solution is more connection.
Punishment, as we'll see in a later chapter, locks in the bad feelings, while
laughing together is a great way to let them out so parent and child can find
each other again.
Playing dumb—which is easier for some of us to pull off than others—
lightens up tense moments. For example, I was walking up the stairs behind
two boys at an elementary school. The bigger one was dragging down the
other one's backpack in a highly annoying way. He thought it was funny,
but the other boy was getting more and more upset. I could see that the boy
being annoyed was faced with a bad choice—either suck it up and take it, or
start a fight he'd probably lose. I said to the annoying one, in a calm, matterof-fact voice, “It doesn't look like he's enjoying this game as much as you
are.” He stopped. Now, I knew that he had no intention of the other boy
enjoying himself. Nevertheless, my playing dumb instead of scolding him
got him to notice the other boy and notice his own behavior. Meanwhile, the
boy being harassed was protected, but not in a way that would get him
beaten up later for being a tattletale, which might have happened if I had
marched the bully down to the principal's office.
When an older sibling is being mean, I say to the younger one, in my
“gee-whiz” voice, “Gee, that looks like it hurt. How do you get back at her
when she does that?” The younger siblings may not be able to tell me, but
they always get a little glimmer in their eyes. Or I say to the older one,
again in a happy voice, “Boy, that was awfully mean. What's going to
happen next?” If I play the heavy and give a lecture, they are going to forget

 what I have said in microseconds. They are taken by surprise with the
village idiot approach, so they might stop and think about it. And they
usually laugh instead of escalating the violence or the conflict.
OceanofPDF.com

 —LOSE YOUR DIGNITY TO FIND YOUR CHILD—

Children often feel stupid—either secretly or not so secretly—and they
long to see someone else look stupid for a change. One of my favorite ways
to reach children is to lose my dignity. This lets children be the more
powerful one in playful interactions, and lets them heal their bruised egos
by seeing me lose my dignity a little. I have found that nothing lets children
laugh more than my pretending to be a dolt. (Adults laugh at this as well.) I
do this by singing funny songs, falling a lot, dancing around, and otherwise
looking quite foolish. Becoming an expert at losing my dignity has required
a great deal of practice.
Here's one example, which I call Captain Lex von Vader Hook. I was
playing once with a six-year-old boy, and he said he was Luke Skywalker
and I was Darth Vader. That was fine, but before we could begin to play he
changed the characters on me. “No, I'm Peter Pan and you're Captain
Hook.” “Okay.” “No, wait, I'm Superman and you're Lex Luthor.” I think
he would choose a good-guy character and feel powerful. Then he would
assign me a bad-guy character and feel threatened. So he switched to a
different character, and so on. We never got to play. He really wanted to use
this superhero play to overcome his fears, but the game itself scared him too
much.
In other words, if play can be a vehicle for healing from fear, ours was
stuck in a snowbank, with the wheels spinning. Eventually this kind of play
just fizzles out, usually because the grown-up gets bored. I decided to help
things along. I combined all my roles into one, so he couldn't flip from one
to the next, and addressed the powerlessness issue directly by making
myself incompetent and goofy. When children play the good guy, they don't
want the bad guy to be too powerful. So I started singing a song: “I'm
Captain Lex von Vader Hook, I'm the dumbest bad guy in town….” I made
it clear that no matter what powers I had, or no matter what character he
was, I would try to get him, but he would always win. I had the bluster of
all these bad guys combined, with none of the bite. He loved this game and

 for months wanted to play it over and over every time we were together.
The second or third time we played it, he made up a new song for me,
escalating my loss of dignity: “I'm Captain Lex von Vader Hook, I love to
poop and pee….” I would sing this, and we would both laugh. I would
pretend to be horribly humiliated, and he would feel like the king of the
world.
I realize I am asking a lot of parents when I suggest that we lose our
dignity. A lot of adults have a hard time just loosening up. We're expected
to be serious at work and just about everywhere else, but our children are
begging for us to snap out of it and have some fun. When adults aren't sure
how to start having more fun playing with children, I ask, “What's the most
outrageous thing you could do? Would the sky actually cave in if you did
it?”
Harville Hendrix, the well-known marriage and relationship expert,
suggests that couples play the ha-ha game. This involves standing very
close, face-to-face, heels off the ground, bouncing lightly on the balls of
your feet. Each person takes a turn saying “Ha!” in a friendly voice, back
and forth, until both are howling with real laughter. Hendrix's basic idea is
that “face-to-face high-energy fun” is invaluable for reconnecting. Adults
often act as if there were only one way to have face-to-face high-energy fun
(I won't go into details in a family-oriented book), but children know lots of
ways. We need to learn from them… and practice.
Cosby Rogers and Janet Sawyers write that “adult play (such as bridge,
tennis, or fishing) has aptly been described as… not fun, lacking
spontaneity; deadly serious—very literal; and focused on doing it correctly
and well.”1 Therefore, to play like a child, bungle. Blunder. Stumble. Be
unable to figure out why the square piece won't fit in the round hole. Risk
looking silly, sing, fall over. Exaggerate everything. Lighten up. Try to have
fun.
Switching gears after work is one of the hardest parts of parenting for
many of us who work outside the home. Most jobs fall a bit short in the
giggling department. The same can be said for switching gears after the
chores part of child care and homemaking. It is hard to create a giggly space
for playtime. The most common ways that adults unwind—TV, alcohol, and
naps—are not part of the Playful Parenting agenda and don't take into

 account the child's needs. Of course, the parent has needs, too, but if the
children are merely an aggravation after work, then something needs to
change. Setting aside time for high-energy fun, complete with giggles, can
be a new way to meet everyone's needs. The hardworking mom or dad gets
to unwind, the child gets some exuberant playtime, and everyone gets to
reconnect.
Parenting is hard work, and being unhappy makes it harder. Most parents
are a little uptight; a few are more seriously depressed. Depressed parents
have an especially difficult time following the giggles, using humor to
lighten up a tense situation, and loosening up. You might have just barely
enough energy to make it through the necessities of life but not have any
energy left over for fun and play. Perhaps you don't even realize you are
unhappy until you try to join children in these giggle-fests, and you can't do
it. If the ideas in this chapter are out of reach for you because of your own
feelings, then please face those feelings squarely. Take a good hard look
inside, talk to other parents, get professional help. Your children will be
forgiving and patient, but they do want you to loosen up.
OceanofPDF.com

 —FROM GIGGLES TO TEARS: WHEN
GOOD PLAY LEADS TO BAD FEELINGS—

When my daughter was five, she was playing one day with our friend
Tim. Since Tim didn't have any children, Emma saw him as fresh meat, an
adult who might actually want to play. Emma was making mazes for him to
try, and they were having lots of fun. But when Tim made one for her, she
had difficulty, and her frustration increased with his attempts to help her.
She said, “I hate you” and some other nasty things and stalked off. Later she
came back, acting happy and ready to play, but I could see that Tim wasn't
ready. She seemed surprised that he was still upset at having been dumped
on so badly.
Children sometimes overestimate the ability of an adult to handle their
strong feelings, especially adults who take the time to play with them. Tim
was surprised at Emma's sudden shift from giggles to angry outburst to
smiling. I suggested that the two of them might need to reconnect first,
maybe by shaking hands or sharing a joke or deciding together to be pals
again. She stuck out her tongue, said she hated me, too, and stalked back to
her room.
Her mom, Tim, and I were talking in the kitchen when Emma came back
with a big smile and proposed a game for us all to play. None of the adults
were much in the mood to play by that point, since adults tend to take these
types of insults personally. I again suggested reconnecting first, and she
rolled her eyes at us and went back to her room. We could hear her playing
by herself. I said, “She's over saying she hates us, but we're not.” Saying
this out loud eased our tensions, and we laughed about it. Two or three more
times Emma came out with a game idea; I responded with a connect-first
idea, but she ignored me and left. At one point I tried to hug her, and she
screamed and squirmed away.
The next time she came out, she had a piece of cardboard and a plastic
spoon that she said was her “two-sided date pad and pencil.” She sat down

 on the couch and we all went over to join her. She pretended to write on it
and handed it to me, saying she had written me a message. I asked her what
it said, and she “read it” out loud: “I love you, Daddy, but I don't want to
hug you.” I asked if I could write her back. She said she'd write my
response for me. She proceeded to pretend to write again, and then read it to
me: “I want to hug you, but I still love you.” Then I asked if she had
anything to write to Tim. She wrote on her pad and said, “Sometimes I
pretend that I hate you, and you get confused.” Tim said, “Yes, I do get
confused.” She wrote some more, then read to Tim, “I pretend that I don't
like you, but I really do.” Tim said, “That's an amazing two-sided date pad,”
and she said, “Yes, it is.”
There were no major giggles in that story, but I include it here because it
illustrates the way emotions can instantly shift during play. Perhaps after a
giggly wrestle, the child will stub his toe and release a torrent of tears.
Maybe after an hour of being the horse, carrying kids around on your back,
you finally say no more because you're exhausted or you've had enough.
Instead of “Thanks, Dad, that was fun,” you may get a furious protest: “You
never play with us; your back always hurts.”
These sudden shifts—from giggles to tears or tantrums—happen because
the child has a pile of backed-up feelings. She keeps the door to these
feelings tightly shut. The fun play opens the emotional door to let out the
giggles, and a flood of other feelings come pouring out after. Once the tears
start, they may last a long time. Very few parents realize how healthy it is
for children to get this chance to shed some of that backed-up supply of
uncried tears. We make the mistake of fussing or yelling at the child,
because the tears or outbursts seem to be over nothing. But old feelings
latch on to the littlest excuse to come out from hiding, especially after a
long fun playtime. If we can just sit with them while they are releasing
these feelings, they will eventually emerge happier children.
This flow from giggles to tears, tantrums, or aggression is puzzling to
adults, but it is really quite normal. All the child needs is to be cuddled (if
she is crying) or listened to quietly (if she is tantruming), or held gently but
firmly (if she is kicking and fighting in a way that might hurt somebody). If
you are prepared for these feelings, you can just relax and let the child
express them and be done. If you aren't prepared, it is easy to get mad:
“How dare you talk to me like that? I've been playing with you for an hour.

 Quit crying, don't be a baby.” But these feelings aren't about nothing, they
come from deep inside, and one of the great side benefits of giggly playtime
is that it can let children feel safe enough to share them with us.
Because the shift from giggles to tears is often triggered by a slight (or
imagined) injury, parents often misunderstand what has happened. They
say, “You're not really hurt.” It may be true that the child is not really
injured, or that she is overreacting to a tiny scrape or bump. But that's the
idea. She is using that bump as an opportunity to release old unfelt feelings,
now that she feels safe and close from all that giggling. Maybe those tears
are stored up from previous injuries that were more serious, but you weren't
around to hold her when they happened. Now she is making up for it by
pretending to be injured so you will cuddle her. Maybe she feels as if she
has to be physically hurt in order to be held and comforted. Either way,
there is no need to tell her she isn't really hurt. Just love and cuddle and
comfort her and welcome the release of feelings, which may be happening
just because she feels so safe and secure with you.
Some parents, instead of dismissing the child's tears, overreact, ending
the play with, “No more roughhousing; I told you someone would get hurt!”
But if the child is just using a very minor injury as a chance to release old
feelings, then there may be no real danger to the game and no real reason to
end it. Often, all that is necessary is a brief pause to pay attention to that
burst of feelings, then back to fun play—which becomes even more fun
now that the child is no longer carrying that load of painful emotion.
Playful Parenting's emphasis on giggling does not mean that every
moment has to be filled with giddy excitement. There are sad times, scary
times, and lonely times, and even aside from those, there are times when the
child is content but not in a giggly mood. Following the giggles does not
imply a crusade to cheer someone up or cajole her out of her feelings. The
child may in fact be quite serious, but nothing is wrong and she doesn't need
to be pushed into laughter. The difference between contented seriousness
and grim misery is what I call engagement. Is the child engaged in what she
is doing? Is she focused, relaxed, interested? Or is she bored, listless, or
bouncing off the walls?
Cosby Rogers and Janet Sawyers say, when you want to figure out how
children's play is going, the first question to ask yourself is: “Are children

 happy, with twinkles in their eyes?”2 That twinkle may reflect a giggle or a
belly laugh just waiting to come out, or it may be a sign of a more serious
contentment, or the satisfied feeling of finishing a challenging task, like
building an amazing Lego spaceship, or sewing clothes for a Beanie Baby,
or taking the training wheels off a bike.
Lighthearted play that brings laughter may set the stage for success in the
more serious side of life, and vice versa. Alexandra was three when a new
baby sister arrived. After the “honeymoon” period, Alexandra started
asking her mother over and over, “Why are you always looking at her?” She
would say this in a tone of resentment and jealousy. Kristin, her mom, was
frustrated that none of her rational explanations to Alexandra seemed to
have any impact, and she was starting to get annoyed by this repeated
question. She would explain why she spent lots of time looking at the baby
and would ask Alexandra if she felt jealous, but nothing really changed.
Kristin was telling me this as we sat having tea in her kitchen, while my
daughter and Alexandra ran around the house. Every few minutes they
would race through the kitchen laughing.
After hearing all this, I called Alexandra over and said, “Alexandra! I'm
going to look at you!” I proceeded to put my eyes close to her elbow and
her head (“So I can look at you really closely”), and to make my eyes bug
out from the exertion of looking at her so hard. Both of us giggled the
whole time. My daughter came over to watch. The girls ran out, and then
Alexandra came back and asked to play that game again. When Kristin or
Emma tried to talk to me, I'd say, “I'm sorry, I can't talk now; I'm looking at
Alexandra.” The next time we went over to their house, Kristin told me that
Alexandra had stopped asking why she always looked at the baby. Instead,
she started coming up to her mother and saying, in a very serious voice,
“Look at me.” Kristin would look at her, gazing intently, while Alexandra
soaked in the attention like a thirsty flower. She would stand still, with a
serious expression, until she decided to run off and play. I think that the
brief “follow the giggles” playtime we engaged in earlier had allowed her to
express, in a direct, nonplay way, what she needed and wanted from her
mother. The indirect question—about why she looked at the baby so much
—was confusing to Kristin. But this direct request for attention was not.

 Unlike many older siblings, Alexandra did not have to escalate her behavior
into hurting or threatening the baby in order to get her mother's attention.
–
Is there enough giggling going on in your house? At the playground? At
your child's school? In my opinion, a good school is one where you hear
giggling and laughter in the halls and in the classrooms. We often forget
that children learn best when they are happy. In the frenzy to evaluate
schools and students, no one asks whether children are happy. Many parents
and child-development experts have lamented the loss of free play and the
way it has become replaced with lessons, competitive sports, structured
activities, and watching TV. I say, let's quit moaning about it and follow the
giggles.
OceanofPDF.com

 CHAPTER 6

OceanofPDF.com

 LEARN TO
ROUGHHOUSE1
Paul had to display extraordinary restraint when he played with
his brother Patrick…. Paul roared up to the infant, then screeched to a
halt, contorting himself in order to get down to Patrick's level. Paul
held his strength in check for nearly fifteen minutes as he wrestled with
his little brother.
SHIRLEY STRUM, from a description of baboon play

Whenever I talk about the topics in this chapter—wrestling, roughhousing, active play, and aggressive play—I am immediately interrupted.
Parents, especially mothers, insist that they don't wrestle, they won't
wrestle, they couldn't possibly wrestle. So I've decided to start this chapter
with a special invitation: Even if you don't think you ever want to wrestle, or
even if you think you already know all about wrestling, read this chapter
anyway. It's full of ideas that are useful even if you don't wrestle—and
maybe you'll even change your mind.
Many animals wrestle, including humans, and we seem to do so for a
variety of reasons. Children wrestle and roughhouse as a way of testing out
their physical strength, as a way to have fun, and as a way to control their
aggression.
Boys and girls—rambunctious children and quiet ones—all benefit from
thoughtful physical play with adults. The active ones, who are going to be
in the thick of the rough and tumble in school and on the playground, need
a chance to do it first with someone who can give them undivided attention,
help them deal with their fears, hesitations, impulses, anger, etc. That's our
job, because we won't call them names if they cry or if they give up, and we
will stop for a rest when the child needs one. Other children are not going to
hold back very much, and they certainly are not going to encourage
expression of feelings. Meanwhile, children who are less physically active
need roughhousing with adults so they can explore their physical power and
develop their confidence and assertiveness. So I make a distinction between

 the kind of wrestling a Playful Parent does with a child, the kinds of play
fighting children do with one another, real aggression, and physical play.
All of these types of wrestling are discussed in this chapter, starting with a
set of guidelines that help make wrestling the kind of play that brings
closeness, confidence, and healing from emotional hurts. In other words, we
are not talking about professional wrestling here.
OceanofPDF.com

 —LARRY'S RULES OF WRESTLING—

Remember the love gun game (page 50), which transformed aggressive
impulses and disconnection into play? Well, in this chapter, we can see how
wrestling and other forms of roughhousing can transform powerlessness
into confidence, and isolation into human connection. The problem with a
great deal of wrestling is that the stronger person wins while the weaker
person gives up or gets hurt. Sometimes two young people figure out how
to avoid these problems when they wrestle each other, but often there is a
definite need for adult involvement to make sure it goes well. Don't worry,
I'll provide a few ground rules to follow.
In the biblical story, Jacob wrestles with a man who turns out to be an
angel. Jacob hangs on, despite being injured, until the angel will give him
its blessing. The Buddhists have a similar story, in which a holy man,
Milarepa, is not upset or scared by the presence of demons in his cave; he
just casually offers them tea until they disappear. When children show us
their wild and scary sides, we need to be as persistent as Jacob and as calm
as Milarepa. If we can stay with them, physically and emotionally, we will
find the cooperative, loving, joyful human being who may have been buried
under a pile of angry or scary or sad or lonely feelings. Wrestling with them
can help them find their true selves again.
There is an endless variety of ways to wrestle. You try to pin their
shoulders to the floor, or they try to pin you. They try to get past you, or
you try to get past them. They try to knock you down. You hold them, and
they squirm to get away. They may need you to lose your dignity and be
totally incompetent so they can feel powerful. Or you match your strength
to theirs, like the older baboon did with his little brother.
And if they are bigger or stronger than you—you may want to set it up so
you have an advantage, and let them fight their hardest before they can win.
For example, arm wrestle where you can cheat (you can have your elbow
off the table and use two hands), and they can't. Or they are allowed to use

 only one hand, or one finger. Or, you just fight your hardest, showing
there's life in the old bird yet, even if your child ultimately wins.
To help you get started, I have come up with ten rules for wrestling with
your child.
LARRY'S RULES OF WRESTLING
1.
2.
3.

Provide basic safety.
Find every opportunity for connection.
Look for every opportunity to increase their confidence and sense
of power.
4.
Use every opportunity to play through old hurts.
5.
Provide just the right level of resistance to the child's need.
6.
Pay close attention.
7.
(Usually) let the child win.
8.
Stop when someone is hurt.
9.
No tickling allowed.
10.
Keep your own feelings from getting in the way.
1.

Provide basic safety. See to it that nobody gets hurt. To make sure
that it's safe, set up ground rules. No hitting, no biting, no punching, no
kicking, no head locks. Besides being safer, pushing and holding are
more helpful in building confidence and connection than hitting. Your
commitment to no one getting hurt, including yourself, builds feelings
of safety that allow for effective wrestling. Watch out for emotional
injuries also. Don't tease or humiliate the child. Since wrestling often
involves saying “ouch” and “stop” when things are actually going fine,
agree on a code word that means that everyone will stop immediately
(it might be something straightforward like “halt,” or something silly
like “banana cream pie,” but it shouldn't be a word that the wrestlers
are likely to say otherwise). Always stop right away when someone
says the code word or if there is an injury.
Children may need to be reminded about these ground rules many
times. If safety permits, it is best to keep reminding them, or holding
them gently but firmly so they can't hurt you, instead of stopping the

 play as soon as they break a rule. See if you can stay engaged,
continuing to play, while still maintaining safety. This gives us the
chance to help children who are impulsive or aggressive to gradually
control these feelings. The reason wrestling often gets out of hand
between peers is that no one is in charge of safety, so the play fighting
turns into a real fight or ends in bitterness and hurt feelings.
2.
Find every opportunity for connection. Take cuddle breaks. Insert
as much connection as possible, wherever possible. If the child avoids
eye contact, you might say, “Before we battle to the death, let us do the
ancient warrior custom of looking each other deep in the eyes.” If he
likes to say, “You're dead!” then you can fall down dead, but fall
slowly in a protracted death scene (think Shakespeare) right on top of
him, pulling him down with you in a big hug. There is a huge
difference between wrestling and punching a punching bag, and that
difference can be summed up in two words: human connection.
Make setting limits, if necessary, an opportunity for connection and
empowerment. Adults often end play sessions abruptly when the child
crosses a threshold of what the adult can tolerate. These thresholds
may be perfectly legitimate (if the child is beginning to hit or bite, for
example) or may be simply our adult limitations on what we can
handle (such as getting our feelings hurt or wondering what the
neighbors would think). Either way, the child's crossing the line may
not have to mean an end to the play. Rather, it is another opportunity
for connection, a chance to talk about limits and feelings. With
practice, it is often possible to set the limit in a relaxed way, then
return to the game or the wrestling.
If verbal limits don't work, and the aggressive or dangerous or
destructive behaviors continue, see if you can wrestle in such a way
that no one gets hurt, while remaining engaged and connected. Some
children, especially those who have been victims of violence
themselves, may need a special setup in order to be able to wrestle as
hard and as wildly as they want without anyone getting hurt. Of
course, ending the play is perfectly reasonable if it is the only way to
maintain safety or if the adult is unable to keep from getting angry.
3.
Look for every opportunity to increase their confidence and sense
of power. Mostly this is done through giving the right level of

 resistance (see number 5) and by encouraging them. It can be tricky to
be simultaneously the coach and the sparring partner, but above all the
goal is to encourage and challenge them. I frequently tell children
during wrestling: “No tricks.” Using their physical strength provides
them with much more of a sense of their physical and inner power than
does winning by tricking you. Sometimes, though, they may need to
show off their superior intellect rather than their superior physical
strength, in which case tricks are fine. In general, the basic message in
wrestling combines the themes of connection and confidence: “Your
power is welcome here. There is a place for you to be strong and
connected, without hurting anyone.”
4.
Use every opportunity to play through old hurts. For example, if a
child faced a difficult challenge earlier in the day and was not pleased
with the outcome, she can replay it with you, through wrestling, with
you representing the obstacle or the bully or the difficulty. The object
is not necessarily for her to win this time around, though that can be
helpful, but more important, to fight all out with you cheering her on.
This fight provides a means of playing out the frustration, humiliation,
and helplessness of having lost or given up the first time around. The
key to a successful replaying of an old hurt is that it must remind the
child of the initial incident, but not so much that she is paralyzed with
fear or powerlessness. She may need reminders that this time around
she is in charge, she has you on her side, she can be strong, she is safe.
5.
Provide just the right level of resistance to the children's needs.
The whole idea of wrestling is to provide resistance. The goal certainly
isn't to win or even necessarily to let them win, but to let them use
their inner power fully, in a way that does not hurt anyone. They need
enough resistance to know you are there and to get a sense of
themselves being powerful, but not so much that they are
overwhelmed or feel obliged to give up. Some children—very young
children, children who have been traumatized, who have been exposed
to a lot of violence in their lives, or who feel especially fearful—may
need to just touch you, and then have you fall over howling in mock
pain. That might be as much resistance as they can handle. If that game
makes them giggle, you know you are on the right track.

 As children get older or feel more comfortable wrestling against
you, they might need more resistance. You may need to push back, to
set it up so they really have to work hard to pin you. And as they get
still older and stronger and more confident, you may need to give even
more resistance so they can go all out. Children who try to hurt you
when they wrestle need a great deal of resistance; they need to be held
gently but firmly so they cannot hurt anyone. Held or wrestled this
way, they can struggle hard, releasing the painful feelings that have
been leading them to be aggressive.
6.
Pay close attention. How do you know whether to be watching for
opportunities to connect, or to build confidence, or to play something
through? Well, you may never know for sure, but you can increase
your odds by paying close attention. If they hesitate about making any
kind of contact, try asking them to touch you gently with one finger,
and then fall over dramatically—see if that gets a laugh. Maybe they
need a big boost of confidence like that before they can connect. Or if
they are punching and kicking and biting with no eye contact, try
getting their attention, or slowing things down, in order to get some
contact first before settling into rough-and-tumble wrestling.
There are two signs that wrestling is on the right track: one is
giggling and the other is sweating, straining, and exertion. Sometimes
these go back and forth, as the wrestling shifts from having fun to
struggling against a deep feeling of powerlessness. The signs that
something is amiss are lack of eye contact, giving up, blind rage, or the
child's actually trying to hurt you. Pay more attention to connection,
confidence-building, working through, or finding the right level of
resistance. Watch for escalating anger, from you or them. Then take a
break to cool off.
You may need all your strength to make sure no one gets hurt when
children kick and fight hard. They aren't wrestling anymore, but
releasing a huge pile of terror and anger. They may be only dimly
aware that you are there, holding them and making sure no one gets
hurt. Hang on! Talk to them gently. This happens because children
have been hurt and scared, and you may be shocked that they have
these emotions inside of them. The wrestling opened the door for the
release of these heavy feelings. When the feelings are done—and I

 have to admit that they can last a long time—then most children
exhibit a remarkable change. They look deeply into your eyes, they
smile and laugh, they want to try something that before they felt was
too difficult. They seem to have dropped a load of worry or tension off
their shoulders. At first, parents tend to be scared and confused by
these tantrums and outbursts, but once they see how happy and relaxed
children are afterward, they realize that the wrestling and the
outpouring of emotion really works to build closeness and confidence.
7.
(Usually) let the child win. Most often, the best end to an episode
of wrestling is victory for the child. As I described in number 5, every
child will need to engage in a different level of fight before ultimately
winning. In some situations, however, children may need to know that
you are fighting your hardest, even though it means you might win.
The same is true when playing checkers or chess or any game with
children—usually you start out letting them win, then you offer more
and more resistance. Ask them if they want you to try your hardest,
and ultimately enjoy their triumph as they beat you fair and square.
Often there's no winning or losing at all in a good wrestle, just a lot of
physical play.
8.
Stop when someone is hurt. Stop immediately if someone's hurt,
even if they seem to want to go back to wrestling. Interrupting
wrestling—or any activity—to pay attention to physical injuries is
especially key for boys, who are often encouraged to be stoical and
keep playing. Playing on when you're injured, “sucking it up,” does
not build character; it builds armor. Then we wonder why boys and
men have a hard time with intimacy and feelings! We have a strong
temptation to want to give our boys armor, but that is not the real way
for them to be safe in the world. As girls now are allowed and
encouraged to be more athletic, they are unfortunately also getting the
message to ignore pain.
For other children, both boys and girls, the challenge is not to quit
after an injury, but to go back to playing after taking a break. A very
minor scrape or bump can make some children (and adults) want to
give up. They need respectful and gentle encouragement to give it
another go. Even if you think the child is pretending to be hurt, it is
still important to stop—in this case, to regroup and go slower or

 provide less resistance. The fake cries and whimpers of pain are signs
that the child feels overwhelmed and that things need to be toned down
a notch or two.
9.
No tickling allowed. No holding others down and tickling them
against their will. Tickling can be fun, but it can also feel to children as
if things are out of control. Tickling can be confusing; the laughing
seems to mean children are enjoying it, even if they may not be. So
best to avoid it when you are wrestling. If children ask to be tickled,
try a quick little poke, then back off until they stop laughing, instead of
continuously tickling them. Or move toward them as if you're about to
tickle, and then back off—you'll get the same laughter without the outof-control feeling. Or try offering a different type of closeness instead.
One way to think about “good” and “bad” tickling is to compare the
way you tickle an in fant—just a little chuck under the chin, followed
by a torrent of giggles—versus the way your uncle or big brother
tickled you, holding you down until you screamed for mercy. If they
have been tickled a lot already, they may want to tickle you. You can
either let them, or say, “No tickling”—whichever makes sense at the
time.
10.
Keep your own feelings from getting in the way. When adults first
try to wrestle with children this way, they are often flooded with old
feelings left over from their own childhoods. They may feel an
impulse to humiliate, tickle, tease, or dominate the child, reflecting
what was done to them when they were small. Or they may feel weak
and helpless. In fact, many people have an immediate negative
reaction to the very idea of wrestling, either because they didn't like it
as a child or because they have seen adults wrestle children while
under the influence of old, buried feelings of rage, competition,
powerlessness, or helplessness. The purpose of the kind of wrestling
we're talking about is for the child to feel confident and powerful.
Don't let old feelings of ours get in their way. Fighting against a much
stronger adult who is out for blood, who desperately needs to win, is
not terribly helpful for the child. This is their time, not your time. See
the last chapter of the book for how to deal effectively with these
feelings if and when they come up. In the meantime, just set them
aside and focus on the goals and principles previously described.

 Adults who did not get much chance to be physically powerful as
children, especially girls who were discouraged from this kind of play
or boys who were beaten up a lot, may feel physically timid and
hesitant at first. They are often reluctant to do anything that even looks
like hurting anybody, or reluctant to risk getting bruised or injured. So
push yourself. Practice with a friend. Make loud karate noises in front
of the mirror. Take a martial arts class. Go to the power room (see
chapter four).
Another group, mostly men, was encouraged to be rough, aggressive, and
competitive as children. Wrestling was a matter of survival. This leaves us
ill-equipped to wrestle in a way that fosters a young person's confidence
and connection. Leave the competition and ferocity at the door. Don't
wrestle if you are mad or frustrated. Maintain eye contact with the child.
Take cuddle breaks. Aim more for giggles from the child than for
superhuman physical prowess. Many of us were brutalized as children, and
when we wrestled or fought, no one was following these guidelines on our
behalf. We needed this kind of play and didn't get it, and that can leave us
feeling or acting like loose cannons or soldiers in combat.
If you have feelings that you can't set aside, be honest about them (but be
humorously honest, not brutally honest). In fact, the best thing to do is
exaggerate them. “I am so tired, I can't stay awake another second. You'll
have to get me onto the couch. If I wrestle one more second, I will surely
die.” “Waaah, that hurt, boo-hoo! You stepped on my toe. I will never be
your friend again….” “If I don't win, I am going to sulk all day.”
OceanofPDF.com

 —GETTING STARTED WITH PLAYFUL WRESTLING—

How do you get started with wrestling if you've never done it with your
child? Simple. You say, “Let's wrestle!” She says, “What's that?” You say,
“You try to pin me down using all your strength—you try to get me on my
back with both my shoulders on the floor (or, you try to get past me onto
the couch, but you can't sneak around; you have to use all your strength to
go right past me).” Start simple; later you can move to each of you trying to
pin the other at the same time. Or you could kneel on the floor and say, “Try
to knock me over.” (Having mats or at least rugs there would be a good
idea!)
At a young friend's birthday party, the boy's father pretended to be an ox,
and each child had to drag him over a line in the grass. The dad made lots
of loud moans and groans, while he used exactly the right resistance for
each child to feel he or she had really accomplished something.
Here's an example of a time when less resistance was needed, rather than
more; when the child didn't need an all-out wrestling match but an
experience of victory. My role was to be a bumbling, incompetent fool. You
see, Emma and I were at her grandparents' house, and she was very antsy. It
was just before her fifth birthday. You can easily imagine, I'm sure, the
agony of spending days waiting until presents could be opened. She wanted
to wrestle. Given her frustration level, I expected it to be an all-out fight,
where I would have to use lots of my strength and get her to use all of hers.
Instead, she set up a game where she tried to get past me without any actual
wrestling. I reached to grab her and she said, “Let me get past you.” In
other words, this time I didn't have to fumble around until I figured out how
much resistance to put up; she told me straight out what she wanted.
This is because after a few experiences of wrestling, children get pretty
savvy about it and tell you how they want it to go. I once asked a girl,
around seven years old, if she wanted to wrestle. She said, “Okay, but no
punching, no head locks, no kicking, you have to stop when I say stop, and
you have to start on your hands and knees.” I said, “You've done this

 before.” She had an older brother and somehow the two of them had figured
out how to make their wrestling fair, instead of her getting clobbered all the
time. She was a mighty wrestler.
My job with Emma this time was not to put up a tough fight and
encourage her to use all her physical strength. It was to let her win easily
while still making it fun. If all she had to do was race past me, it wouldn't
be much of a victory. After a few false starts (I was still thinking in terms of
wrestling) we eventually hit upon a very entertaining game. I stood at one
end of the room bragging about how strong and powerful and smart I was,
insisting that she could never, ever get past me. Then she would trick me
and somehow get across the room. I acted shocked and went over to the
other side of the room to do it again. At first, Emma used old tried-and-true
tricks: She would say, “Hey, look over there, it's an elephant,” and I would
look and she would waltz past. I increased the resistance by making her
come up with a new trick to sneak past me each time. Of course, if that had
frustrated her I would have let her do the same trick as often as she wanted.
I took her giggles and intense concentration as a sign that she wanted the
challenge of thinking up new tricks.
Some of her solutions were very creative, like pretending to hypnotize
me. When she would be stumped for a trick, I would give her a hint. For
example, standing up very tall with my legs spread apart, I would say, “No
one can get past me!,” and she would crawl under my legs. Then, of course,
the next time I would crouch down low (“You'll never trick me like that
again!”), and she would jump over me.
You may have noticed that this example did not actually involve any
wrestling. I include it here because the principles, especially getting just the
right resistance, are exactly the same. Part of the fun of this game was my
taking a few seconds to keep bragging after she had already gotten past me.
Children love it when you continue to brag after they've beaten you,
especially if you exaggerate a double take of shock and dismay that
somehow they have once again eluded your grasp.
During a play session with an eight-year-old boy—with whom I had
played once before, so I knew he liked to wrestle and he liked to win—I
started things rolling by saying “Oh no! Now I'm in for it!” in a mockhorrified voice as soon as I saw him. He responded with a diabolical laugh
and started to square off for a wrestle, but then he pulled away and went

 over to the toy shelves. I think maybe the wrestling was too much too soon.
He was interested, but he wasn't quite ready.
I wanted to let him be in charge of the play, but I also wanted to pull him
back into connection. I saw him eyeing the Lego box, and I didn't want him
to spend the whole time building a Lego ship and not making any contact,
so when he touched the box, I said, “Oh no! You touched the blue plastic
part, now the house is going to fall down!” His eyes lit up, and he got that
sneaky grin on his face again. He moved away across the room so that I was
between him and the box, and then he tried to lunge for it. (As an aside, I
am sure I have missed countless little signals like this, but happily I caught
that one. He could have just stayed where he was and touched the box
again. Instead, he set up a game, without a word, that required him to get
past me to touch it.) We had a long fun game of his trying to get to the box
and my trying to stop him. We did end up wrestling, but it was on his terms.
I have no idea why I said that touching the box would make the house fall
down. It was just the first thing to come out of my mouth, to get a rise out
of him and get him back engaged in the play. But I think it was actually the
right touch, because it seemed that the reason he avoided wrestling at first
was because he was afraid of his own aggressive impulses. The idea of the
whole house falling down just from his touching a box of Lego pieces
exaggerated this fear and made it funny. That, in turn, let him play out the
feelings through wrestling. Children who don't get the chance to wrestle
may have to bottle up those aggressive impulses until they explode.
OceanofPDF.com

 —AGGRESSION—

When we see National Geographic specials with shots of lion cubs play
fighting, we assume that they are practicing their hunting and fighting
skills. What we may not see is that they are also learning how to control
their aggression, how to modulate it. When male mammals fight each other
for dominance of the herd or the troop, they almost never fight to the death,
or even to serious injury, which means they hold back some of their
strength. Though we might expect that it would be better for them to fight
their hardest, apparently it is useful for animals to learn how to fight with
the equivalent of one paw tied behind their back. The result is a complex
dance to see who is strongest without really putting it to the test. The same
is true when young humans, especially boys, play fight. They aren't just
practicing aggression, they are practicing restraint and control as well. My
favorite examples of this come from baboons, who are uncannily similar to
us in many of their social relations. In some ways they may actually control
their aggression better than many humans.
One adolescent male baboon “liked to join groups of smaller baboons in
wild free-for-alls in which three or four monkeys would gang up on one.
But just when the situation started to get serious for the victim, they'd
switch to another target. Once in a while the overexcited youngsters would
get carried away and the playful melees would turn aggressive, but since
everyone wanted to continue playing, the aggression was usually controlled
and short-lived.” And Paul, the baboon mentioned in the quote at the
beginning of the chapter, restrained his aggression impressively when he
played with his baby brother. Even though Paul outweighed Patrick, thirtythree pounds to six, and male baboons have been described as “fighting
machines,” Patrick was never seen to get hurt.2
When children in the United States play war, they are usually doing the
same thing that lion cubs are doing when they play fight: testing their
muscles and their “claws,” and exploring the complex world of conflicts,
alliances, and strategies.

 But war play takes on a wide range of different meanings for different
children; this is especially true as you don't have to live in a war-torn
country to witness violence. We are all exposed to images of real and
imaginary violence every day—in movies, cartoons, and so on. Real
children are killed or injured every day in fights and shootings and
accidents. Some parents think war play is perfectly fine, a way of working
out feelings. After all, children—especially boys—have been playing these
games for centuries. Other parents are appalled, fearing that gun play will
lead to real gun violence, that cartoon deaths will numb children to the
reality of pain and suffering. I think that both groups are a little bit right.
[Note: When children who live in a war zone play war, it has a very
different meaning. They are using play to recover from the trauma of what
they have witnessed and experienced. Since the adults around them are
often either unavailable or traumatized themselves, this play can easily turn
into real aggression without any effective healing.]
There is a good kind of fantasy war play, which may include pretend
guns or other pretend weapons, complete with sound effects and elaborate
death scenes. Pretend guns (the kind you make with your finger or a
cardboard tube or a stick) allow children to create games and rules and play
out the themes important to them, including themes of warfare, violence,
and weapons. Adults do have roles in this kind of play, to keep it
lighthearted by dying in extravagant death scenes when the child says
“Bang bang, you're dead,” or to introduce themes of nurturing (the army
medic) and caring (the devoted soldier buddy) into the play.
On the other hand, toy guns, especially realistic ones, tend to restrict
children into playing in very limited ways. What else can you do with a Star
Wars Death Star besides blow up a planet? Yet when you get tired of
making your cardboard tube into a light saber, you can make it a rocket or a
conductor's baton. When you get tired of your fake Uzi, you're not likely to
play a game of Mideast peace talks. And in the most extreme situations,
play violence can simply be training for actual violence, rehearsing what to
do with a gun when you are angry at someone.
I don't believe you can or should ban all aggressive play. Children need
to come to terms with aggression—their own and others'—and if we don't
let them do it through play, they will do it in real life. Still, it is fine to
negotiate until you find a happy medium that lets them express themselves

 but does not violate your own values. For example, some parents allow
magical weapons such as wands and dragons' teeth, but not imaginary guns
and bullets. Trying to eradicate all aggressive play always backfires. Unable
to play out the aggressive feelings that they have inside, they may think that
something is wrong with them, because they aren't ever supposed to feel
angry or violent. They may become obsessed with war and weapons,
because these are forbidden playthings. Good creative play, however,
especially if you get on the floor with children to play with them, does not
make children violent, no matter what kinds of aggressive games they are
playing.
When people talk about aggression, they usually talk about boys, but
girls have to figure out this aspect of life as well. A friend of mine sent me
an e-mail: “Laurie's interested in aggression right now, and I'd love ideas for
how to help her do this in a healthy way. She talks about how she and her
friend Lily at preschool like to ‘push each other.' She loves books with
monsters in them. One of her favorite imaginative games is playing Billy
Goats Gruff—she takes great delight in butting and kicking the troll off the
bridge. If we talk about fish and animals that live in the ocean, all she wants
to know is whether they bite. Anyway, none of this disturbs me too much—
but maybe you'd suggest games or forms of play that would let her explore
her own power?”
In my answer to this mom, I first commended her for not getting freaked
out about her daughter's natural experimentation with power and
aggression. It's healthy and normal for her age. I then explained that Laurie,
like most preschoolers, was exploring several new things—new things her
body can do (push someone hard enough so they fall over) and new ideas
about how much control she has over her own aggression and how much
control others have over their aggression. So she and Lily have fun pushing
each other at school, and she wants to know whether fish bite.
Next I discussed games that play with these ideas. Games like Simon
says, red light/green light, and so on aren't about aggression, but they are
about control over impulses, so they are classic games for this age (and up
to age six or seven). Another idea is to have her bite something like a rag or
a doll. Then the parent can say, “Okay, bite harder, bite softer, bite quickly,
bite longer,” and so on. These rapid shifts that teach self-control are also
fun. This idea is discussed in more detail later (pages 109–110).

 Another game I suggested was a classic role reversal, where Laurie's
mom or dad could play the part of someone who is figuring out how to
handle aggression. This family lives on Fox Street, so I made up a game
called the Fighting Foxfish of Fox Street, where the parent is the biting fish
who chases after Laurie in a clumsy, undignified way, always missing,
maybe biting him- or herself instead of Laurie (using fingers or arms as
pretend jaws), or chomping on the chair and pretending to spit out yucky
splinters. The foxfish might say, “I just have to bite something right now.
Look, a worm. Ouch! That was my toe.” You don't want to imitate her
aggressive behaviors exactly, but make them close enough to bring the
giggles.
OceanofPDF.com

 —THE BENEFITS OF ACTIVE PHYSICAL PLAY—

Not all physical play involves roughhousing or wrestling. Some of it is
just climbing and swinging and running around. All children need this kind
of play, and most need way more than they get. One problem with TV is
that after hours of sitting in school, children don't need more hours of sitting
in front of a screen. In rare instances, TV can be a simple resting spot, and
then the child can return to more interesting and creative play. My friend
Charlie told me about his son, Davy, who loves sports. Davy will
sometimes take a break from playing some sport outside to come inside and
watch sports on TV. After a few minutes, he is eager to shut off the set and
return to actually playing. Back on the field or the court, he incorporates
some of the moves and the commentary he has just seen into his ballplaying. Unfortunately, that way of using TV is rare; more often, it saps the
energy and enthusiasm and creativity out of children and leaves them
semicomatose on the couch.
One difficulty for many parents in the area of physical play is how to
balance safety with adventurousness. We often have a tendency to be either
overly worried or not worried enough. I usually hover too much. When
Emma was little, I would stand right underneath her when she climbed on a
play structure, my face contorted by worry and anxiety. Her mother would
let her climb as high as she wanted, a confident smile on her face, trusting
Emma's judgment. At the time I thought this was horrible, but she was
right. No broken bones. And I know, as a therapist, that even if she had
broken a bone, bones heal faster than timidity and fearful-ness. Emma is
now confident and athletic, and I no longer cringe when she climbs a tree.
Janusz Korczak—who was the Dr. Spock of Poland before he was sent to
the Warsaw Ghetto—wrote about how much better psychologically it was
to give children piles of sand, sticks, hammers, nails, and wood, instead of
games and store-bought toys (he would surely have railed against TV),
despite the risk of injury.3

 Physical play is extremely important to children's development. From
newborns' first gentle tosses in the air to kids playing organized sports,
children learn by using their bodies. Because some of us adults would rather
sit and think and talk, we often make the mistake of trying to talk through
parenting problems that are better dealt with physically or through play.
Here are just a few examples of how active physical play can help children:
Self-soothing. Self-soothing is the ability to comfort and calm
yourself even if you are alone, and it is a major accomplishment of infancy—though many of us still have difficulty with it. Contrary to a
common belief, young children do not learn to self-soothe by being
left on their own to “cry it out,” or by being sent to time-out. They
learn it from being soothed by someone who cares about them, then
over time they take that comfort inside and are able to soothe
themselves.
When children have a general difficulty in calming down or
recovering from an upset, they need lots of cuddling time. But look at
what happens: If children can't settle down, they can't get the cuddling
they need. Boys are especially unlikely to get all the comfort and
cuddling they need because they don't sit still for it. Wrestling often
helps them, since active children may do better with active cuddling
than the sit-quietly-on-the-lap type of cuddling.
When children have a hard time calming down, parents are often
hesitant about roughhousing. They are afraid that it will escalate, and
that children won't be able to settle down. But these are the children
who need it most. You can't learn to settle down if you never get
revved up. Children with lots of energy who never get to roughhouse
end up going wild when they do get the chance, because they don't
have any practice with calming down. If you start to wrestle regularly,
both parent and child will learn to do a better job of winding down.
One thing I do is teach children how to take three deep breaths to
relax. Not all deep breaths are created equal. I teach children to take a
deep breath in through the nose, then let it out slowly. Let the exhale
take twice as long as the inhale, so that the next breath has to be even
deeper. Three or four of these make a huge difference. Make sure they
don't just take rapid gulps of air, hyperventilating, when you ask them

 to take three deep breaths. I find it helps to do it with them. It helps
them breathe more deeply, and it helps adults relax, too.
Children with difficulties in self-soothing also benefit from pretend
play with dolls, where they practice soothing the doll when it gets
upset, by cuddling it or laying it down for a nap. The parent can help
by pretending to be the cranky baby, or by modeling nurturing,
soothing behavior for children. It goes without saying that most boys
miss out on this kind of play, so it is no wonder that so many seem to
have short-circuited their dimmer switches (they can rev up until they
crash, but they can't slow down).
Paying attention. Parents and teachers tend to despair (or rush to
the medicine cabinet) when a child has difficulty with attention and
focusing. Stanley Greenspan offers some wonderful alternatives to
despair or medication. He recommends setting aside several periods
per day for a certain kind of play that he calls self-regulation. The
basic idea is to have the child jump, run, swing, dance, do jumping
jacks, or engage in any repeated rhythmic movement. Then you call
out frequent, rapid changes: “Go faster, slower, slower, faster,
superfast…. Go right, go left, go right, go left…. Hop on your left foot,
now hop on your right foot, now hop on both feet.” This game, which
most children find fun and which works very well in groups, is one of
the best ways to make up for deficits in emotional regulation, deficits
that many children, especially boys, seem to have. There are
innumerable variations. Hand a child a pile of blocks and say, very
fast, “Sort by shape. Now sort by color. Now use your left hand.” If
they like to sing, say, “Sing louder, now softer.” If they scream, ask
them to scream their loudest, then a little softer, then a little softer, then
whisper, and so on.
Self-soothing and paying attention are actually quite closely related.
For example, it may look like Jed's problem is that he can't sit still in
his fourth-grade class. He may join the ranks of boys diagnosed with
attention deficit disorder. But perhaps the real problem is that he can't
soothe himself when he feels anxious or frustrated. He has missed out
on one of the earliest developmental achievements of infancy, and it's
showing up years later. Unable to reduce his anxiety, he fidgets, kicks

 his neighbor, and gets in trouble. He may need a lot of connectionbuilding play.
Motor planning and sequencing. Some children have problems
with what is called motor planning and sequencing, which may be seen
in difficulty getting organized for school in the morning, or keeping
track of assignments, or seeing a project through to the end. To help
this problem through the use of physical play, create an obstacle
course, starting simple and making it harder as children master it. For
older children, make a treasure hunt, with clues that lead to more clues.
Once again, some activities that are more commonly played by girls,
like complicated hand-clapping songs or jump-rope games, are helpful
in developing these skills.
Impulse control. Children learn to control their impulses through
play. We may try to teach impulse control by lecturing, punishing, and
having friendly chats, but none of those are very likely to work.
Psychologists Elena Bodrova and Deborah Leong describe a five-yearold boy who was unable to sit during circle time at school without
interrupting the teacher. However, that same boy could be a perfect
student when he was playing school with other children. Over time, he
will be able to transfer this control he has during play into the
classroom.4
So, play out the situations where your child is impulsive. Just say
“Let's play school.” “Let's play getting dressed and ready.” “Let's play
that you want this toy real bad, and I won't share it with you.” “Let's
play crossing the street—oh no, the little bunny almost got hit by a
car.” Take a real situation that is hard for them, label it as play, and let
children practice gaining control over their impulses in ways that won't
get them punished or humiliated.
OceanofPDF.com

 CHAPTER 7

OceanofPDF.com

 SUSPEND REALITY:
REVERSE THE ROLES
“Let's pretend that you're the dad and I'm the daughter, and you're
mad at me.”
—A FIVE-YEAR-OLD GIRL to her angry father

In play, the ordinary rules of reality are suspended, and that is what
gives it such power. A little boy can imagine himself a superhero; a young
girl can wrestle her father to the mat and pin his shoulders down. Children
playing school get to hand out the assignments and the grades and the
punishments. The playing field is leveled, or even tipped a bit in favor of
the child, to make up for the frustrations of being smaller and weaker and
less competent than the bigger folks.
Even if no one shoves them around or takes advantage of them, children
still feel powerless sometimes. They can't always feel as if they are the king
of the mountain. After all, at the doctor's office, who gets the shot? In
school, who has to sit still and keep quiet unless called on? At home, who
makes the rules, and who is supposed to follow them? Who has to go to bed
at a certain time? Who has to say please and thank you? Of course, children
should get medical treatment and learn math and have bedtimes. But they
also need lots of playtime that reverses the roles, suspends reality, and lets
them be in charge. They need to take on the more powerful role—the hero,
the princess, the perfect student.
The most common way for children to cope with these injustices and
upsets is by using play to come up with a new script and create a new,
improved reality. In this new reality the roles are often reversed. They play
the part of the doctor, the teacher, the parent, the Tyrannosaurus rex, the
Power Ranger. Preteens take on the role of the teenager, and teenagers try
on adult roles.
OceanofPDF.com

 —REVERSING ROLES—

In the middle of a soccer game, Daniel, age seven, said he had to go to
the bathroom. He said, “Don't touch the ball,” and then he tucked the ball
away inside a box. I said I wouldn't touch it. He thought for a minute, then
said, “I don't trust you, come inside with me.” This was a new theme in the
play that I hadn't seen before, but it certainly made sense. Daniel tends to
wander off in school and get in trouble a lot, so he was playing out the
theme of someone not being trustworthy. In the play, he reversed the roles
so that I was the one who couldn't be trusted, and he could be the one who
was in charge of enforcing the rules.
Role reversal is especially helpful for restoring children's sense of
confidence—escaping from the tower of powerlessness—and for
overcoming fears and inhibitions. At times, children play out these roles on
their own, and all they need from us is to be their stage manager or
producer—providing the play space, the toys, the refreshments. Other
times, they need us to be a responsive audience. As they begin to engage in
fantasy play, they may also need us to participate as a fellow actor, or even
occasionally as a director. A popular philosophy of child rearing suggests
that the more we leave children alone the better; benign neglect will allow
them to blossom and develop on their own. That might be fine if it weren't
for the intrusive influence of our culture and the media. It's a paradox:
because of the pressures on children to limit their imaginations and
creativity, they actually need active adult help in order to write and star in
their own stories. Benign neglect doesn't empower children, it leaves them
at the mercy of the best marketing money can buy—marketing that doesn't
just tell children what toys to purchase, but also how to play with them.
OceanofPDF.com

 —FROM TRAGEDY TO COMEDY—

In a comedy, things are turned upside down for humorous effect. In a
tragedy, things start out upside down (“There's something rotten in the state
of Denmark”) and the play drives toward setting things right. Both of these
are applicable to children's play and the roles they take on. If you think
about what makes children giggle, often it's when reality is suspended and
roles are reversed. These are giggles of liberation as they are freeing
themselves from worries, fears, and especially from feeling powerless over
their lives. They laugh, and their world is set right again.
Playful Parenting helps this natural process along by making sure that
this time it is the adult, not the child, who is in the less powerful position.
Daniel, the seven-year-old who didn't trust me with his soccer ball, had
been having problems at school, mostly for being defiant and not listening.
In our play-therapy sessions he often liked to play the part of a kid who
breaks rules and gets in trouble, while he assigned me the role of the
authority figure, chasing after him to punish him.
This game, however, didn't bring on the giggles. He was easily upset
while playing it; nothing was ever quite right. After all, it was just a replay
of his school day, and even though I tried to liven things up by being a
bumbling goofy authority figure, the play didn't go anywhere. So one day I
decided to give a little push by suggesting a role reversal. First, I asked
Daniel what happened in his school if someone got in trouble. He said they
might get a time-out. I asked about what happened if it was something
really bad, and he said they would be sent to the principal's office.
“What does the principal do?”
“She talks to you!”
“Eek! That sounds really scary.”
Daniel leaned over and whispered to me, “Do you know the principal's
name? It's Miss Sternly.”
“Oh yeah? That's a good name for a principal.”
“Just kidding, it's Mrs. Atkins.”

 “I'll be the kid who gets sent to the principal, and you can be the
principal,” I suggested, trying to set up the role reversal.
“I'll be Mr. Sternly.”
“Okay,” I said, then I put on a child's voice. “Excuse me, Mr. Sternly, the
teacher sent me here, I'm not sure why; maybe because I turned everything
in the classroom over, including the teacher and all the desks and the fish
tank.”
“And the kids?”
“Yes, and the kids, I turned everything over because I didn't get to use all
the blue markers like I wanted to. What's my punishment?”
“If you do it again, you will be sent out of the school forever.” Daniel
took the role reversal idea and ran with it.
“Oh, no, that would be terrible.”
“And you have to fix everything with your own money. Now go back to
the classroom and fix everything up.”
Unlike our play together when he was the troublemaker, this simple
exchange with him as the principal was accompanied by a great amount of
giggling and clowning around.
Even though children learn at an amazing rate, they still often feel
incompetent, especially when they see others doing something they can't do
yet. Role reversal can help with this, too. The first time my daughter tried
cross-country skiing, she whined and complained bitterly. It seemed to me
that she was doing fine and would enjoy it if she just let herself, so I tried to
talk her out of feeling miserable. Guess what? It didn't work. I got so
annoyed at her complaining that it took me a long time to realize that she
felt incompetent and was frustrated by how often she fell (or almost fell)
and how hard it was for her to get up. All I could see was that she was
doing great for her first time. All she could see was that she fell and I didn't.
So I made a big show of falling myself, all four limbs and ski poles and skis
up in the air, aiming in different directions, shouting about snow getting in
my underwear. She laughed and laughed, then proceeded to enjoy herself
immensely for the rest of the time, and even asked if we could ski again the
next day. In other words, I reversed the roles and became the less competent
skier. That left her in the position of being relatively good at it, which gave
her a burst of confidence that let her enjoy it. Unfortunately for my

 wounded dignity, lectures and coaching didn't help at all. It took a more
playful response to cut through her feelings of incompetence.
Reversing roles usually means that the child is now in the one-up
position, but not always. Sometimes older siblings need something very
different. They are used to being the boss, and they may need a role reversal
that puts them down a notch. But in a playful way! In frustration, parents
often try to reverse the roles by showing the older sibling who's really boss,
but that usually just leads to more conflict between the siblings. What I
usually do with older siblings, or any older or stronger children who are
picking on smaller ones, is to say to them, in a mock-threatening voice,
“Hey, pick on someone your own size.” And I put up my fists in a parody of
a fighter's stance, waiting for them to come after me instead of their victim.
Of course, I never beat them up! More often I run and hide under a pillow,
or let them flip me over, or do something else to get their giggles going.
Other times, I wrestle hard with them, giving them more of a run for their
money than could the smaller child, who could only whine or tattle or
scream to get even. Underneath the aggression, bigger children usually feel
powerless, so I often have to reverse the roles once more, letting them be
more powerful than me (in play) instead of their taking advantage of being
more powerful than their little brother (in reality). It is important to be clear
that you are joking around and are not going to clobber them (even if
they've just finished clobbering a littler child). Give them, in a gentle,
playful way, the idea that they are not the boss of the world. And at the
same time, give them the idea that they can be powerful without hurting
anyone smaller. You can be someone they can fight with where they can go
all out and no one gets hurt.
OceanofPDF.com

 —STORYTELLING TO HEAL FEARS—

Scared children need a way to heal from their fears. One way that helps
is to tell the story of what happened to them, either in words or by acting
out the story in play. Often they play the same scenes over and over, scenes
that are closely or loosely based on their own experiences. Unfortunately,
children sometimes forget the details of scary events or refuse to talk about
them, because it is too painful. They may need some gentle reminders of the
incident from an adult, in order to finish dealing with it and put it away.
Adults, like children, often wish they could just forget about terrible things
that happen. But shoving it under the rug is not the same as really dealing
with it and putting it behind us. According to Barbara Brooks and Paula
Siegel, “The point of having the child tell the story is to allow her to
discharge the feelings connected to the memories and experiences. Without
this venting, the feelings leave a residue in the child's mind that will haunt
her later.”1 As I describe in greater detail in the last chapter of the book,
adults also need to tell their own stories. Parents need to talk to each other
about the joys and difficulties of parenting, and especially to share the
incidents and feelings that seem too painful or embarrassing or scary to tell.
Telling stories is also a way to tap playfully into the themes that are
important in children's lives. These stories work best when they are thinly
disguised versions of the truth—close enough to make a connection
between the story and the real events and feelings, but different enough to
make it safe. Storytelling is a wonderful way to introduce themes that a
child may avoid thinking about (or playing about) directly. A friend of
mine, whose son had a very bad time at his first preschool, noticed that he
hardly ever talked about it and never played school when he was at home,
even though usually he was very verbal and very imaginative in his play.
Even after he started a new school, which he loved, he never seemed to deal
with the difficulties he had at the old one. His mother couldn't believe he
didn't have any feelings about it, and she assumed he must have buried
them.

 Not wanting to force him to face these feelings (and, of course, you really
can't force a child to talk or play about something if he doesn't choose to),
but wanting to help him with these feelings somehow, she decided to tell a
story. She made up a story about a little mouse who was in a very leaky
boat on a storm-tossed sea, but then was picked up by a sturdy boat with a
wonderful crew. She never mentioned that the leaky boat represented the
first school and the sturdy boat represented the new school. At some level
though, he made the connection. He wanted to hear this story a dozen times
the first day she told it to him, and then spent the rest of the day acting out
the story, adding numerous details that the mom could see were
representations of what had happened in the old school. After this, he was
even more enthusiastic about his new school, and he was much more
confident there about trying new things. Did he realize the story was about
his school experiences? She didn't know for sure, but it didn't really matter.
One of the basic ideas of Playful Parenting is finding just the right
distance, and I think this is part of why children love stories so much. In
physical play, like running around in the park, finding the right distance is
simply a matter of how close or how far to be from the child. Distance is the
very essence of the game that I play with a four-year-old friend. She likes to
play with me, but she is pretty shy. She never lets me come nearer than
about six feet. If I do, she hides behind her mother's skirt. So we play a
version of chase or tag where I chase her, but I never invade her invisible
force-field range. I stay at least six feet away. Sometimes I shift gears and
start running away from her, and she chases me, maintaining the six-foot
distance. We never get closer than our fixed distance, but we are still
playing a game that is all about connection. Meanwhile, she spends the
whole time smiling so big I think her face is going to split open.
In the case of stories, it is the symbolic distance that is important. Talking
directly about a troubling topic may be too difficult, but sharing a fictional
version of the same topic may make it possible for the child to tackle it.
With a little practice you can make up stories that touch on the right themes
and feelings without hitting too close to home. Of course, some stories are
just stories and don't have to be related to the child's life.
Good stories are just the right blend of fact and fiction. They hit the
themes that are important to the child, but they do it in a disguised way,
with animal heroes or fictional characters. For example, a three-year-old

 with a new sibling may not want to hear any more lectures to “be gentle
with the baby…. I know you feel jealous sometimes…. Blah blah blah.”
She may, however, want her mom to read her a funny picture book about a
bunny rabbit with a new sibling, and read it over and over and over. On the
other hand, many children like hearing true stories, especially the story of
their birth or adoption.
As children grow older, we can shift from telling them stories to listening
to their stories. With children who are around ten or twelve, I love to ask
them to tell me their life story. They may need a lot of encouragement, but I
try to let them tell it themselves. Resist the temptation to butt in with your
own perspective on the story, or with extra details that you remember,
unless they ask you. If their story is sketchy, ask them to tell it again,
adding some more details this time. Keep asking for the story, and for more
details, for as much time as you have available. It can be a very powerful
experience for both of you. This storytelling idea is easier when it isn't your
own child, since when you know all the details, it is tempting to add them
or correct the child—both of which inhibit the child's ability to tell it his
way. For younger children you can start the story for them, and ask them to
add whatever they remember, or imagine.
Telling stories together is a great way to make sure the story is neither
too far a field nor too painful. Joint storytelling simply means that every
once in a while you ask the child for ideas on how the story should go. Or
sometimes children will forcefully offer their own ideas in a jointly told
story. My friend and colleague Sam Roth told me about a boy whose
favorite game was joint storytelling, where the child would create terrifying
dangers for the hero, while Sam would have to figure out ways to save him.
The boy was symbolically finding the right distance for talking about fears
and worries he could not talk about directly; Sam was symbolically talking
about safety and security.
Children use this idea of symbolic distance all the time in their own play,
especially dramatic play where they make up characters and act out scenes.
It is important to let them be in charge of this emotional distance, because
they are deciding how much they can handle. Lawrence Hart-mann, whose
parents were both psychoanalysts, tells a story about a drawing of a prince
he made when he was four. He was showing his parents the prince's sword,
and they said, “That's a penis.” “No,” he said, “it's a sword.” “No,” they

 insisted, “it's a penis.”2 Even if the sword was symbolically a penis (which
perhaps must be assumed in a family of psychoanalysts), his parents were
not allowing him to be the one to decide whether to play it safe and call it a
sword.
OceanofPDF.com

 —ACTING AND DIRECTING WHEN NECESSARY—

When children are dealing with feelings of powerlessness, they often
engage in role-reversal play on their own initiative. They may need us only
to be an eager audience. Other times, this kind of play does not develop
spontaneously, and more adult thought and planning are necessary. We must
be prepared to be actors in the drama, or even directors and playwrights.
Children who have specific fears, for example, are likely to need our help.
Most children will not make up pretend games on their own to deal with
these fears; instead, they will just avoid the thing they fear. If they are afraid
of bees, or the water, they may stop wanting to go outside, or refuse to go
swimming. Parents may get annoyed and frustrated, and even force children
to do these scary things, but sometimes the fears remain in place anyway.
The reason children often avoid using play to heal fears is that fear leads
people to avoid whatever scares them, which makes it hard to use play for
its healing purpose. Unfortunately, no one ever got over a fear by avoiding
it, only by facing it. If an adult initiates a fun game about it, children can
gain confidence that their fears can be overcome.
So if a child is afraid of bees, you might say, “You be a bee and I'll try to
run away from you.” Let yourself get “stung,” and then scream. Or you say,
“I'm a bee and I'm going to sting you,” but you play the part of a klutzy,
incompetent bee. Somehow you end up stinging yourself every time,
instead of the child. Or you keep bumping into walls and falling over on the
floor. Anything to get the child giggling about something that used to be too
scary even to think about.
I see a boy in therapy who is afraid of bugs, and he always makes me be
the one to fetch the ball or Frisbee when it goes into the bushes. I close my
eyes and stumble into the bushes, pretending to be too afraid of bugs to
look. I ask him to direct me, since I can't see, as I bumble around. He laughs
and tells me which direction to go and slowly builds up his confidence. If I
just went and got the ball for him, he might be happy to have avoided the
bugs, but he wouldn't have made any progress on his fears. If I had made a

 big deal about his fear, he would have been humiliated. Contrary to our
models of military training, people don't learn best when they are
humiliated. Taking on the fear myself seemed to unstick the fear a little bit,
like putting oil on a rusty hinge. Finding the right symbolic distance isn't
always easy though, since it may change from day to day. One day I tried
my trick of pretending to be afraid of bugs, and instead of playing that game
with me, he walked away. After a minute of standing in the middle of a
bush and feeling like a dope, I changed to being loudly afraid of thorns in
the bushes, instead of bugs, and he came running back over to coach me
through it so I could get the ball.
I have seen many parents allow fears like this to go unchecked forever,
limiting the child's activities, out of an effort to protect them from feeling
scared if they are forced to face the scary thing again. Other parents ignore
the fear, forcing the child to sink or swim. Playful Parenting provides a
middle ground, a more effective solution than either of these. Naturally, it
involves a playful attitude and attention to closeness and confidence.
Fernando, age three, was scared of swings. He usually wouldn't go on
them at all, but one time he went on because his best friend, Ned, was on
and he wanted to do everything Ned did. He was enjoying himself, but at
one point he got scared, let go of the chains, and fell off. Fortunately he
wasn't hurt, but, not surprisingly, he became more afraid of swings than
ever. His father asked me for ideas about how to approach this problem.
One option, I said, is to reverse the roles, to be the incompetent one who
can't swing. I find that it is often better to play at being incompetent instead
of pretending to be fearful, since that seems to let the child loosen up and
laugh about it more. So, you say, “I am the best swinger ever, no swing is
too tough for me, I know everything there is to know about swings,” and
then you act as if you can't tell the difference between a swing and a slide.
Or you can't even get on it properly. Or you fall off. Meanwhile, hopefully,
the child is laughing his head off, and/or giving you instructions on how to
do it properly, which, of course, you bungle. As always, be on the lookout
for signs the child is feeling teased or made fun of, and if this seems to be
the case, apologize and switch gears right away.
Unfortunately, my brilliant advice fell flat and didn't work at all, because
the child refused to go to the park. We went back to the drawing board. My
next suggestion was that Fernando's dad announce that they are going to

 have a special playtime to work on going on swings. We guessed that
Fernando would say, “I don't want to go on a swing” or “I don't like
swings.” That's okay. Dad could answer, “I know, we may not go on a
swing today, but we are going to work on getting over the fear of swings.”
If you don't ever mention swings, he'll never look scared, and it may look as
if the problem is solved. Maybe it's no big deal to be afraid of swings, but
who needs a life filled with restrictions like that? On the other hand, if you
say, “You're going on the swing and that's final. If you cry about it, you're
never going to the park again,” you may win the battle, but you're on the
way to losing the war. Children who end up being reckless daredevils—
mostly boys—have buried their fear and have to continually prove to
themselves that they aren't afraid, so they do increasingly dumb things.
The middle ground is to mention casually that you want to help him get
over his fear of swings. You have become the director and stage manager,
overriding his avoidance of swings, but not so much that he freezes up or
shuts all systems down. At the right distance—which may be just outside
your front door or twenty yards from the swing or right beside them—there
is an invisible boundary that represents exactly the border between avoiding
the fear and being flooded by it. This is the edge (it may not always be at
the same place even for the same child). This is where the work of using
Playful Parenting to heal fears takes place. At this edge, when you say,
brightly, “Let's go on the swing,” the child's response may be trembling or
screaming or laughing. They may burst into tears, or break out in a cold
sweat. That's the signal you're at the edge. That's good! Don't panic. Listen
to the feelings, but don't force them forward or let them give up. Just keep
relaxedly saying, “Let's go on the swing. Let's go one step closer. How
about if we touch the swing?” The child has to trust that you won't trick him
and make him get on before he is ready. Be prepared. This may take a few
minutes or a few hours, and it may all happen at one sitting or over the
course of several playtimes. Gradually, you inch toward the goal, with lots
of encouragement. In Fernando's case, it took a couple of times. Now
Fernando is king of the swings. This technique isn't exactly a role reversal,
but it involves balancing different roles—the boy who is paralyzed by fear,
the boy who never wants to go to the park again, and the boy who really
wants to be able to swing.

 Sometimes there's a different outcome to a scary experience. Instead of
avoiding the thing they fear, or playing a game about it, children
compulsively seek it out. They may try to use play to deal with the fear but
can't figure out how to do it in a way that works. Instead, they just keep
scaring themselves all over again. Horror movies and overly violent
television often have this result. They may want to watch the show over and
over not because they liked it but because they are locked in a cycle of
feeling scared. They try to overcome their fear by watching the show again
and again. They may not even look scared, and they may actually start
acting out the stuff they see on the screen.
To get over their fear, some children may just need to watch the show a
few times, until it gets less and less scary with each viewing. This is called
desensitization. Or they may need to watch it in your lap, or next to you, so
they can face the fear in a safer setting. If you are watching a movie like
this with children, it's a good idea to take what I call scream breaks. Pause
the movie and give a pretend scream, which will usually be followed by
giggles. This break lets some of the feelings out, like the valve on a
pressure cooker.
Occasionally, when children play out what they saw, or watch the show
over and over, instead of desensitizing they get totally scared all over again.
When this happens, the answer is once again for the adult to initiate rolereversal play, with the adult playing the role of a bumbling, incompetent,
and not-very-scary monster. It's a fun challenge to develop a monster or a
bad guy who is just the right mix of scary and goofy, in order to get children
to laugh. The laughter helps them out of the cycle of aggressive- or horrororiented play.
OceanofPDF.com

 —FANTASY PLAY—

In the epigraph to this chapter I referred to the time my daughter said to
me, when I was very frustrated with her, “Let's pretend you're the dad and
I'm the daughter and you're mad at me.” This isn't role reversal, and, in fact,
it was funny precisely because she assigned roles for the game that were
exactly the same as our real-life roles. What made it playful, and eased the
tension between us, was the way she took the real situation and made it into
fantasy play. This technique is even simpler than role reversal and can be
just as effective. If children are having trouble with friends, try simply
saying, “Let's pretend that we're friends.” See what happens. Let them
decide whether to make you a good friend or a bad friend. The fantasy play
might be close to the real situation, or only loosely related. With one young
boy, I made up a game called Larry's School of Nonsense and Goofiness,
because he never would have wanted to go along if I had said, “Let's play
kindergarten.” He loved to play the nonsense school game, and we made up
all kinds of silly rules and punishments and difficult challenges that
provided a dramatic (but humorous) link to the real-life difficult situations
facing him at school.
Another way to look at this idea is to see that children may get their sense
of power from controlling the game, in the same way they get it from
reversing the roles. For instance, when a client of mine—an only child—
was eight and waiting eagerly to hear about the birth of her new cousin, I
expected some “sibling” rivalry to appear in her play. Sure enough, she set
up a game with me where I was the father, she was the older sister, and
there was a new set of baby twins. I was supposed to pay attention only to
the twins and not to her. She proceeded to have a pretend temper tantrum. I
thought she would want me to nurture her in the game, but she wanted me
to ignore her and give all my time and energy to the babies. In other words,
she knew better than I how she wanted to use the play—not to have her cup
filled by playing the part of the cherished baby, but to take on the role of the
discarded older sibling in a playful way. We played in this vein for several

 weeks, and it was very effective in helping her deal with her feelings of
jealousy and rivalry. You'll notice that she did not reverse the roles, making
herself the baby (which is the most common response to a new child in the
family). She kept the roles intact but fictionalized the situation, twisting the
roles a bit. However, even though she retained the role of the displaced
older child, she did reverse the roles in a more basic way—no longer was
she the helpless victim of her own jealous feelings; instead, she could use
play to master those feelings. She may not have been able to control the
amount of attention the new cousin would soak up, but she could control
the game we played.
Another painful theme that children will often try to introduce into a
game is the feeling that no one likes them. Unfortunately, when children try
to reverse the roles with this theme, adults get confused. The play often runs
into a dead end. Children say, for example, “I hate you,” or “You're stupid.”
The parent feels outraged or rejected. But the children are not going to curl
into your lap and cry, “No one likes me,” even though that's what they
really mean. We have to read between the lines and understand that they are
telling us—in their own way—how much they hurt inside and how we can
help them. So instead of yelling at them for talking to us that way, and
sending them to their room, we might say, “Waaah, Joey called me stupid.
Waaah, no one likes me.” Or, “You can call me stupid, but you'd better not
call me Wiener Schnitzel.”
One boy, who liked to play catch in his sessions, gave me a clue about
this theme of not being liked. Once when I dropped the ball, he said, “That
ball doesn't like you.” I knew he was struggling with not having many
friends at school, but he never talked about it. So I took advantage of this
opening to get him to giggle about how upset I was that the ball didn't like
me. Another child had a trick where she would tell me to sit down on the
couch, and then push me off so I couldn't sit down. She would say, “The
couch doesn't like you.” Since she often got in trouble for hitting other
children in school because she felt as if they didn't like her, I started hitting
the couch and yelling at it while she laughed. I acted real surprised that the
couch still didn't like me even after I punched it a bunch of times.
Psychiatrist Stanley Greenspan writes, “The transition to pretend play is
one of the most important leaps your child will make.”3 Fantasy play

 requires, and fosters, symbolic thought, abstraction, and creative
imagination. Some children leap right into fantasy play on their own. Others
need a little push from adults. Try picking up a doll or stuffed animal and
making it into a character with a funny voice. Call the climbing structure
Mount Everest. Start playtimes with the phrase, “Let's pretend…” Once a
fantasy game has started, play your part with gusto, and thicken the plot.
Introduce conflict or challenge. Narrate the story. If a child doesn't ever
seem to engage in fantasy play, try adding a fantasy element to the games
they do like to play. For example, Ken and I play chess a lot in our sessions,
and he almost never does any kind of fantasy play. So sometimes, during
chess matches, I say, “I'll be Bobby Fischer and you be Gary Kasparov.”
That lets me exaggerate feelings of anxiety and nervousness—feelings that
Ken tries to manage by denying them—through my pretend character.
Whenever a child is struggling with an emotion or a confusing concept in
their lives, it helps to give that role to a fantasy character. For a child
obsessed with fairness, for example, the parent might pick up the child's
second favorite animal or toy and make it say, “That's not fair! You always
play with Tigger!” You might develop characters who are sad, or
experimenting with being naughty, or aggressive, or unable to solve a
problem similar to one that is facing the child. “All the other animals teased
me when you were at school today. I don't know what to do.” “I'm scared
when you turn the light out.” Don't be surprised if the child is very mean to
this puppet or doll that represents him; it's his way of showing how bad he
feels about whatever problem he is having. He may also show you exactly
what he needs from you, by helping the character in a very smart way. This
technique lets the child have some perspective on feelings and problems. It
helps parents, too, who often feel helpless when their child is struggling
with something, but can't or won't talk about it.
Among the many fantasy roles that children take on in their play are good
guys and bad guys. Once known as cops and robbers, this kind of play is
now more likely to involve superheroes or fantasy characters from TV and
movies. The main thing for parents to remember about this type of play is
that it isn't as destructive or as horrid as it may seem. Remember Paul, the
baboon in the last chapter who restrained his aggression in order to wrestle
safely with his little brother? Well, superhero or good guy/bad guy play is a
human way of practicing control over aggression. Some children prefer to

 be the bad guy, experimenting with being frightening or dangerous.
Actually hurting other people isn't helpful, but playing at it can be both fun
and educational—in the sense of learning to manage aggressive feelings
and impulses. Other children prefer to be the good guy. They like to be
aggressive in a way that is socially acceptable—by being Batman, for
example, or a soldier. That is, they get to exercise their aggression but only
at acceptable targets.
Some parents love this kind of superhero play and get into the characters
along with their children. They understand that if they are playing the role
of the bad guy or the monster, they need to be not too scary—powerful
enough to be interesting, but not overwhelming. Maybe a little bumbling or
incompetent (like Lex Luthor in the Superman movies). Other parents hate
this kind of play and would love to ban it. Sorry. Children who want to play
these games need to play them, and if they aren't allowed to, they will go
underground and do them anyway. It is much better to join in and play with
them, which then lets you shift the play a little bit if it gets too violent or
out of hand.
OceanofPDF.com

 —FINDING AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT—

Who writes the scripts that children act out when they demand a new
toy they've seen advertised on TV, when they tease one another, when they
play Pokémon or Power Rangers, when they go on a date, when they sneak
behind the school to smoke a cigarette? Not our children, and not us. These
scripts are handed down year after year, enhanced by television and movies.
These prescripted scenarios kill imagination and creativity. In contrast,
good fantasy play is spontaneous and free. It follows an imaginary script
that is continually evolving and changing, a script “written” by the child or
a group of children. This script may be inspired by characters or situations
or scenes from a movie or TV show, but it quickly leaves that starting point
to explore new territory of the imagination.
But look around at children playing; for the most part, you will see them
acting out someone else's script instead of their own. Their own imagination
is overpowered by the intensity and the repetition of what they see on the
screen. If they break away from the screen at all to play, the game follows
the prescripted story line exactly, or it fizzles out to boredom, or else the
game becomes violent. This violence is not the playful use of fantasy but
true aggression, reckless and dangerous. Toys that are spin offs from
movies and television and video games keep the play locked to that script.
What else can you do with a gun besides shoot with it? On the contrary, a
simple cardboard tube can be a light saber, a sword, a tree, a trumpet, and
on and on and on. Of course, some children will get creative even with the
most uninspiring toys, but often it takes some adult help to get the play
unstuck from the same exact characters, scenarios, and outcomes. Although
children love repetition, they need to change things a little in their play.
They need to repeat, but with a little twist. Most toys are junk, by which I
mean they can do only one thing, over and over. Great toys, like good
dramatic play, allow children to make the world their own and allow full
expression of their creativity.

 On the other hand, most play experts agree that you can't successfully
ban games based on TV shows, especially war play or weapon play. You
can try to ban it, but they are very likely to become obsessed with the idea
of it, because it is forbidden. Beyond that, though, they need to play these
games in order to figure out what those images and stories mean to them.
By playing with them, we can help children rediscover their own stories,
their own characters, their own source of imaginative play.
But if we just let them run wild with violent play, that does not leave
children free to make their own choices. It actually leaves them in the hands
of the media, who are exerting constant pressure on children, especially
boys, to fill their play and their imaginations with weapons. So if you can't
ban it and you can't ignore it, what do you do? By now you won't be
surprised by my answer: Play it with them. When they shoot you, fall down
dead—preferably on top of them. Or pretend you were shot with the love
gun (see chapter three). Pretend to be wounded and see if you can get the
child to be a nurturing medic for a minute instead of a soldier or superhero.
Exaggerate the mayhem in a way that brings on the giggles.
In the same way that toy guns can inhibit children's creative play, graphic
images of sex and violence can overwhelm children's imaginations. These
images replace children's own creations, the ones they come up with in their
own minds, with a mass-produced and overly stimulating imitation. You
can see the results in their play. I can often tell just by how children play
how much television they watch, or what types of things they are allowed to
see. Shows that mix sex and violence, from slasher movies to professional
wrestling, are the worst.
Many toys come with their own prepackaged scripts for how children are
supposed to play them, and, in fact, our whole culture writes scripts for
children (and adults) about how to behave. We are rewarded for following
these scripts and punished for deviating from them. Boys are supposed to
act one way, girls another way. Teenagers are told exactly how to rebel, and
especially what rebellious products to buy. Children are programmed to
watch a commercial and say, “I want one of those.” Children need help with
all this.
To counteract these prescripted roles, one thing we can do as parents is,
together with our children, examine these images. Watch TV and movies
with them, and stop to discuss the things you see. Play games based on

 what you've watched, but twist things around a bit. Play the role of the
cheerful idiot who is entranced with Power Rangers, or who tries to imitate
the dancers in heavy-metal rock videos.
Through billions of dollars in marketing, the corporations of the world
write a master script for our children, with one and only one role for them
to play: the consumer. When this role is assigned to them, and they go along
with it passively, they are just locking themselves in the tower of
powerlessness. One great way to take a step out of this tower is to
understand how television influences people. Years ago, my daughter saw a
video at a children's museum about truth versus deception in television
advertisements aimed at children. Ever since, she has been wisely skeptical
about claims made in commercials. This is another type of role reversal,
because it puts children in the driver's seat, as decoders of the media
message, instead of in the role of passive consumers.
Do you know who the true experts are in tuning in to children,
understanding their motivations, their themes, their feelings? These are
experts who put my fellow child psychologists and myself to shame. They
spend hour after hour, day after day, paying attention to children and trying
to figure out how they think and what they feel. Too bad they work for
Disney, and Cartoon Network, and Nickelodeon, and MTV, and ad
agencies, and toy companies. They have an interest—their profit—in
knowing what makes children laugh, what scares them, what they like to
play. We have to do at least as good a job as they do. Our stake in paying
attention to children—tuning in—is much greater than a simple profit
motive.
These corporations are tuning in to our children, and our children are
tuning in to TV and magazines. The media aimed at children are so much
more exciting and enticing than we'll ever be. So children tune us out, and
we respond by tuning them out. David Elkind, famous for his book The
Hurried Child, talks about the way this media-driven consumerism affects
our children. “What characterizes contemporary capitalistic societies,
particularly the United States, is the exploitation of children as consumers.
Toy and clothing manufacturers and the music and movie industries now
view children and youth as a vast market.
Indeed, teenagers have the highest percentage of disposable income of
any age group in our society. And as children and youth become markets,

 their health and welfare become secondary to the accumulation of capital as
they did at the time of the Industrial Revolution [when their labor was
exploited].”4 Elkind believes that this trend explains why there is less and
less truly free play in the United States and other Western countries these
days. It is replaced by play that brings somebody a profit. Just compare
street games of hide-and-seek and kick the can with contemporary products
such as Pokémon and American Girl dolls. Some children barely know how
to play if they don't have a store-bought toy with them. Meanwhile, school
days contain less and less play time, even in kindergarten, and more
academic preparation for becoming a productive member of society.
One thing I love about visiting New York City is that there are so many
ads that are geared to advertisers, as opposed to consumers. I usually find
these marketing strategies fascinating yet disturbing. On a recent trip, I
noticed two of these ad campaigns. One was for Nickelodeon, the other for
MTV. It seemed that one or the other of these ads was on nearly every bus
kiosk. The Nickelodeon ads all described a typical child, focusing on that
child's unique talents. They all ended with some phrase about how these
children made their own decisions about what shoes to buy, or made the
decision for the whole family about what sports drink to buy, or had an
average of so many dollars allowance each week. The idea was that
Nickelodeon could deliver those consumers to any advertiser smart enough
to advertise on their network. I was appalled. The ads were pretending to
celebrate child power, then undermining it.
The MTV ads were more subtle. They didn't even come out and say that
they were aimed at advertisers. The whole ad was a word or phrase that
seemed to be some new teenage slang. Underneath was the definition and
the MTV logo. I thought these were ads for some hot new show that I didn't
know about, because I'm an old guy who doesn't watch MTV. My niece,
who lives in New York and follows the advertising world, informed me that
there was no new show. In fact, there was no new slang. These phrases were
made up in the MTV marketing department, and the ads were supposed to
make people think: I don't understand kids today, but I don't have to,
because MTV does. I just have to hand over my money to them, and they'll
do the rest, making their viewers into my customers. Scary. As if it isn't
hard enough to bridge the gap between the generations, now we have

 advertising designed to make adults feel as if we will never understand
young people.
Unplug and play.
OceanofPDF.com

 CHAPTER 8

OceanofPDF.com

 EMPOWER GIRLS
AND CONNECT
WITH BOYS
A three-year-old boy to his father:
“Dad, you're a man. And Mommy is a woman.
And George is Curious.”

Parenting has been described as the process of giving our children both
roots and wings. In the language of Playful Parenting, filling a child's cup is
a metaphor for watering the plant so the roots will grow deep, and also a
metaphor for nurturing the bird so her wings will soar. Every child needs a
full cup; every child needs both roots and wings. Unfortunately, boys and
girls are treated in ways that damage their roots and wings. One goal of
Playful Parenting is to help correct some of this damage. Because of the
way girls tend to be inhibited from exploring, they need help in spreading
their wings, exploring the wide world, and discovering their own power
room. Because boys are so often left alone with their feelings and deprived
of the comforts of cuddling and nurturing, they need extra help in putting
down roots.
The story of the love gun (page 50) was about using playfulness to help a
boy connect on a human-to-human level instead of repeating the same tired
script about shooting and killing. Though I have played variations of the
love gun game with girls, I play it much more often with boys, because
boys are more likely to need that added push to reconnect. By the same
token, though I wrestle with boys and do my best to encourage their
confidence, I make sure to pay extra attention to the themes of power and
confidence in girls.
One of the few things I remember from graduate school is a set of studies
that I call the tabletop experiments, which are about the different ways
people treat an infant depending on whether it is a boy or a girl. Everyone
was shown the same baby, but half were told it was a boy and half were told
it was a girl. That way, the researchers knew that the subjects in the

 experiment were not just responding to subtle differences between boy
babies and girl babies. In some studies, a crawling baby, dressed only in a
diaper, was left on a large table in a room with a stranger. In others, the
subjects heard a tape recording of a crying baby coming from the next
room. The researchers secretly watched the scene, and measured how much
the subjects let the child explore, how soon they went to get the baby when
it “woke up,” and how much they interacted with the baby.
If the adults thought the child was a girl, they went to get her sooner
when she cried, and they interacted with her more. If they thought it was a
boy, they waited much longer to comfort the crying baby, but they
encouraged more exploration and more gross motor activity. In other words,
only girls were given roots; only boys were allowed to spread their wings.
The actual sex of the baby didn't matter at all.1 Another of these tabletop
studies is especially relevant to girls and power. John and Sandra Condry2
showed adults videotapes of a nine-month-old baby responding to different
toys. Some were told the baby was a girl and some that it was a boy, but in
fact, all subjects saw the same videotape. The adult subjects were asked to
rate the intensity of pleasure, anger, and fear that they saw displayed by the
baby. The biggest effect was found with the jack-in-the-box, which made
the baby in the videotape cry. The raters described this cry as anger if they
thought it was a boy, and as fear if they thought it was a girl. Also, the
people who thought they were watching a boy described the baby as being
more active and more potent than those who thought they were watching a
girl. It's no wonder that later on, boys are more likely to be punished while
girls are more likely to be overprotected.
These tabletop studies illustrate my basic idea about how boys and girls
are treated differently—almost from birth—and what they need from us as a
result. They are not merely treated differently, they are each limited,
blocked from their full potential. Girls are comforted, but are not usually
encouraged to explore or take risks; they need Playful Parenting that builds
empowerment and confidence. Boys are allowed to explore and are actively
encouraged to be daring, but they are left alone when they are scared or
lonely or sad. In fact, as they get older, they are not just left alone but
punished for expressing these feelings. So boys need Playful Parenting that
pays extra attention to connection and feelings.

 When I talk to groups of adults, I often ask what annoys or aggravates or
bewilders them about boys. It is no wonder that the answers, especially
from women, come back loud and clear: “They don't talk.” “They're closed
up.” “They don't share how they feel.” The answer is simple: connect,
connect, connect. Do it as playfully as possible, but do it. For girls, the
answer is just as straightforward: empower, empower, empower.
In Failing at Fairness, an influential book about girls being shortchanged
by schools, Myra and David Sadker tell a story about a tenth-grade math
class.3 A girl goes to the teacher for help and is told the answer. A boy goes
to the same teacher for help and is told to go back and try to work it out for
himself. The Sadkers argue that the girl is cheated out of the chance to think
for herself and develop her mathematical ability. I agree. I think they miss
half the point of the story, though, which is that the boy loses out, too. It's
the tabletop experiments all over again—the girl is given warmth but is
discouraged from spreading her wings by working hard at the problem; the
boy is given high expectations about achievement but has to do it all on his
own, without any emotional support, without roots. Instead, the teacher
might have said to both students, “Let's work it out together.”
On average, boys and girls do play differently. Boys more often
roughhouse; girls more often play house. I hear over and over from parents:
Give a girl a fire truck, and she'll wrap it in a blanket and put it to bed. Give
a boy virtually anything, and he'll make a weapon out of it. Of course, like
all sex differences, these differences are averages. Men on average are taller
than women, but we all know short men and tall women. Some boys prefer
playing house to roughhousing, and vice versa for girls.
The fact that boys and girls play differently, and that they start to play
differently very early, is often taken as evidence that these differences are
natural or normal. Others insist that the differences are all learned, drilled
into children by a sexist society. They are both sort of right. Many years of
research can be summarized in one sentence: Inborn sex differences are
real, but they are quite small.4 Parenting, culture, and education can either
minimize or exaggerate these small biological differences. In our society
they tend to be exaggerated.
Both closeness and confidence should be every child's birthright. But
girls are discouraged from being too powerful, and they are encouraged to

 be overly “nice,” to care more about relationships than about achievement.
If they don't fit this mold, they are called names that suggest they are not
proper females: bitchy, pushy, bossy, dyke. Meanwhile, boys are
discouraged from being too close. In place of closeness, boys are taught and
pressured to overemphasize competition, assertiveness, achievement, and
strength. Look at the insults a boy hears if he is connected instead of
disconnected. If he has a close connection with his mother, he's a mama's
boy; if he likes to play with girls, he's a sissy; if he wants to hug or hold
hands with a boy, he's a fag; if he wants an equal, respectful relationship
with his girlfriend, he's henpecked; if he likes school, he's a nerd.
In a world without these prejudices and without this differential treatment
of boys and girls, would boys and girls still play differently? We don't
know. We do know that now, in our current society, children play in ways
that mirror the sex roles they see around them. Take a common example:
the difference between the way boys and girls respond when they see a bug.
Many girls, even after decades of feminism, will see a bug and go “eek,
ooh, ugh!” and act out the famous helpless, pathetic, powerless, weak,
damsel-in-distress scenario. A typical boy—even if his father is a diaperchanging New Age sensitive guy—will see the same bug and smash it,
scrunch it, kill it. Preferably with sound effects resembling weapons of
mass destruction. Neither of these is a very rational response. They are both
exaggerations of sex-role stereotypes. Meanwhile, boys who act scared of
the bug and girls who trample the bug run the risk of being teased for being
so different from the norm.
A few years ago I was playing with my daughter and a friend of hers, a
boy in her kindergarten class. They were playing a fantasy game about
knights and princesses and dragons. Even though my daughter was
physically stronger and more confident than her friend, somehow the knight
kept having to rescue the princess. I remember thinking, Where do they get
this stuff? I tried to get the princess to rescue the knight for a change, but
eventually had to forget about it: children play to try on adult roles, and this
includes sex roles—figuring out what it means to be male or female. In
some ways, these roles have changed dramatically in the last few years. In
other ways, though, they've barely budged since the Stone Age, certainly
not since the age of chivalry.

 One thing that has always puzzled me is why toy companies still package
tea sets in pink boxes with pictures of girls on the cover. They know how to
get boys to play with tea sets, and girls to play with robots, but they'd rather
not. Even the chance to sell twice as many tea sets isn't a big enough
motivation to get the marketing business out of its rut of toys for boys and
toys for girls. Of course, it's not really a big deal whether a child plays with
a tea set or not. Or is it? One study found that girls who engaged in more
stereotypical feminine play as young children did worse than other girls in
math and science in school.5 We can only speculate about the long-term
effects on boys of being limited to certain toys.
The Playful Parenting prescription, of course, is get down on the floor
and play with children. No matter what games we play with them, we can
make a special effort to connect with boys and empower girls, so that all
children can grow roots and wings.
OceanofPDF.com

 —WHY I PLAY BARBIE (AND ACTION FIGURES),
EVEN THOUGH I HATE IT—

My daughter, the offspring of two ardent feminists, used to love to play
with Barbies and dolls based on Disney-movie heroines. Thankfully, she's
mostly outgrown it now. I hated playing this with her. It was boring, stupid,
and against almost everything I believe in. Yet, sometimes, when my
daughter asked me, I would play. Children play in order to figure things out
about the world, and girls certainly have a lot to figure out in the areas of
body image, clothing, makeup, looking pretty, romance, etc. The messages
girls receive about all this are confusing and misleading and
disempowering, and they need our help in sorting it all out. In the same
way, boys need help figuring out all the messages they get about aggression
and competition. That's why I also suggest that parents join in their sons'
aggressive play (which many parents—especially mothers—hate as much
as I hate Barbie).
Many writers have bemoaned the way our culture disempowers girls,
especially as they approach adolescence. I think that what happens is that
girls experience a disruption in their sense of the world and of themselves,
especially about their appearance. The unrealistic and distorted expectations
about how girls should look, and about what is pretty, lock many girls into a
fortress of powerlessness. If looks are all-important, and they don't look the
right way, then things are pretty miserable. Mary Pipher, author of Reviving
Ophelia, talks about how girls experience a significant drop in self-esteem
within minutes of thumbing through fashion magazines.6 If your daughter
reads those magazines, go through them with her. Don't let the images play
out their seductive games without some input from you, some grounding in
reality.
How can engaging in play help your daughter be empowered? If you sit
on the floor and play Barbies with her, you can shake things up a bit. Be
wild with the dolls: dance them around, dress them up oddly, make them

 say outrageous things. I like having one doll play up the sexist stereotypes
that the dolls are based on, while another more powerful doll stands up to it.
“I'm the femininity police, and you aren't being ladylike!” “Shut up and
leave me alone; I like to run and jump, and you can't stop me.” I try to
introduce plots that are different from the love and romance and marriage
scenarios that are the staple of girl-oriented games and movies. Have you
ever noticed that Disney movies that focus on male characters are all about
identity, like Pinocchio finding himself, while movies with female leads are
all about romance—The Little Mermaid, Snow White, Cinderella?
To counteract the impact of what I have described in the tabletop
experiments, we have to encourage girls to be adventurous, loud, strong,
physically powerful, and assertive. We need to fight the notion that strong
women and girls are not proper females. This may require, especially for
mothers, that we take a close look at our own upbringing, and our own
inhibitions about wrestling or rough-and-tumble play. All children can use a
hand with being more confident and being powerful in a healthy and
constructive way, but girls face extra obstacles to discovering this reservoir
of strength.
If I play Barbies and Little Mermaid with girls in order to counteract the
effects of what our society values and devalues, the same goes for playing
war games and action figures with boys. I overcome my own pacifism and
gentle nature in order to throw myself enthusiastically into games about
killing and fighting and mass destruction. I insert a little reality into the play
here and there—“Ouch, that must hurt!”—and I insert as much closeness as
possible. I fall over dead on top of them if I get shot, cower behind them if
an enemy is nearby, take any excuse to be physically and emotionally close.
With both boys and girls, the Playful Parenting approach is to join in first,
then gradually lead them out of the spot where they are stuck. If we lecture
them, or refuse to play a game because it is too violent or too girly, they
shut us out. Who can blame them? We wouldn't like it if someone told us
our favorite activities were stupid. If we leave them alone to figure out all
this confusing stuff about being male or being female, they really aren't
being left alone at all. On the contrary, if we leave the scene, they are told
how to behave and how to look and what to think by marketing
departments, advertising agencies, and the entertainment industry.
Corporations are eager to fill the gap that is left when we step aside.

 Competition is an area that is confusing for both girls and boys, and for
their parents. Girls may give up on trying their hardest, or may not be able
to enjoy a victory, because they feel bad for the losers. Boys, meanwhile,
are expected to care more about winning than about friendships or feelings.
In other words, once again our society sets up boys to be isolated and girls
to be powerless. Boys are supposed to sacrifice relationships and emotions
in favor of competition and victory, while girls are supposed to sacrifice
individual achievement in favor of not hurting anyone's feelings.
I saw this distinction clearly last spring in my daughter's soccer league.
Her team was supposed to play against another team from the same school
—in other words, against their friends instead of against strangers from
other schools. The girls were dreading this encounter and wished for rain,
snow, anything to avoid having to pit competition against friendship. I was
mentioning this to another parent, who then told me about her son's baseball
team. When they were scheduled to play against their friends and
classmates, they didn't pray for rain. Both teams relished the coming
encounter. For weeks ahead of the game they taunted and teased one
another, divided along team lines at lunch, vowed to destroy each other on
the field, and so on. This teasing among boys is very confusing for parents.
Boys use teasing, and even hitting, as a way of being close to one another,
especially since more direct ways of expressing affection are forbidden to
boys after age three or four. On the other hand, this teasing and shoving can
cause real pain and fear.
I am not arguing that the girls should be more like the boys or that the
boys should be more like the girls. As with the bugs (squashing them versus
running away screeching), the answer is somewhere in between. With our
help, boys can be as well connected as they are powerful, and girls can be
as empowered as they are connected.
For another example, look at children's artwork. Except for a few who
have special talent or special teachers, most children become very
stereotyped in their artwork. Boys will draw weapons and spaceships, girls
will draw hearts and rainbows and maybe horses. I can't believe that this is
a biological difference. I think it's a matter of being stuck in sex roles. Help
them learn to draw more interesting things. Draw together to help them out
of the lonely corner where the stereotyped drawings repeat in an endless
loop. Exaggerating or playing with these differences also helps loosen

 things up. “Aw, you drew a love battleship; how cute. All those guns poking
out of it are so precious….” “Oh no! That rainbow shot me with a heart
dart; I'm bleeding.”
Since most boys have been pressured not to cry, or have gotten in trouble
with their peers for crying, I made up a character called Never-Cry-Man. I
say, with a dramatic flourish, “I am Never-Cry-Man; I never cry,” and then I
burst into fake tears at the drop of a hat. With girls I will play a character
who is a parody of girliness, who lives and breathes for fashion and hair
design. Or I play the role of a handsome prince who cares only about what
the girl dolls look like. He's a very funny sexist pig who provokes laughter
and lets girls reject the timeworn stereotypes. These games loosen up the
absurd images that the media try to lock into our children's brains.
OceanofPDF.com

 —CONNECTING WITH BOTH BOYS AND GIRLS—

Disconnection is natural and inevitable, and all children occasionally
lock themselves in the tower of isolation. Some spend more time in that
tower than others. As a group, however, boys face extra obstacles in
reconnecting. Because of how boys are treated, they are more likely to have
difficulty expressing feelings, showing that they've been hurt, looking
vulnerable, maintaining intimate relationships, and giving or accepting
tenderness. Unfortunately, these are exactly the ways to get out of that
tower of isolation. The result is what Daniel Kindlon and Michael
Thompson refer to, in Raising Cain, as boys' emotional illiteracy. That's a
real problem, because emotional literacy is necessary for psychological
healing and for real intimacy.
A repeated finding in research on childhood sexual abuse is that girls are
more likely to be abused within the home, by relatives, while boys are more
likely to be abused outside the home. In other words, those who prey on
girls tend to manipulate the close relationship they have. Pedophiles who
prey on boys tend to use the fact that boys are starved for affection and
contact. In my work with adult men, I heard story after story of boys who
were sitting ducks for pedophiles because these predators offered them
“love,” affection, respect, attention, and access to forbidden things like
alcohol or pornography. The abusers were offering these things only for
their own sexual gratification, but the boys were taken in because they were
so desperate for connection. The emotional miseducation of boys leaves
them lonely, which sets them up to be exploited and abused. Then, unable
to freely express their emotions, this miseducation interferes with their
recovery from those traumas. Many of these men came from loving, normal
homes. Their empty cups weren't the result of negligent parenting but of our
society's mistreatment of boys. Obviously, playing more with our sons isn't
the only answer, but it is a significant start.
Look how hard it is for men and older boys to have any kind of physical
contact that isn't violent, competitive, or sexual. We laugh at men's

 awkwardness when they hug each other, or when they don't know how to
comfort a friend, but it is more poignant than funny. Cuddling more with
boys is not going to reverse these powerful social forces overnight, but we
have to start somewhere. We all know how destructive it is to maintain the
archaic standard that boys don't cry, yet we still react differently to boys'
tears than to girls' tears.
The starting place is emotional connection. Empathy, emotional
intelligence, kindness—these are all learned in close relationships, not from
books or moral lessons. And they are learned in play. Unfortunately—
catastrophically—some of the things that would help boys connect are
considered “girl things”: cuddling; playing with baby dolls; reading and
writing poetry; practicing music, art, literature, drama, singing, dancing.
Some boys do these things, but they are much more common and much
more encouraged in girls. Boys who do them may pay a severe price, and
they often end up either giving up these activities or getting labeled as
sissies. The ironic thing is that it isn't hard to get boys to play with dolls—
many studies have shown that just watching a few videos showing men
taking care of babies increases preschool boys' interest in nurturing doll
play—but as a society we aren't sure if we want them to. We somehow want
boys to grow up to be nurturing fathers without any risk of their becoming
sissies.
There are games that we can play with boys to improve their emotional
literacy and their ability to connect, games that won't be rejected as
unmanly. Some of these activities focus on communication. In order to help
boys to talk more, play simple word games and language games. One of my
favorites is fortunately/unfortunately, where one person starts a story with,
“Fortunately…” and the other person says the next line, starting with
“Unfortunately…” You go back and forth telling a tale of disaster and
rescue—two important themes for most children. Another great game,
which doesn't require words, is squiggle. An old game that was popularized
among therapists by D. W. Winnicott, squiggle is very simple. One person
starts a drawing, making squiggles that don't look like anything in
particular. The other person has to finish the drawing, making it into
something. You take turns being the one to start. The idea of these play
activities is to practice the building blocks of communication. Don't expect
to leapfrog directly to deep conversations. For example, I consulted with

 some parents recently who were eager for their nine-year-old son to talk to
them more. I suggested ways for them to listen to him on his turf—
nonverbal communication. So rather than insisting that he tell them details
about his school day, they asked him to give it a thumbs-up or thumbsdown. He loved that, and started adding more elaborate gestures. A former
power struggle became a cherished family ritual.
Even video or computer games can be a basis for connection, and I don't
mean just by plugging two Gameboys together. I was visiting a boy, age
eleven, whom I see for therapy in his home. He often is finishing a video
game when I arrive, and is torn between this activity—his favorite—and
doing something more interactive with me. I like when he chooses to turn it
off and play, but I also enjoy the challenge of figuring out how to connect
with him when he is so transfixed by the screen. One day I came upstairs
and found him going full tilt on the game, so I took off my coat and covered
up the screen with it. At first he said angrily, “Hey, what are you doing, get
that away.” I said, “You are so good at this, I bet you can do it without
looking.” He was excited by this idea, and I told him I'd tell him which
direction his enemy was and what was happening on the screen. We had a
fabulous time, and it required more interaction than we usually had when
we played chess or catch.
In fact, to help boys connect, you can play anything at all, especially
games that require some interaction. Even better, play what they want to
play. You can't communicate the idea that what they want to play is stupid
and violent and antisocial, and then expect them to talk to you about their
inner feelings.
Another set of games focuses directly on emotions. Make a facial
expression, or find some good ones in a magazine, and play name that
feeling. Ask them to make a scary face, a sad face, a scared face. Respond
with a complementary face (that is, comfort the sad face, recoil in horror
from the angry face). Get into fantasy play with them, and have your
character express feelings through words and actions. Don't be subtle. Boys
usually love it when a grown man pretends to cry in an exaggerated way.
Boys in our society are famous for having problems with paying attention
and sitting still, as can be seen by the huge increase in the diagnosis of
Attention Deficit Disorder (ADD). But I think many attention problems in
boys are really attachment problems. They have more to do with the boy's

 cup being empty or leaky than they do with any inability to process
information. No one can process information properly or pay attention well
if they don't have the secure base of good attachment. Stanley Greenspan
writes: “The active, energetic child soon learns to seek in stimulation the
satisfaction he cannot find in intimacy.”7 Then, of course, all that racing
around makes him hard to be close to. Thus, the impulsivity and scattered
quality of some boys diagnosed with ADD may simply be a side effect of a
deeper problem, an inability to connect. Most treatments for ADD don't
address this underlying difficulty in attachment—the empty cup—and may
even get in the way.
With young girls, concerns about closeness and connection often come
out in fantasy play or playing with dolls, as opposed to fighting or play
fighting. A child who feels mistreated might be extra nice to her dolls, or
might play the part of a cruel mother. I'm not talking about abused children
here—all children feel mistreated and misunderstood, at least some of the
time. An adult can get involved in this kind of play by humorously playing
the part of the mean mother, or by playing an incredibly obnoxious kid. As
girls get older, they are often faced with significant challenges about
making and keeping friends, and about finding a secure place in their peer
group. Because at this point they may not still be playing with dolls, and in
fact, they may be shutting their parents out of their lives, we have to figure
out new ways to maintain our connections with them as they struggle
through difficulties with connections. Play with them, hang out with them,
do what they want to do, let them talk when they are ready. My favorite
tactic with teenage girls is to say, “Okay, your turn.” They ask me what I
mean. I tell them that they can talk about anything they want, or we can go
anywhere they want. Then I wait. We are usually so eager to jump in and
offer helpful suggestions, but many children, especially teenage girls, need
some space to sit and figure out what they want. If we wait patiently, they'll
make good use of our attention and our confidence in them.
OceanofPDF.com

 —BOYS, GIRLS, AND POWERLESSNESS—

It can be hard to get girls to put down their hairbrushes and ribbons and
stop styling their dolls' hair long enough to wrestle or to play the part of the
heroine instead of the damsel in distress. At least the goal is clear, though:
to help them reclaim a sense of their own power. With boys and power, the
goal is less clear. In some ways, power seems like boys' strong suit, but in
other ways they are just as likely to be powerless. From what I have seen, it
looks as if boy powerlessness comes in two flavors. One is straightforward
enough: boys who are timid and fearful, passive and helpless. The other
type is more confusing: the reckless boys who create havoc in their homes
and classrooms. They don't look especially powerless.
The difference between recklessness and true power is connection. Like
some attention deficits, recklessness comes from an earlier problem with
attachment. I have had numerous experiences of seeing one child racing up
a tree without paying any attention to the risks, while another child stands
forlornly at the bottom, too scared to try. If a child doesn't see any risks at
all, he can't explore safely, but if he sees only the dangers, he won't explore
at all. One needs a soothing influence: “Slow down there, buddy; let's do
this safely.” The other needs encouragement: “Let's give it a try; I'll be right
here to spot you.”
In chapter four I described the power room, my daughter's name for a
way she discovered to recharge her own batteries and wrestle harder. A lot
of children, especially young boys, don't feel powerful, so they won't really
wrestle. Instead, they will come and stand right in front of you and go “Hai,
Ha, Hai, Ho Hai!” and do these Power Ranger/Ninja Turtle karate moves in
the air. Or else they punch and kick and try to hurt you. In either case, there
may be physical strength, but there's no emotional contact there, so it isn't
real power. What I usually do, besides making sure I don't get hurt, is to say,
“See if you can push me over. How about if we wrestle and we just use
pushing.” Pushing is a totally different kind of activity than a karate kick or
a punch. There's a constant pressure, so there's a sense of contact.

 A lot of boys who are really aggressive, who bite or punch or do these
“Hai Hai Hai” karate kind of moves, will give up as soon as you really try
to wrestle with them. If you try to just use pushing and pulling with them,
they'll sometimes give up in two seconds because they are actually afraid of
the real contact or of being truly powerful. Without a clear sense of a strong
human connection, all they have left are the moves they've seen on TV. This
is a clear indication that the aggression is a substitute for contact.
Powerlessness in boys often masquerades as strength, because boys have to
look tough and strong, no matter how they feel inside.
When children—most commonly boys—are not able to get their cups
refilled consistently, they often become impulsive and inattentive. Other
children, more commonly girls, can become timid and mousy because they
are not allowed to be assertive or independent. It's the tabletop experiments
all over again. The only thing some boys know how to do when they are
frustrated is to be aggressive; the only thing some girls know how to do
when they are frustrated is to sulk or follow passively along.
OceanofPDF.com

 —BOYS AND FEELINGS—

I was listening to National Public Radio and heard an interview with the
leader of the team that had just broken the land speed record, with a 750plus-mile-per-hour jet-propelled car. He was talking about his team's
success, and what it was like to drive that fast. After talking about the
technical aspects, Liane Hansen asked him, “What about the emotional
part?” He said, “We try to keep emotions out of it. Emotions are seriously
dangerous.” I had to laugh. The guy drives 750 miles per hour and it's
emotions that are dangerous!
As a joke, I sent a friend a greeting card that said, “Sorry I yelled.”
Inside, it continued, “Next time I'll keep it all inside.” Boys (and men) tend
to get in trouble for expressing emotions, and we also get in trouble for
what we do in order not to express emotions. Boys are teased for crying,
and then everyone is surprised when they hit someone or break something
instead of crying. In one preschool, researchers looked at every episode of
crying. Surprisingly, boys and girls cried about the same amount. Other
children usually ignored the crying, while teachers usually responded. The
big difference came in the way teachers responded: With crying girls they
were more likely to give comfort; with crying boys they were more likely to
scold.8
When you're punished for having feelings and even more for showing
them, it's hard to recover from an injury or a loss—big or small. You just
don't have a chance to get it out of your system. I once saw a great video of
clips from TV sportscasts. When a team won, there was incredible
togetherness and shared joy among the men on the team. Hugs, claps on the
back, slaps on the butt, and so on. When they lost, they each sat alone. The
cameras would zoom in close for a shot, hoping like vultures to catch them
crying. Why did they grieve alone, when clearly they had very close bonds
with their teammates? Because if they shared their loss, they would
probably have to cry. Faced with the sadness about losing, combined with
the closeness and comfort of a friend, they just wouldn't be able to hold it

 in, because sharing suffering is what helps us release it. But they could not
cry, certainly not on national television and probably not in the locker room
either. You could see the facial contortions on these athletes, who were
struggling emotionally after the game just as hard as they struggled
physically during it.
I frequently hear about the boyhood version of these sports heroes.
Parents will talk about their sons bursting into tears as soon as they get in
the car after school, after holding it in for hours after a bad day or a bad
experience. One mother told me about her nine-year-old son. The teacher
had told her after school that he had a bad day, but he refused to be
comforted and refused to talk about it. The mother asked him, “Were you
afraid you'd cry if you talked about it, or if Miss Smith gave you a hug?”
The boy nodded his head yes and let a lone tear trickle out. Of course, some
boys are even more buttoned up than this, refusing to ever show any pain or
sadness no matter what.
With a young boy named Lars, I invented a game called the designated
screamer. This game is designed to help children who stoically tough it out
when they get hurt. Lars and I were playing ball (of course that's what we
were playing; he lived and breathed sports). He was about seven. He got
hurt but immediately jumped up and started playing again. I could tell by
his limping and his tight-lipped grimaces that his leg still hurt, a lot, but he
denied that he was in pain and insisted on continuing the game. I started
jumping up and down, pretending that my leg was in extreme agony. He
asked me what I was doing, and I explained that I was the designated
screamer. Just like in baseball, where there is a designated hitter so that
pitchers can specialize in pitching, I made myself the one who would do his
screaming for him. He laughed at this, while I jumped around on one foot
making a fool of myself. Then he said he'd like to rest his leg a little before
we played some more. That was a major accomplishment.
I once asked two six-year-olds, a boy and a girl, what the key was to
popularity in first grade. The boy said, “Shoot missiles.” The girl said, “Be
nice.” In other words, the fact that boys are given a heavy dose of “boys
don't cry” does not mean that girls have full freedom to express all their
feelings either. Instead of having to be tough, girls are encouraged to be
nice. That leaves several key emotions in the unacceptable category, most
notably, anger. No wonder so many girls become experts at subtle cruelty.

 In their book about the educational system's shortchanging of girls, David
and Myra Sadker also look at the way this same system miseducates boys.
They interviewed a boy named Tony, who called the male role a prison, and
said there were “five rules [that] must be followed by boys who want to fit
the ‘standard' code of behavior: Be a good student but not too good—any
better than B+ is a nerd. Play three varsity sports—or two with weight
training. Party and get drunk. Brag about sexual accomplishments and refer
to girls as bitches in casual conversation. And never show your feelings.
But as coeditor of his school's literary magazine, Tony said he was
constantly surprised by the depth of the emotional side so many boys were
hiding. ‘Tough guys and jocks hand in these incredible poems. They're
usually seniors who will never see anyone again—or they make it
anonymous.' ”9
OceanofPDF.com

 —BOYS AND GIRLS, PLAYING TOGETHER—

I was driving my daughter and her friend Kent home from school. Kent
started asking her, “Do you have Megatron?”
“No.”
“Do you have Star of Death?”
“No.”
I interrupted, “She doesn't have any of those violent computer games.”
“Oh,” he said.” Bummer.” His voice made it sound like I had told him
that she has no toys and has to live on bread and water. He tried again, “Do
you know what a nuclear weapon is?”
“I'm not sure.”
Kent proceeded to go into a lovingly detailed description of nuclear
weapons and their destructive power. And how cool the game Megatron
was. I turned on the radio, to protect my sensitive pacifist ears from this
conversation. A song came on with a line about kissing. Kent said, “Eeew,
gross.” Emma agreed, “Turn it off!” I said, “Blowing up millions of people
is cool, but two people kissing is gross?” They answered, in unison, “ Yes!”
The funny thing was that I think if Emma had been with a female friend,
they would have giggled about the song instead of saying it was gross.
In general, boys and girls tend to segregate their play starting in
kindergarten or first grade. As they split into separate groups, the style of
their play becomes more and more different. They also start to think that the
other gender is somehow drastically different from them. A few years
before Megatron, Emma was going to Kent's house after kindergarten to
play. Before she came, Kent's father told me that he ran around the house
shouting, “What is Emma going to play with? I don't have any girl toys!”
His father reassured him that they'd have no trouble finding things to play
together, which was indeed the case.
Not that children always figure this out. In their book about war play,
Nancy Carlsson-Paige and Diane Levin write about this gulf between toys
for girls and toys for boys: “One parent described watching her daughter

 sitting on the front steps of their apartment building next to a male friend
about the same age. Holly had her Barbie dolls, and Michael had his GI Joe
figures and tanks. Each held their own dolls as they eyed those of the other.
They looked as if they wanted to play together, but just ended up sitting
there.”10 The authors make excellent suggestions about how adults can
help, by offering neutral materials or art projects, or suggesting nongendered games like having their dolls go to outer space. The Playful
Parenting approach, of course, is to go downstairs and get down on the floor
with them, maybe taking both dolls and initiating a fantasy game that
tweaks these gender roles a little bit. For example, you could have the GI
Joe say, “Hey, those high-heeled shoes would make a great weapon.” And
Barbie answers, “Do you think they make those green suits in my size?
They are really fashionable.”
In other words, encourage boys and girls to play together. This
mixedgender play gives boys the chance to have some play that builds
connection and gives girls a chance to have some play that promotes
confidence and power. Playing together helps boys and girls not be
strangers when they rediscover each other in adolescence. They also seem
to be more creative when they play together. In fact, they have to be more
creative. Most girls expect more out of play than death and destruction, and
most boys expect more than dressing dolls and combing their hair.
I was in the park and saw a father pushing his baby in a stroller. The baby
looked to me to be about six months old. It was a heartwarming scene, until
his wife showed up. As soon as he saw her, he started yelling at her, “Do
you know what just happened? Do you want to know what just happened?
Two different people said he looked like a girl. They thought he was a girl.”
He put on a sarcastic voice: “ ‘What a cute little girl. What's her name.' I
can't f——ing believe it. Does he look like a girl to you?” He then put his
face a few inches from the baby's face and yelled at the baby: “You do not
look like a girl! How could anybody think you look like a girl.”
I was half fearing (maybe half hoping) he would have a heart attack on
the spot from this gender catastrophe. I found myself thinking of the men in
groups I have led for batterers and sex offenders. Some of these men were
so pressured to be masculine that it almost killed somebody. One man who
grew up to be a violent bully toward his wife and children told a heart-

 wrenching story of being chased home by bullies when he was a boy. He
ran inside the house, relieved to have escaped a beating, and his mother sent
him back outside, locking the door, so he could go out there and fight like a
man. A neighbor finally chased off the three older boys who were beating
him to a pulp.
These are extreme cases, but every boy needs some help with the cruelty
and violence that surrounds them and with the unrealistic expectations that
they must always be tough and strong. We aren't just told that boys will be
boys. Boys had damned well better be boys. A U.S. military officer,
General Homer Lea, said in 1898, “The greatest danger that a long period of
profound peace offers to a nation is that of creating effeminate tendencies in
young men.”11 Heaven forbid!
All boys are affected by the taunts, insults, and violence against gay men
and against boys who are labeled as fags, queers, and sissies. Even the boys
who aren't being targeted themselves are hurt by this antigay, anti-sissy
atmosphere, because they all have to prove their manhood constantly, or
face the consequences. When boys taunt each other about being gay, they
aren't referring to acts of homosexual sex. They are trying, not so playfully,
to figure out masculinity. They are accusing each other of being less than
fully male. As we can see from the man in the park, this is a dreadful
disease. But we don't like it when boys are too masculine either.
Mike Tyson, the professional boxer who was convicted of sexual assault
and later was banned from his sport for biting a piece off of Evander
Holyfield's ear, is a good example of a boy who was pressured from all
sides to be aggressive, who was rewarded for this aggression beyond his
wildest dreams, and then—big surprise!—went too far. The response to his
behavior reflects our ambivalence about male violence. He was vilified as a
monster, but then he was given a short jail sentence, reinstated into boxing,
and given another shot at the title.
As I hope I have made clear, comforting children, cuddling them and
valuing them, does not make boys weak. It makes them emotionally strong;
it makes them human. We are much less afraid than we used to be of girls
being athletic and powerful and smart, though we still have room for
improvement. Title IX, which required equal athletic facilities for girls in
college, has changed things tremendously. Sports have become an

 acceptable way for girls to excel, to become confident and physically
powerful. Now we need an emotional Title IX for boys.
OceanofPDF.com

 CHAPTER 9

OceanofPDF.com

 FOLLOW YOUR
CHILD'S LEAD1
“I want to teach people how to understand and love this
miraculous creative state of ‘I do not know' when related to children—
so full of life and dazzling surprises!”
—JANUSZ KORCZAK

Playful Parenting is a delicate balance between following a child's lead
and stepping in as a guide. On one side, we let children be completely in
charge of the play, in order to nurture their creativity and sense of
confidence. On the other side, we actively intervene to help children get
unstuck from situations that are repetitive, boring, or potentially harmful. I
must confess that I have become an expert on this principle of Playful
Parenting by repeatedly getting it wrong. One day I'll be sure I have to “do
something” until I realize my job is to follow. The next day I'll follow along
resentfully until I finally figure out how to lead us both out of a rut and onto
a path that's fun for the two of us. This chapter is about following the child's
lead; the next chapter is about times when it makes sense for the adult to
lead the way.
I usually learn my best lessons about following when I try to lead, and
things go nowhere in a hurry. One time my daughter and I were playing
freeze tag. It's lots of fun with a big group of people, because one person
freezes people and others can unfreeze them, so the game is constantly in
flux. Playing freeze tag with just two people, my daughter and me, was less
fun (for me). I ended up frozen most of the time. She would freeze me and
then go off and do something else but expect me to stay frozen. I guessed
that she wanted me to break the rules and come after her. Instead of
following her instructions, I thought I would take the lead and focus on
connection.
I guessed incorrectly. When I unfroze myself and chased after her, she
was furious at me. I have to admit I made the same mistake a few times in a
row. I was convinced (wrongly) that she needed me to push for connection

 even though it broke her rules. Also, it was boring for me to stay there
frozen all by myself! Finally, I decided to follow her rules of the game
precisely to the letter, no matter how boring or how much I wanted to come
after her. I apologized for having broken the rules before and promised to
freeze indefinitely. She froze me once more to check if I really meant it. I
stayed frozen for a couple of minutes while she went into the other room.
Every once in a while I would call out “I'm still frozen” so she wouldn't
forget we were playing together. Once she saw I could follow the rules, she
unfroze me and said that game was over. Now she wanted to play a game
together, with me helping her balance on a big ball. I had finally gotten it
right! The game she had wanted to play was not about connection. She
wanted to see if I would follow her lead, and once I did, she could see I was
on her side. Then she was ready to connect and do something fun together.
It isn't always easy to know how to follow a child's lead, especially if the
child doesn't say much. Luke is eleven and not very communicative. Our
therapy usually consists of playing chess or playing catch together, or of my
watching him play video games. I ask him what's new; sometimes he'll say
something, but often he won't. He isn't sullen about it, just reserved. He
certainly never tells me about what's going on deep inside of him. One time
I decided to push it a little bit. We were playing catch with a football, and I
asked him what was new. He ignored the question. I tried again a few times;
he ignored me each time. Finally, I said, “Is there nothing new, or you aren't
going to tell me?” He gave the football a kick into the bushes and said,
“That's what's new!” I loved that. When you are “listening” to a child's play,
you have to treat everything as if it's communication, including throws and
kicks of a football. Most children won't spell it out for you. Since I couldn't
quite tell what he was trying to say, I decided to go with the funny aspect of
this.
I said, “Oh, I see. You're telling me what's new in football language.
Hmm, let's see, you feel stuck, like the ball is stuck in the bushes?”
“No.” He laughed.
“You're flying high, but then you come crashing down?”
“No!” Luke kicked the ball again, and it hit the telephone wire.
“You sent a wire to New Zealand?”
“No! I mean yeah, I did.” More laughing.

 I kept making up translations of how the football could signify what he
was thinking or what he wanted to say. Some of them were relevant to
themes in his life; some were just funny. A few minutes later, when I was
running after the ball, he said, “Ha-ha, you like that ball. Why don't you
marry it?” Here was his clearest statement yet. His mother had told me that
Luke was being teased at school about liking a girl, but he had never
brought it up with me. Even though it was thinly disguised as being about
me and the ball, I saw his teasing me as an opportunity to bring that theme
into the play.
So, after I dropped a throw or kick, I'd say to the ball, “I love you,
football. Why don't you like me?” He'd laugh at that. If I caught the ball, I'd
say, “I think it likes me again,” and pretend to kiss it. He really laughed at
that. This technique is great for following the lead of children who don't
volunteer much (or anything) about their lives.
The first part of this chapter describes some basic principles of following
a child's lead, such as enthusiastically saying yes to whatever they want to
do and setting aside specific occasions for what I call PlayTime. The second
part of the chapter applies these principles to particular situations, such as
PlayTime with siblings, with teenagers and preteens, with other people's
children, and with hard-to-reach children.
HOW TO FOLLOW A CHILD'S LEAD
Just say yes
Do whatever they want to do
Be safe (but don't worry too much)
Set aside PlayTime
Take time to recover
OceanofPDF.com

 —JUST SAY YES—

Following a child's lead means that every once in a while (as often as
we can handle it), children need us to be hugely enthusiastic, to say yes in a
booming voice instead of the constant parade of no. Many of us have an
automatic response to almost any request or anything we see a child doing
—usually it's to say no, but sometimes our automatic response is to say yes.
(Chapter thirteen, on discipline, will deal with the importance of setting
limits as part of Playful Parenting.) Try counting how many times you say
no to children in an hour, or in a day. I think you'll be shocked. We often
feel compelled to jump in and say no when they are doing something or
suggesting something that we know is a bad idea. Unfortunately, jumping in
does not help them develop their own good judgment. They simply have to
discover certain things for themselves, and the best way for them to do this
is with our encouragement and support.
Of course, I'm not advocating anarchy. There must be limits. Children
need adult supervision and adult help with decisions until they can make
their own. But try breaking out of the automatic habit of saying no all the
time. If they suggest something ridiculously dangerous, and you respond
with an enthusiastic, “Hey, that's a cool idea, let's try it,” they will probably
say, “No! That's dangerous.” If they suggest something that is harmless but
seems impossible, try not to jump in and say so. Try saying, “Great idea. I
wonder how we could make that work.” They just might figure it out, to
your surprise, and at the very least they will think it through for themselves.
One afternoon while I was waiting for my daughter after school, I started
talking to Rebecca, the five-year-old sister of one of my daughter's friends.
We were standing by her car while her mother was talking to someone, and
she asked me if she could climb onto the car and ride on top while her
mother drove home. I knew that Rebecca knew that this was, of course, not
going to happen. But I also knew Rebecca, and I guessed that she expected
me to say no, and that then she would start to climb up anyway to see what
I would do. I didn't want to get in a power struggle with her, so I said,

 “Sure, let's climb up there; that'll be fun. We'll have to hold on real tight.”
And she said, “Larry! That's dangerous. We can't do that.” I started to
pretend to climb up, and she said, “No, no, we'll fall off.” If I had been the
one to say no, she may have kept alive the idea that this was a very cool
thing to do that grown-ups don't allow because they are worrywarts. But by
my saying yes, she got to figure out for herself how it would turn out. Of
course, if she had said, “Okay, let's do it,” I'd have played dumb and said
things like “I wonder how we'll stay on when your mom turns a corner,” or
“I wonder what your mom will say when she sees us up there,” nudging her
judgment on a little bit.
Saying yes instead of no does not mean hiding how you feel. Saying yes
to something doesn't mean you have to pretend to like it! If you hate a
certain game, it is okay to say you hate it, but instead of just saying, “No, I
won't play that with you,” try humorously begging and pleading not to have
to play it. I've seen so many parents, starting with myself, reluctantly agree
to play some game they find boring or stupid, and then dragging through it
on the verge of falling asleep. For me, this problem always came up when
my daughter wanted to play Barbies, which I hate. Falling asleep during
Barbie time was always my compromise between playing what she wanted
to play and running as fast as possible out of the room. It was a compromise
that didn't work well for either of us. She got a playmate who couldn't keep
his eyes open, and I felt doubly awful—I was playing Barbie and letting her
down. The solution was a different kind of compromise. I said straight out
how I felt about Barbies, then kept on playing. I exaggerated my horror and
repugnance and begged and pleaded not to have to play, making it clear that
this was all in fun and I would, in fact, play them with her. Lo and behold,
not only did I stay awake, but I had fun, and she did, too. The Barbie play
was no longer the same old monotonous dressing and undressing the dolls,
but turned into action-packed dramatic play, with tremendous bursts of
giggles from both of us.
Just saying yes means having a basic attitude of acceptance rather than
rejection, approval rather than disapproval. Be animated as you play: use
gestures, your voice, and facial expressions. Be enthusiastic, racing after the
ball if you're playing catch, throwing yourself into your character in fantasy
play. Be sure to take stock of your own feelings, especially depression and
anger, since these emotions make it hard to match children's pace and tone.

 Be warm, inviting, supportive. Now, I don't expect you to do this every
minute you are with children; it would be nice, but it's a little unrealistic.
My hope is that you will set aside certain times to really try on this attitude,
even if it's just for a few minutes at first. Most of us—myself included—
feel as though we are already giving so much, paying so much attention to
our children. But hours of half hearted, lethargic, resentful interaction is less
helpful that a shorter time of full-throttle play. In fact, once they get some
of this type of playtime, they will usually be less demanding of every
minute of your attention the rest of the time.
I often catch myself saying “That won't work,” or “That's impossible.”
What does that convey, besides that I'm an interfering grown-up with no
imagination? I am trying to provide a shortcut for the child. I already know
that it won't work, so they don't have to find out through experience, do
they? Yes, of course we have to do this when it comes to things like
touching the hot stove or running into traffic. But most situations in life
aren't so drastic that children can't be allowed to figure them out on their
own. It's like doing children's homework for them: the answers may be
right, but they haven't learned anything. So instead of saying “That won't
work,” try saying “Let's try it and see.” Either you will be surprised, or they
will learn for themselves that it doesn't work. Whatever happens, they will
see you as an ally instead of a naysayer. It isn't that you never say no when
you are following children's lead, but look inside to see if you are saying no
out of your own feelings of discomfort or because it is really necessary. As
the next chapter will demonstrate, it is okay to try to unstick things that are
stuck. Don't follow their lead, for example, when they tell you to go away
and never come back. You may need to back off a little, but don't abandon
them forever.
A few years ago I was with my daughter and some other families out in
the country. Four of us—two dads and two six-year-old girls—were
standing at the edge of a pond, and someone realized that the dock was just
a raft tied onto the bank. One of the girls said, “Let's go for a ride.” I
immediately tried to put a damper on the whole thing: “It'll be too hard to
untie. I don't think it's such a good idea.” The other dad ignored me and
said, “Sure, see if you can get it loose.” I felt a glimmer of hope: They won't
be able to get it untied. No such luck. They had it untied in no time.

 I fought down my urge to panic and run screaming off the raft, leaving
my daughter and the others to their fate.
While I was having visions of our makeshift raft sinking in the middle of
a pond, which happened to be extremely cold, the other dad said—very
calmly, I thought—“How are we going to steer it?” The girls snapped into
action. They ordered me to jump off and hold the rope so the raft wouldn't
float away. They ordered the other dad to stay on board and “keep a
lookout,” while they ran off to find some big sticks for steering. It worked!
We had a great time on the raft. Later, seeing how delighted and triumphant
the girls were, everyone wanted to try it.
I was happy for them, but inside I was stewing. Not because I had been
proven wrong (I'm pretty used to that), but because I had been so quick to
say no without really thinking. I had overestimated the dangers,
underestimated their abilities, and let my own fears try to run the show. But
it wasn't just that I had tried to say no. As usual, I had tried to take over,
imposing my “better” judgment. I tried to convince myself that I was just
being safe, but it wasn't really a matter of safety. It was a matter of my not
wanting to risk getting cold and wet, but the girls were perfectly happy to
take that risk in order to have such a great adventure.
OceanofPDF.com

 —DO WHATEVER THEY WANT TO DO—

On several occasions I have had the great pleasure of watching Patty
Wipfler lead play workshops for children and adults. Anyone who knows
her work will easily see her influence throughout this book. She is the head
of an organization called the Parents Leadership Institute, and a champion
of parents, families, and young people. I recommend her writings very
highly. Following children's leads and doing whatever they want to do are
the cornerstones of what she calls Special Time. “The times when we can
relax, play and connect with our children are at the heart of our precious
relationship with them. But relaxed time for parent and child to share their
love is always in short supply…. ‘Special time' is an excellent tool… an
active form of listening, in which your child's play becomes her vehicle for
telling you about her life….”2
Play, as Patty Wipfler suggests, is children's way of telling us about their
lives. Playing what they want to play, how they want to play it, is our way
of really listening. We have all had the experience of wanting to tell
someone something, but they keep interrupting us or changing the subject
or telling us what to do or how to feel. We hate it, yet we do it to children
all the time. We say, “I hate that game,” or we take over the game, telling
them how to do it properly. That's not the best way to get a peek into our
children's lives, to see what they really think and feel. Playing their way, on
their terms, is what does it.
Of course, before we can play whatever they want, we have to play with
them some in the first place. Unfortunately, when we say, “I don't want to
play,” they hear that as, “I don't want to join you in your world.” No wonder
they then say to us, “I don't want to go to school…. I don't want to go to
Aunt Margaret's….” They are just saying they don't want to go to our world
either. The more we join them in their world, the more cooperative they'll
be when we drag them along to ours.
And we can't just sit there like a lump while they play, either, much as
we'd like to after a hard day. They need us to be active participants in the

 play, just like listening requires active attentiveness. We don't share our
innermost selves with people who stare out into space while they are talking
to us, or look constantly at their watch, or keep changing the subject. It can
be a challenge to be an active participant in play, while still following their
lead. It may mean that if you're outside playing basketball, you get to be an
enthusiastic rebounder, and feed them the ball for another shot, instead of
showing off your own three-point jump shots (unless they want you to show
your stuff, or play your hardest against them, in which case you do that).
At workshops, I sometimes ask parents to tell me their most favorite
thing to do in the whole world. I respond to each one, “That's boring…
that's dumb… yuck… who would want to do that… you have to be
kidding…” and so on. Before they tar and feather me, I explain why I have
been provoking and insulting them in this way. I think we unwittingly give
this message to our children all the time. I realized one day, in a painful
shock of self-awareness, that when I told my daughter “I hate playing
Barbies,” I was really saying, “Your favorite thing to do in the whole world
is something I find boring and stupid and sexist and a waste of time.” Not
exactly the message that a loving father (and child psychologist) really
wants to convey. So as I described in the last chapter, I started playing
Barbies with her, and together we figured out ways to make it fun and not
quite so awful.
Why is it so important not always to say no? Imagine you had some scary
or confusing or overwhelming things happen to you, and you weren't
allowed to talk about them. Now imagine that you weren't even allowed to
think about them. That's what it's like not to let a child play the way they
want to play. Play is their way of talking and thinking.
Whenever I talk about this “do what they want to do” aspect of Playful
Parenting, someone always asks, “If you always follow their lead, won't
they always want to do the same thing, over and over?” Sometimes they do
want to do things more times than we can stand (yet we say that children
have a short attention span!). But the more we let them take the lead, the
more children have room to try out new things. These new things might be
physical challenges, like finally trying the monkey bars or the high diving
board, or they may be emotional challenges, like asking someone to be their
friend or talking about a bad experience in school.

 OceanofPDF.com

 —BE SAFE (BUT DON'T WORRY TOO MUCH)—

Talking with parents about following children in play, someone
inevitably asks what I call the “run out in the street” question. “If you are
following their lead, what do you do when they want to do something
dangerous?” First, we have to separate our fears from actual danger. In
these instances, perhaps we can say, “That scares me. Let's see if we can
figure out a way to do it safely. If we can't, we'll have to forget it.” Children
have very good judgment when they are allowed to use it, but often they
haven't gotten much of a chance, since we are always telling them what
they should or shouldn't do. Most of us worry much more about danger than
we need to, especially if we are going to be right there playing with them
instead of sending them out to play on their own. You can always slow
things down and help them think through the consequences, rather than
jumping in to decide in advance that something is impossible or too
dangerous.
Of course, as parents, part of our job is to pay attention to basic safety,
but sometimes we use safety as a good excuse for our own insecurities and
inhibitions. Like when I wanted to insist that the raft trip was unsafe, but
really I just didn't want to get wet. The epigraph to this chapter, about
finding the joy in the uncertainty of not knowing what will happen next, is
especially relevant to following children's leads. We may feel as though we
are concerned about their safety when we say no, but we may just be
protecting ourselves from discomfort, embarrassment, and uncertainty. Not
knowing where we'll end up is something that most of us adults find
unsettling. That feeling of “I don't know” seems a lot like inadequacy and
incompetence. If only we could relax and take a deep breath, sigh, and
think, I've done a good job as a parent. Even with the mistakes we've made,
even with the regrets, we have a lot to be proud of.
OceanofPDF.com

 —SET ASIDE PLAYTIME—

When children choose what to play and how to play, their cup is
refilled. This refill boosts their confidence and fosters their relationship
with you. The best way to follow children's leads is to set aside an hour or
two where the child is completely in charge. I call it PlayTime. If Playful
Parenting is an invitation to join children where they live, PlayTime is an
invitation to go a step further.
Playful Parenting is an attitude, a 24/7 approach to being more connected
with children and having more fun with them, letting them learn and grow
without pressure or fear. Parenting happens everywhere all the time;
opportunities abound for play and playfulness, for filling empty cups, for
comforting, for helping children heal, for sharing a tender moment. In
addition to this general infusion of playfulness, connection, and confidence,
sometimes children need something more structured. PlayTime is a detailed
road map for going the extra mile into children's territory, in order to help
them use play to build closer relationships, to explore the world, to heal
from life's upsets, and simply to have more fun.
The basic format of PlayTime is quite simple. The parent or some other
adult sets aside regular one-on-one time with a child. The adult offers the
child undivided attention with no interruptions and with a clear focus on
connection, engagement, and interaction. In a sense, PlayTime is just
Playful Parenting Plus, where the “plus” means more enthusiasm, more
joining, more commitment to closeness and confidence, more fun, a more
welcoming attitude toward their feelings, more willingness to put one's own
feelings aside, more active and boisterous play. In addition, you don't
answer the phone or cook dinner or take a nap during PlayTime.
You may have noticed that what I call PlayTime is very similar to what
play therapists do all the time: regular sessions of play that either follow the
child's lead or push them to overcome some emotional block. While
therapists tend to work with children who are more distressed, their
techniques show the healing power of play for all children. If play can bring

 a child out of extreme isolation, or restore connection to a troubled family,
surely it can help with “ordinary” distance and isolation, or “average” levels
of aggression or frustration.
PlayTime is for every child, but it also has specific benefits for specific
problems. If things are great, PlayTime will be a huge amount of fun for
both of you. If things are fine, PlayTime will help make them great. If
things are tough, PlayTime will make them easier, though it may be hard
work along the way. If things are impossible, PlayTime just might make
them possible, or even help heal a troubled child or repair a damaged
relationship.
Parents who already spend a lot of time playing with their children often
ask me whether there is any added benefit of setting aside specific time and
calling it PlayTime. I think there is. Having a regular and scheduled time
allows children to look forward to it and plan for it. They will often save up
their feelings for it, which makes PlayTime a challenge but also helps them
to be less demanding at other times. Officially setting aside the time also
helps us to be extra enthusiastic and remember to say yes instead of no, to
do what they want, and not to worry too much about safety and rulebreaking. I wouldn't expect anyone to do all that for more than an hour or so
at a time! You might, in fact, just want to start with ten or fifteen minutes.
But when you do set aside the time, this gives children permission to bring
up emotional subjects that are generally not encouraged or allowed. The
fact that you are choosing to play whatever they want—even Barbies or war
games or Legos—is a big deal for children. The fact that you give them
your full attention, no answering the phone or making dinner, is an even
bigger deal.
Many parents think, Oh, I know just what Elmo will want to do for
PlayTime. But don't jump the gun and start doing or suggesting what you
think they will want to do. Let them surprise you—and possibly themselves
—by really making it a free and open choice. This point reminds me of the
years that my father and I spent going to football games together. Neither
one of us really wanted to go, or enjoyed them very much, but we each
thought the other one wanted to do it as a way to have special time together.
Like many parents and children, we put up with a lot for the sake of being
together, but we both would have had more fun if we had figured out what
we really wanted to do instead of guessing.

 Another controversial area is whether to allow PlayTime to transcend the
usual rules. If sugar is forbidden, children may want to go to the candy store
during PlayTime. If war play is forbidden, then they may want to go at it
with fake pistols and swords. If they are only fourteen, they may want to
use PlayTime to learn how to drive. They aren't just trying to send us over
the edge, they are using the safety of PlayTime to handle something new or
something hard. They also use PlayTime to push us to rethink some of our
rules and regulations. I don't have a set rule for this problem. Experiment
and see what works for you and your children. I usually will try out the
forbidden activity, with a five- or ten-minute time limit, but if it becomes a
problem, then I call it off.
Angela, who was a participant in a mother's class I taught, faced a
problem of this type with her sons when she tried to do PlayTime with
them. They took advantage of the opportunity to do whatever they wanted
to begin a wild game of pretend gunplay, which had always been strictly
forbidden. This was a tricky situation, in which Angela had to balance her
commitment to her sons' taking charge of the play with her commitment to
her own antigun principles.
In order to untangle this knotty problem, the first question is: Is this kind
of play or activity really dangerous (physically or emotionally), or do I just
find it horribly uncomfortable? Angela decided her opposition to gunplay
was mostly her own discomfort. Given her values and her parenting style,
there wasn't much danger that her sons would become violent psychopaths.
But she still felt unable or unwilling to endure that discomfort, even though
she understood all the arguments for letting the children choose their play
themes and play activities. I suggested a two-part approach, with the idea of
respecting both the children's clear desire to figure something out about
playing with weapons, and the mother's need to feel comfortable with the
play they chose. The first part involved Angela taking every opportunity
she could to talk with other parents about her concerns over pretend
gunplay—to explain the reasons she hates it, why she is such a committed
pacifist. Often such discussions help parents consider experimenting with
loosening the rules somewhat during PlayTime. When you're experimenting
with an unsettling situation like this, it helps to keep PlayTimes short; a half
hour or less is plenty when you are going into uncharted territory.

 The second part of the solution for Angela and her children was to
discover some ways in which her sons could explore the themes they were
drawn to, without making it too hard for her to stick around and play with
them. For example, perhaps she could handle magical weapons or pretend
swords in a fantasy game. These weapons might satisfy the boys' desire to
play with guns without driving their mom up the wall. In the long run, the
thinking we do in order to resolve these PlayTime problems ends up being
very helpful in our parenting overall.
I think the reason children respond so well to PlayTime is not just that
they get to do what they want and to be in charge, but because we are
reaching for them, reaching for a close connection. They get to notice that
we don't always act as if it's more important to talk on the phone, or protect
the furniture, or stick to our many rules, than it is to play with them and
have fun. As long as they see that we are aiming to follow their lead
sometimes, they will accept that we are grown-ups with anxieties and rules
(some reasonable, some not).
PlayTime—structured time set aside to enthusiastically follow a child's
lead—can be helpful for just about any child. I recommend it for families
where everything is going great as often as I do for families in crisis and
turmoil. PlayTime can also help with sibling rivalry and other family
conflicts, can help parents connect with hard-to-reach children, and can
provide opportunities for parents and older children to have fun together.
Sibling rivalry, for example, often recedes if each child has regular oneon-one PlayTime with a parent. In big families, children often crave the
chance to have the full attention of both parents, even if it's only for a few
minutes. I know the time for this kind of commitment is very hard to come
by, but it pays off. Children who desperately need attention have a way of
getting it, and they'll get it by hook or by crook if they don't get it through
PlayTime.
Younger children generally jump right in, raring to go, as soon as you
explain the concept. Older children may need some time to think about this
strange offer. “You really are going to do whatever I want?” They may not
be able to think of anything at first, but don't be too quick to give
suggestions. That just imposes your ideas. Just relaxedly say, “It's your
special time; what do you want to do?” One important theme for adolescent
and preteen PlayTime is romance—girlfriends and boyfriends, sex and

 dating. Pretending to be madly in love with a rock star or movie star can get
them giggling. Sing ridiculously corny love songs, ask to chew the gum
they've been chewing, promise never to wash the spot where they've
touched you, and so on. They'll make fun of you for being such a dweeb (or
whatever the word is these days). Enjoy it. That's their way of using play to
deal with their experiences of being uncool, or their fear that tomorrow they
may show up at school in the wrong clothes.
The mother of a twelve-year-old boy wrote about an unexpected
connection they made.3 She had a regular date with her son, every
Wednesday evening, to do something special together, whatever he wanted.
Usually he wanted to go to the mall and hang out, and usually they had a
good time, though he never talked much. She always thought they had a
good, open relationship, and that she was a great listener for her son.
One week, a friend of the mother's died, and she decided to honor her
friend's passing by not talking for three days. Before she began her silence,
she asked her son if he wanted to reschedule their outing that was planned
for the next day. He shrugged and said it didn't matter. After they got in the
car and headed to the mall, he started to talk. He poured his heart out to her,
saying things he had never told her before about school, friends, feelings,
everything. She watched the road and kept quiet. After pulling in at the mall
parking lot, he just stayed in the car and kept talking. They never got out.
When it got late, they drove home, with him still talking. Clearly her vow of
silence gave him the freedom to talk without fear of interruption or
judgment. Sometimes we just need to get out of a child's way, and the
connection will happen spontaneously. The problem is, most of the time we
don't even know when or how we're in the way.
Note: PlayTime with other people's children is very different from
PlayTime with your own children. If children do not have a secure
attachment figure at home, someone who consistently fills their cup, then
they are going to want to make you one. They may cling to you so that you
have to peel them off when it's time to leave. They may act as if they don't
care if you come or go, but really the connection is very important to them.
Or perhaps they will test you to see how much of their horribleness you can
stand without going away. Too bad they can't just give us a written exam
and not really have to test our tolerance for being punched or called names

 or ignored or yelled at or teased or shocked—all the things children do
when they haven't had a full cup for a long time and you offer them a refill.
Instead, they will show how much they need a friend by breaking your
things and trying to hurt you. If at all possible, we need to maintain our
connection, to stay engaged even when they go over the line and we have to
set a limit. Children, our own and other people's, need us to be human and
genuine, to be a home base, a source of refills for empty cups, leaky cups,
and even broken cups. In my work as a play therapist, I encounter this kind
of testing and this kind of confusion regularly. One girl, for example, in the
course of fifteen minutes, said to me: “ I hate you…. Never come back….
Can you come every day?… Can I be your daughter?… If you leave, you
can never come back.”
If they do have an attachment figure, you are still valuable. You will have
different areas of ease and difficulty than the parents or main caretakers.
They may hate mess, while it doesn't bother you. You may get irritated by
loud noises or wild play that doesn't faze them, and so on. Children quickly
learn who can tolerate what. When my daughter was in kindergarten, I
would often play around on the floor with her and her friends at pick-up
time. They would climb on me as if I were a climbing structure, or wrestle
with me. Other kids I had never met would get in line to play with me then,
since most grown-ups don't go for that kind of thing.
OceanofPDF.com

 —TAKE TIME TO RECOVER—

I probably should have mentioned right up front that PlayTime is harder
than it sounds. If it were easy, I wouldn't have had to write this book. It isn't
easy for me to stay focused on connection, to stay enthusiastic, to pay
undivided attention to a child, to put off my own work or my plans to get
dinner made early for a change. In fact, I haven't met anyone who really
finds it easy. The main difficulty, of course, is our own unmet needs, our
own piles of feelings (our worries, anxieties, and fatigue; our
embarrassment about being joyful and playful). PlayTime, or any play
during which we follow children's lead, can be hard because we feel as if
we don't know how to play, or we feel as if we can't bear to play those
boring, awful games they seem to want to play all the time. We often avoid
it, and when we do play this way, we may need time to recover. The best
way to recover from an emotionally draining PlayTime is to talk to other
parents about it, especially other parents who are trying out the same thing.
When we feel as if we don't want to play, because we're too busy or too
tired or too bored, we need to push ourselves a little bit. Just like when we
are depressed, we don't feel like exercising or going outside; but if we make
ourselves do it, we feel better. And in the long run we are happier. So don't
give in to those feelings of “I don't want to;” push through the inertia and
play.
It is sometimes hard to stay actively engaged when you are just
following. When I first started having PlayTime with my daughter, she
would want to play a fantasy game in which I would be the king, or the
little brother, and she would tell me to go to sleep. Unfortunately, I would
really fall asleep, and she would get mad! I had a similar problem with
Monopoly or other board games. When she was little she often wanted to
roll the dice for me, move my piece for me, make the decisions about what I
should buy. It was very tempting to tune out, to say, “You don't need me, I
might as well go make dinner (or go take a nap).” But in her eyes, we were
playing together, and that was important to her. My job was to stay awake.

 Time for another confession. Most of the time I feel as if I'm terrible at
PlayTime. I feel stupid, and I hate feeling stupid. I feel like a servant, and I
hate feeling like a servant. I have a hard time just letting children lead the
play. I get sleepy, lethargic, fatigued. If we're playing with Legos, I'll sort
the pieces by color and shape, to distract myself. If we are building houses
of cards, I'll build one better than theirs. I don't mean to humiliate them or
frustrate them, I just get lost in my own feelings instead of following their
rhythms and their needs. So why do I put myself through it?
First of all, even when I am not doing it as well as I'd like, it still has a
powerful impact on the children and on our relationship. Afterward, I can
usually see the positive effects it has had, as the children are calmer or less
aggressive or less frustrated, and we can play together or sit together easily.
Second, I can see that over time I am getting better at it, even though I still
feel stupid or incompetent sometimes. Third, children keep asking for it,
even if during PlayTime they tell me I am doing everything wrong. I guess
that this complaining and protesting about my incompetence and ignorance
during PlayTime is just their way of showing me what they need to play and
what deep emotions they are using play to address.
OceanofPDF.com

 —LETTING CHILDREN TAKE THE LEAD IN PLAY—

In my first session with Robert, I suggested to his mother that she try a
technique of having him run faster and slower, right and left, etc., as a way
of learning to regulate emotion better. This technique, which I wrote about
in chapter six, was supposed to help him control his impulses and emotions
so he wouldn't have so much trouble with his peers at school. He tended to
use his fists instead of his words, or to use off-putting words like “Shut up,
you idiot” instead of good preschool words like “I didn't like it when you
took my block.” I wanted to show his mother what I meant, so I said, “Hey,
Robert, can you run real fast around the kitchen?” He immediately decided
to tell me how fast to run and in which direction to run. He knew what he
wanted to do, and it sure wasn't what I had in mind. He didn't know
anything about PlayTime, but he had the basic idea. He wanted to play at
being in charge of me, not practice some self-regulation game I wanted to
teach him. I knew what to do. I ran fast when he told me to run fast, walked
slow when he told me to walk slow, and generally built up a strong bond of
trust in that first meeting by following his lead.
A few months later, I heard from Robert's mother right before our session
that he had had a terrible day in preschool, ending with several other
children telling him they didn't want to play with him. These children told
Robert's mother at pick-up time that he had been bad. In our session he was
very excited to see me and eager to play. I had a plan for the session,
something I don't usually do. I was going to say, “Let's pretend that I want
to be friends with you and you don't want to be friends with me.” A classic
role reversal. I was very proud of it and ready to roll. Before I could get the
words out, he said, “You chase me, and I'll tell you how fast to run.” I had
forgotten that game we played in our first session, but obviously he hadn't.
Every few minutes I would try to shift things to my idea, but I never got out
more than “Let's…” or “I've got an idea….” Each time he interrupted me
with a command for me to do something, and each time I went along.

 As part of the chase game there were many doors, some of which he
would shut in my face. When I tried to open them, he would say that I
couldn't come in that way, that I had to go around. By the time I went
around, he'd be through the door and on the other side. I knocked on the
door and begged to be let in. He shouted, “No! You can't come in. I don't
like you, you're stinky.” Aha! Here we were, just where I was hoping to get,
playing a game where he reversed the roles and he could be the one who
didn't want to be friends with me. I got to play one of my favorite games,
begging and pleading to be allowed in the room, to be his friend. But the
play came around to this key theme only because I followed him, rather
than because he followed me.
Robert would never have sat still for a lecture on how you can't make
friends very well by kicking them and telling them they're stupid, but
through this game I was able to exaggerate that approach in a playful way,
so he could giggle about it. I threatened to kick him if he didn't let me in.
I promised to be his best friend and then said in a stage whisper that I
would steal all his toys as soon as he let me in his room. Laughing about
this topic—which had previously been only a source of tears and frustration
and denial (“I don't know why they don't like me, they're just mean”)—led
to real changes in Robert's ability to make and maintain friendships. And it
could make positive changes in your children's lives, too—if you just let
yourself follow their lead.
OceanofPDF.com

 CHAPTER 10

OceanofPDF.com

 TAKE CHARGE
(WHEN NECESSARY)1
“… not-quite-permissive [play]… begins when you notice where a
child can t function… where a child can't play rough or can't accept
affection or can't be tender or can't take certain risks like being very
far away from [mom or dad]…. You want children to know that you're
willing to design play that invites them to try [new things] in their own
ways… providing challenges that are tailored specifically to their
needs.”
—PATTY WIPFLER

In the last chapter, I described a game of freeze tag with my daughter
during which I tried to take over the game instead of following her lead. I
had forgotten one of my basic rules, which is to follow at least until you
have a pretty good reason to jump in and lead. Sometimes, though,
following a child's lead isn't enough, or doesn't work. At those times, the
Playful Parent takes charge of the play, at least for a moment, redirecting it
in order to help a child get unstuck. If the child is locked in the towers of
powerlessness and isolation, she needs a helping hand to get out.
Sometimes all the child needs is a gentle push, and then a return to
following her lead. Other times, we need to insist on making a connection.
Some other common ways of taking charge are to provide a challenge to the
child, introduce important themes, and make things fun that seem boring.
OceanofPDF.com

 —OFFER A GENTLE PUSH—

The key to taking charge is to have a light touch, to introduce a theme
or an idea or some contact and then see what children do with it. One of my
favorite gentle pushes is to ask a simple question, or make a comment. If I
feel as if we're not connected enough for the play to go well, I might say,
“The next thing we need to do is connect; how do you think we ought to do
it?” Children who aren't used to being asked this question may need some
ideas or suggestions about how to reconnect, such as hugging, looking in
each other's eyes, shaking hands, wrestling, giving a high-five, etc. Children
who have been asked a few times generally have very clear ideas about how
they want to connect (or else they say, “No way!” and run away laughing,
and then a new game begins).
A gentle push might be as simple as saying, “Let's play,” instead of
waiting for them to say it to you. Or “Let's play soccer,” if they usually like
to sit inside and watch television. Just about any of the principles of Playful
Parenting described in previous chapters can be the basis for a gentle push.
Suggest a wrestling match to a child who seems to be feeling powerless,
reverse the roles after an upsetting incident, empower girls, or connect with
boys. With a boy who wants to spend the entire therapy session playing a
video game alone, I might give a variety of gentle pushes to try to get some
interaction going. A not-so-gentle push might be to unplug the set.
Greenspan describes a gentle push as “making every encounter into a
two-way exchange… rather than engaging in parallel activities.”2 For
example, if the child is building a tower and ignoring you, don't just build
your own tower off to the side. Take all the blocks, so she has to ask you for
the ones she needs. Pick up blocks and ask her how to build something.
Then do everything wrong so she'll give you instructions on how to do it
right. Or fight—gently and humorously—over a block you both need.
Another style of gentle push is to join in with whatever the child is doing,
and then change it a little bit. If he is repetitively jumping up and down
without any laughs or giggles, you can start jumping, too, then introduce a

 song or slowly add variations in the rhythm. If a young child flits from toy
to toy, picking one up and then dropping it, you aren't going to get very far
with a lecture on increasing attention span. Instead, try following behind
him, collecting each thing he drops. At the end, offer the pile to him to start
over.
Is the child sitting like a lump? Say, “You're asleep; I'll be your blanket,”
and lie on top of him, singing a lullaby. Or my personal favorite: Sit on top
of him, pretending not to notice, and say, “This couch sure is lumpy.” Of
course, I am not suggesting nonstop entertainment and interaction with your
child. That would be exhausting—for both of you—and intrusive. I am
talking about once in a while during the day, or during times when you've
put aside your work and your worries for some concentrated PlayTime.
OceanofPDF.com

 —INSIST ON CONNECTION—

Pamela Haines wrote an article that made a deep impact on me.3 It was
about how newborns and infants reach out to us, taking the lead in
establishing a profound connection. It's no accident that most parents bond
so powerfully with their babies, or that the inability to bond—whether it
comes from the parent or the baby—is instantly recognizable. Babies are
experts at sending out signals of cuteness and/or neediness so that we will
be compelled to smooch them up and to take care of them. As they get
older, they aren't nearly so obvious about what they need, especially when
they need to connect with us. Haines goes on to say that at this point it
becomes our job to take the lead in connecting. In fact, our job is to insist
on connection, to assume that children want more contact and more
affection underneath their rejecting or obnoxious behavior. Not that they
want to cuddle with us every minute—they also need to spread their wings
and fly. But joyfully exploring the world, knowing that we are cheering
them on, is vastly different from feeling sullen, withdrawn, depressed, or
lonely.
Sometimes children like to play with that tension between distance and
closeness, between expressing their need for connection and wanting us to
make the first move. My sister Diane used to teach preschool, and she made
a home visit at the end of the summer to a girl named Roxanne, who had
been very attached to her the previous year. Roxanne's mother let her in and
shouted to Roxanne that Diane was there. The two adults went into the next
room, where Roxanne was sitting on the floor, coloring intently. Without
looking up, she said slyly, “Who was Diane?” After a little playful banter,
they made a great reconnection. Hearing this story, I loved how that one
teasing question expressed so much: I missed you, I wasn't sure if you were
coming back, I'm not sure if I should get close to you again because then I'll
miss you again, I'm going to yank your chain a little bit to get back at you.
That's a lot of meaning for three words.

 Oddly, even though children demand so much attention from us, they
often tune us out when we finally put everything else aside and get on the
floor to play with them. This can be confusing and even annoying, but it
actually makes perfect sense. They are feeling locked away in the tower of
isolation. And they are a bit mad at us for that. When we give them our full
attention, they show us what's going on in their hearts. They don't say it in
words, they say it in play, by pretending we don't exist or don't matter.
When we were busy, they felt as if they didn't matter to us. So don't give up
or walk away; be persistent. Our job is to take the initiative and push
(gently) for a connection.
If a light touch in making a connection does not work, we may need to
step in more vigorously. These more intensive techniques often involve
children's release of very painful emotions, through crying, throwing
tantrums, or kicking and screaming. This release leaves children free to
reestablish a deep connection with their parent. These emotions also clear
the way for a restoration of children's confidence. We may have to insist
that they—with our help—take some time to work on a problem that they
would rather avoid. We may have to insist on connection to break through a
thick wall of isolation.
For example, a boy I see in therapy is afraid of dogs, but he never wants
to talk about it or think about it. That makes it hard to get over the fear, so
occasionally I will insist on our taking a walk during the session. When we
pass by a dog, I try to help him through the fear, by walking with him
slowly, closer and closer. Once we are near the dog, he is the boss again,
and I follow his lead about how fast or slow to approach it. But in order to
get there, I have to direct the session, since he would never have said, “Let's
go find a dog so I can work on my fear today.”
With this kind of fear, there is usually a specific distance from the dog
that I call the edge. This edge is where the healing work of overcoming
fears takes place. Sitting in my office talking about Nintendo is too far
away, but getting jumped on by a barking dog is too close. Somewhere in
between is just right. Finding that edge usually requires an adult stepping in
to direct the play. You can usually tell when you are at the exact edge,
because the child may tremble or shake with fear, or cry, or laugh. Stay
right there. When that wave of emotion subsides, take a step closer. These
emotions come pouring out of the child because he notices two things at the

 same time: I am with a dog, and I am safe. That's why the edge is so
important, because it is the exact spot where both of these are true. Another
common response at the edge is for the child to talk nonstop about every
experience he has ever had with dogs. Or he may talk himself through the
fear, saying out loud, “It's a nice doggy. It's on a leash; it's not going to bite
me.” If you have a fearful child, try seeing if you can find this edge with
him; you can't just send him outside to find it himself. He needs you with
him so he can feel the safety and security as well as the fear. We can't
simply lecture him about how ridiculous his fears are, or how safe the dog
is. He has to figure this out by doing the emotional work at the edge of the
fear, with us nearby.
Sometimes the fearful thing that the child avoids is not a dog or a
swimming pool but making a close connection. In that case, it is again up to
us to push it a little, because children won't put a sign outside of their tower
that says, “Please help me out of this isolation.” Martha Welch wrote a book
called Holding Time,4 about a special technique for holding children to help
them overcome their resistance to making contact. Her book has been quite
controversial, because of concerns that her techniques can be coercive or
even harmful if used inappropriately or incorrectly. The basic ideas in the
book, however, are very useful. Based on her work with a wide range of
children, especially those with autistic and attachment disorders, Welch
argues that children need adults to persist in connection until there is a
breakthrough. The adult physically holds on through children's struggles to
resist the contact, and does not settle for less than a profound human
connection.
The idea that I have found most useful in Welch's work is that adults
usually settle for a superficial level of connection with children. Our
expectations are low. We may not even notice when we don't have a deep
bond, or we may think there is nothing we can do about it. Welch claims, I
think correctly, that if we are willing to put in the time and effort, then there
is plenty we can do about it. We can reclaim that extremely warm, close,
deep connection that most of us thought was no longer possible. Finding
this level of connection often requires a period of calmly holding children
very close while they struggle and fight and cry to break free.

 This technique is not for everyone. Some people swear by it, but it gives
other parents the willies. Even if you don't hold your child as she fights and
struggles to get away—the way Welch suggests—her idea of insisting on a
deep connection is a useful guide for Playful Parenting. I usually use a
variation of Holding Time with children, which I call feelings time. In
feelings time, I will start by holding children close, either to prevent myself
from getting hurt or to comfort them. Perhaps our PlayTime has released a
pile of aggressive feelings, and they can't stop trying to hurt me or another
child. Perhaps they race around breaking things, refusing to make any kind
of eye contact or other contact. Or they hurt themselves a little and come to
my lap for comfort. No matter how the holding starts, at some point they
will start to pull away or insist on being put down. Welch describes this step
very accurately. Usually I will try to hold them just a little longer and see
what happens. If they tell me to let them go, I usually do. If they go right
back to hitting me, I go right back to holding them. If they retreat to a
corner or a locked room, I give them a little space and approach more
tentatively. If they are ready to make a connection, then we shift to playing.
In other words, I keep insisting on connection, but I want it to be on the
child's terms as much as possible. When in doubt, I don't hold children
against their will, unless it is necessary for safety. In the same way, I won't
try to force children to make eye contact with me, but I will invite them to
look at my eyes. And I will keep inviting them, instead of giving up after
the first rejection. If I do hold children while they kick and scream—and,
yes, sometimes it is the only thing to do—I always ask them about it later:
“What did you think of that holding stuff? You were screaming for me to
stop, but when I stopped, you kept on hitting me.” “You look like you feel
much better; do you think the feelings time helped?”
Holding is, of course, the hallmark of Welch's holding time, but it is also
a technique suggested by other experts as well, when free play becomes
impossible because of aggression, withdrawal, or some other sign of
overwhelming emotions in the child. Patty Wipfler, for example, sees
insistence on connection as a way of helping children release their pent-up
emotions. For example, if children won't stop hitting or biting, gently but
firmly stop them from doing it. That often is enough to bring a healing
flood of tears. This emotional release is typically followed by a new level of

 closeness and cooperativeness.5 Stanley Greenspan recommends the use of
firm holding to calm children down if they get violent or agitated; the
contact and the firm pressure and the safety help children to organize their
sensations and their impulses.6
In all of these variations of close physical holding, it is important to
remember that the goal is not to punish children or assert your control
because you are bigger, but to let them release the painful emotions that
interfere with their connecting to others. Therefore, it is best not to hold
children when you are feeling angry or out of control yourself. In those
situations, take a time-out from each other and come back when you can be
calm and loving.
In the previous chapter I stressed the importance of just saying yes to
children, at least some of the time. I don't want to be confusing or
contradictory, but there are also times when we need to say no. One such
time is when children want something very badly, and they get it, and then a
moment later they want something different just as much, and then they get
it, and then the same thing happens again. Or they keep trying to do
something dangerous or destructive or hurtful. A firm no here may help
them release all of the backed-up feelings that are keeping them from
enjoying what they do have. In a way, the no acts like the holding in
Holding Time: It provides a resistance that children then use to let out their
excess feelings of fear and anger and frustration. They may respond to the
no with a temper tantrum, a bout of tears, or a raging fit. They aren't being
brats; they are “playing,” even though it isn't the kind of fun time we
usually associate with play. They are choosing some little thing to have a fit
over, because they don't have the words or maturity to talk directly about
their feelings. Don't be too judgmental about this; most adults do the same
thing. Think of the last argument you had with your spouse or partner or
friend. Did you pick a fight over some little thing because you couldn't
figure out how to really express yourself?
OceanofPDF.com

 —CHALLENGE—

Challenges lie somewhere between following children's lead and taking
charge. Stanley Greenspan calls this being playfully obstructive, while Patty
Wipfler calls it not-quite-permissive play. For example, if a child's attention
is entirely on a toy, and you want to make some contact, you can start by
picking up another toy and having your toy interact with her toy. If that
fails, and she tries to wander off, you can block the door with your toy. If
you still can't make a connection, you may try grabbing her toy and making
a run for it. If that is too scary or annoying for the child, maybe just reach
for her toy and miss, falling over on your face instead.
Now, why would you want to be so obnoxious? To make a connection.
To draw children out of the tower of isolation. To push them to try
something new that they have been too timid to try. Instead of just being
aggravated by their staring at the TV, you might stand in front of it and
block their view, or climb under the covers with them instead of nagging
them to get out of bed. With one client, who isn't big on contact, I will
frequently stick my hand out and say, “I challenge you to a thumb wrestle.”
Sometimes he says yes, and we thumb wrestle. Sometimes he says no, and I
pretend to beg and plead. Sometimes he says, “Next week,” and I say,
“Okay.”
Those examples of challenges are mostly about breaking through
children's isolation. Other children need more of a hand with powerlessness. Instead of doing anything the child wants, you might use PlayTime to
set him a challenge, such as climbing a tree, riding a bike, doing an extrahard math problem, calling a friend (if he is shy), and so on. The sky's the
limit. Brave parents may also offer the child a chance to give them a
challenge!
I was walking on the levee along the Mississippi River in New Orleans
one day when two boys, around nine or ten years old, came down nearby on
their bikes. It was a pretty steep hill, especially for a city that's mostly
below sea level. At the bottom they fell off their bikes, half on purpose,

 laughing and shouting. One boy said, “Were you scared?” The other said,
“Nah, I wasn't scared.” The first one said, “You must not have been going
as fast as me then, because I was scared.” I love that story, because it says
so much about boys and competition and about boys and feelings. I also
love it because these boys had raced down the hill clearly to give
themselves a physical challenge. As children get older, play may mean
choosing to do something a little scary to overcome their fear.
Physical challenges give children a chance to test themselves, find their
own limits, see how much strength they have. I think one reason teenagers
seek out thrills and dangerous activities is to create these types of
experiences for themselves. It's much better to join them and structure these
scary-but-safe adventures, so that we can provide both safety and emotional
support, rather than try to forbid them. They may prefer to do this with
other adults, such as on an Outward Bound course, rather than with us. We
might prefer that, too, since as they get older and stronger, we might feel as
if we are getting older and creakier.
OceanofPDF.com

 —INTRODUCE IMPORTANT THEMES—

As we have seen, children at play often bring up the themes important
to them. Most of the time, this happens spontaneously and automatically. In
fact, you may not be able to stop a theme, even if you are tired of it, like
bathroom humor or aggression or romance. At other times, though, an
important theme may be avoided or neglected, and an adult can jump-start
the play by introducing it. As with every time you take the lead in play,
remember to have a light touch. If a theme that you introduce doesn't go
anywhere, drop it. This idea is similar to the way therapists say, “You
haven't mentioned your mother lately….”
With children, it is even easier. After seeing him for several months, I
learned that my ten-year-old client Ramon was having a hard time sleeping
in his own bed. He certainly had never brought it up. We were playing with
pillows, so I made up a game where I said I had to have the pillows in order
to feel safe and go to sleep. He grabbed the pillows from me, and I
pretended to cry. He loved that game. A preschooler, Nancy, didn't want
ever to talk about her problems with toilet training. So whenever we played
house, I always had my characters search for bathrooms or have accidents. I
was playing with a six-year-old girl and her mother at an afternoon familyplay workshop. It seemed to me as if the mother was hovering a bit over her
daughter, worried about her getting hurt. The daughter wanted to do her
own thing but also wanted to please her mother. This tension made it hard
for her to play.
I started following the girl around the room, saying “Oh no! You aren't
going to walk, are you, that's so dangerous! You aren't going to put on roller
skates, oh no, I'm so worried, I can't look.” I was personifying and
exaggerating the worry. Both the mother and the daughter laughed at this
gentle caricature of the mother. The daughter began to play with more and
more confidence, being brave and daring but not at all reckless, as I kept up
my mock horror. If I stopped for a minute, she would say, “Hey, Larry, look,
I'm going to jump off this chair onto the mat,” which would be my cue to

 beg her not to do it, while she laughed and jumped. I could have just
suggested to the mom to back off and not hover so much, but that may well
have left them both more tense. I don't think the girl would have been able
to be as adventurous, or as safe.
My sister Jeanie told me a story about a mother she knew whose child
was having severe separation anxiety at preschool. The boy would cry for
the whole morning, not just for a few minutes after his mom left. Jeanie
recommended that they play school at home. They built a Lego house to be
the school, and the mom and her son pretended to be the teachers and
students. This play was relaxed and fun and didn't stir up any feelings, but
the boy still cried when he went to the real school. Then the mother thought
of adding a crucial element to the game, having a little car pull up to drop
off the little Lego guy at school. The boy would make his character say,
“Don't leave, Mama.” The mom would have her Lego mama cuddle the
scared boy. After just a few games of this, the situation at school changed
dramatically, and he made a good adjustment to being there. What
happened? At first he avoided any tough emotions in the play, but the
mother was tuned in enough to know what themes to introduce. The play
became highly emotionally charged, and the mother was soothing in her
dual role as mother and teacher. The child was then able to carry this
soothing presence with him into the real school, because they had played
out the scene in fantasy at home.
Sometimes a child will play out the same theme over and over. In that
case, try broadening the range of themes in the play. If his fantasy games
are always about aggressive dinosaurs, be a dinosaur that gets hurt and ask
the child's dinosaur for help. Even if he refuses, you are at least starting a
dialogue about dependency and empathy, not just about aggression. Rulebreaking is a good theme to introduce for most children. I love to make up
wacky rules and then pretend to be upset when children break them, or have
them make up rules for me—with appropriate punishments.
One theme that is loaded with difficulty is exclusion and inclusion. Like
adults, children have a natural inclination toward wanting to be included by
the group, but they are all too willing to exclude others. We can't just order
children to be nice and then walk away. We have to stick around and help
children figure out the actual nuts and bolts of including and what to do

 when children exclude or feel like excluding.7 Having the child's dolls or
stuffed animals act out exclusion and rejection is my favorite way to
introduce this theme.
Some themes are just as difficult for adults as they are for children, so it
can be a challenge to introduce them into play. Some schools and
neighborhoods are segregated by race and class; others are integrated. Some
are in between. Whatever your child's situation, they live with the fact of
these similarities and differences, and the fact that race and class matter
tremendously in our society. Yet we don't talk about it very much.
Generally, children either play out the same old terrible stereotypes that
they hear and see around them, or are afraid to bring up the topic at all. If
children can't play out a theme or feeling that is important to them, they
can't really figure it out. Multiculturalism has made impressive strides
(remember flesh-colored crayons?), but racism still pervades our society
and affects all of our children. I consulted at a school where every girl in the
second grade was in Girl Scouts, except for three girls whose families had
recently immigrated from Asia. Only a couple of white parents noticed or
cared. Other differences, such as physical or mental disabilities, are also
taboo subjects. I will never forget visiting a preschool class taught by my
sister Diane, where all the students lovingly included a girl with cerebral
palsy into every aspect of their play. As parents, we have to get over our
own fears, embarrassments, and prejudices in order to help our children
deal with these topics.
Recently, a colleague asked me if I had any suggestions for a difficult
problem he was facing. His daughter was in a diverse preschool and seemed
to get along with everyone, but when it came time to invite people to her
birthday party, she wanted to invite only her white friends. My first
suggestion was that parents should be in charge of birthday party guest lists
at that age (and beyond), because many young children tend to be “casually
cruel,” publicly excluding and including people without regard for the
emotional consequences and hurt feelings. Birthday party lists are not a
time to empower children; they are a time to guide them, especially when it
comes to exclusion based on race or class, or exclusion of a scapegoat or
outcast.

 Children also need to be pushed to overcome their resistance to
differences of any kind. It is a myth that young children are blissfully
“colorblind;” they are as aware of race as the rest of us. An even more
important suggestion for these parents goes by the fancy name of
intergenerational socializing, which simply means that if you want your
child to be friends with someone, the parents should invite their whole
family over. Finally, the Playful Parenting approach applies just as well to
thorny problems like racism as it does to having problems at school or
getting a shot at the doctor's. The parent can pick up a doll and have it say
to a frog Beanie Baby, “You're green. I don't want to play with you.” The
idea is to get the child giggling about the whole issue rather than to give a
thinly disguised lecture. It may seem funny, but those giggles actually help
the child think better about the topic.
OceanofPDF.com

 —MAKE IT FUN—

Taking the lead in play also means having an attitude that anything can
be fun. Chores, errands, cleanup, drudgery—why shouldn't these be as funfilled as playing? In his autobiography, Patch Adams, the hero of the recent
film, talks about his commitment to making everything fun. “The file room
of the Navy Federal Credit Union in Anacostia might seem like an unlikely
place to thrive. The people who worked there spent half their waking hours
doing something they hated. Filing was considered particularly horrible
work: joyless, boring, and dull. I decided to change all that. My fellow file
clerk was Louis Fulwiler, who remains my oldest friend…. From the very
first day we decided to make the files a ‘happening'—it was, remember, the
mid-1960s—and egged each other on…. We interacted with other people in
the office by singing file information…. Louis was my partner in fun and
we gave each other the courage to be goofy in public. When we went back
to visit ten or fifteen years later, everybody still remembered us. We had
opened whole new vistas in the filing shtick.”8
Patch Adams goes on to say, “Waiting in line becomes a great
opportunity to meet people, daydream, or play. Washing dishes—too often
seen as drudgery—becomes a ballet performed in gratitude to the cook.”
My friend Andy, who was in a fathers' group with me when our children
were two and three, once said, “I used to get upset at long lines and stuff,
but now Seth and I can have a great time in line at the supermarket, or
whatever we are doing.” Back when my daughter was a baby, I remember
realizing how much I separated the world into diaper duty versus playtime.
Heaven forbid we get these mixed up.
So now, when my daughter and I go grocery shopping, we sometimes
play a game in which she tries to sneak things into my cart that I would
never buy, and I have to spot them before we get to the checkout.
Sometimes we have more fun during cleanup time than we did playing. I
think parents often resort to bribes when children revolt against unpleasant
tasks such as getting a haircut or going to the doctor—the legendary

 spoonful of sugar that helps the medicine go down—and I know I've
certainly done it myself. But bribes are not the same as actually figuring out
how to make it fun. In fact, bribes backfire, making it even less likely that
children will want to do something on their own initiative, whether it is
getting up in the morning, or studying in school, or doing chores.10 Unlike
bribes, making everything fun fosters closeness, confidence, and
cooperation.
OceanofPDF.com

 —LEADING THE WAY—

At the end of the last chapter I introduced a boy named Robert as an
example of following a child's lead in play. He is also a great example of
the leading end, and of points in between.
Robert is a five-year-old boy whose mother called me after he was sent
home repeatedly from his preschool (and later, sent home from camp). He
tended to be aggressive when he was frustrated, and he was beginning to be
rejected by the other children for being bad. Robert is an incredibly bright
child, but he's socially unskilled and hard to settle down. In the first few
sessions, we just played whatever he wanted to play. Once we had a good
relationship, there were several times when I wanted to direct the play to
help him past a spot where he had difficulty.
For example, one time I tried the close physical holding technique I
described earlier because he kept hitting and kicking me, and my other
attempts to get him to stop all failed. When I held him so I wouldn't get
hurt, he screamed that he hated me. This type of play (play?) is exactly the
type of situation that I think calls for close holding and insisting on
connection. I asked his mom to hold him close while he struggled to get
away. He screamed at her to let him go and for me to leave. She told him
she would let go when he calmed down. I suggested that she say instead,
“I'll let you go when we are connected again. When we can look at each
other in the eye and really see each other.” She did, and the holding
changed. He was less agitated and confused. He still avoided eye contact,
but it was no longer a power struggle between the two of them over settling
down. Instead, it was a joint effort to reconnect.
As he wound down a bit, I asked her what she thought these feelings
were all about. Clearly, underneath the aggression, there was a little boy
who was scared and hurting. Some of his teachers realized this, but they
were still at a loss as to how to keep him from hurting others and digging
himself deeper into a hole—the role of a bully and bad kid. As his mom
told me about some scary things that had happened to Robert when he was

 younger, she began to cry; Robert relaxed in her arms, looking at her. She
told me how bad she felt about how scared he was, and how little he was,
and how he had to be brave and strong. I asked her to talk to him, instead of
to me. She did, and they looked deeply at each other, no struggling now,
just being gentle together.
Our previous sessions had created a strong rapport between the two of us
but had not produced much in the way of results at school or at camp. This
session, however, with his mother holding him, made a dramatic difference.
That weekend, they spent a lot of time talking as a family about how Robert
felt when he hit people, and for the first time he admitted that he felt scared
and worried, instead of just saying that other people had been mean or
stupid. Mom and Dad helped him think about ways to feel safe. To their
surprise, he announced that he thought that hitting people really didn't make
him any safer, because they just stopped liking him. Since then, his camp
and school experiences have been better. I think it was the mother's new
level of awareness that made the difference, at least as much as Robert
having the holding time. But if she hadn't held him through those tears and
screams, she probably would never have felt close enough to him to talk
about the deeper issues of fear and safety. Certainly he wouldn't have sat
still to listen to it. Since then, he has had a few more of these holding
sessions, but mostly we play. I should also say that at the end of each of
these holding sessions, he was very eager to have me come back and play
with him the next week, so I knew that his yelling at me to go away forever
was just his way of saying that he was dealing with some heavy-duty
emotions.
Another time Robert was mad at me; I forget what I had done wrong. He
closed the door to the kitchen in my face and said, “I am going to have
popcorn, and you can't have any.”
I burst in with a big frown, “Waaah!”
He said, “Okay, you can have one kernel.”
“One kernel, yippee, what a generous guy, I am so happy. Hey, wait a
minute, what flavor is it?”
“Oh, butter.”
“Well, that's okay then, because I hate buttered popcorn.”
“Tricked you, it's plain!”
“Waaah!”

 “Mom, where's the popcorn?”
“I'm not sure you should have any if you don't share.”
I told Mom, “It's okay, it's part of the game.” Then I said to Robert, “Do
you have any peanut-butter-caramel-soy-sauce-flavored popcorn? That's my
favorite!”
“No!”
“Waaah!”
He sat eating his popcorn, and he handed me one kernel. I said, “Hey, is
this peanut-butter-caramel-soy-sauce flavored?”
“Yep.”
I ate it. “This is butter flavored; you tricked me.”
He laughed.
“Maybe that piece just didn't have any peanut-butter sauce on it. Try this
one,” he suggested.
“I'm not sure if I trust you. Are you sure this is peanut-butter-caramelsoy-sauce flavored?”
“I'm sure it is; try it.”
“If it isn't, should I make a mad face?” I wanted to help him be able to
handle other people being mad at him, and I thought this could be a playful
way to introduce this idea. But I wanted to ask him first, so I didn't really
scare him.
“No!” He said no very emphatically—he wasn't ready for me to make a
mad face at him.
“What should I do if this somehow turns out not to be peanut-buttercaramel-soy-sauce flavored?”
“Make a sad face.”
I ate the popcorn, made a very sad face, and he laughed and laughed. We
repeated that a few times. In one sense, I was following along in this game
with the popcorn. But in another sense, I was leading, by introducing
themes like disappointment, anger, and power.
One time Robert and I were on the couch, and he bopped me with a
pillow. We could have launched into a pillow fight, but I decided to try
something else instead. I said, “Oh hi! Welcome to Dr. Cohen's School of
Pillow Management. You must be our new student. I'm very glad to meet
you.” I shook his hand to get some contact. By responding playfully to his
whack on my head with the pillow, I was following his lead. But by

 creating a game about school, I was stepping in as a guide. This game—Dr.
Cohen's School of Pillow Management—was something I was making up
as I went along, not some fancy therapy thing. I was just looking for a way
to introduce the themes of school, rules, and self-control, themes he usually
tried hard to avoid.
I continued, “You are just in time for the first lesson—No bopping!“ I
fully expected him to break this rule. I started talking at double speed:
“Now, put this pillow here and that pillow there and then switch the two
pillows like this and then spin around and stack these two pillows….” I
made the instructions very confusing but funny, to be kind of like school
but not quite. Mainly I was setting him up to bop me with the pillow, so I
could pretend to be all upset and chase him around while he giggled about
getting one over on me.
“Oh, and remember, there is only one rule, no bopping!” (Sorry to
interrupt again, but with some children, you have to whisper to them, “It's
really okay to bop me, I don't mind; I'm just saying it's a rule for the game.”
With Robert that was hardly a problem—he was itching for a chance to
wallop me with the pillow.) Robert picked up the pillows, started to move
them around the couch, and then when I wasn't looking, he bopped me. I
screamed a funny scream, and he ran away, saying, “You have to chase me
now.” Naturally I went chasing after him. Whenever possible, I switch back
to following children's lead once things get going. I caught him and carried
him back to the couch, and I said, “Now, that was very good except for one
small thing. No bopping! Are you ready to try it again, with no bopping?
Okay.” I repeated the instructions, and we had a replay of this game, about
ten or twenty times, with a great deal of giggling from everyone (including
Robert's mom, who was in the kitchen watching this goofiness).
At the end, when it was nearly time for me to go, Robert asked if we
could play it one more time. I said sure, and he proceeded to follow the very
complicated instructions about the pillows, and he didn't bop me. He had a
huge smile of accomplishment on his face. I said, “That was amazing. I
think you get to move on to the next level of pillow management.” He
beamed. “This level is called advanced bopping.” He really beamed now.
“In advanced bopping, you can bop me on the head, but you have to stand
on one foot and sing.” He did that, and we all laughed.

 Let me explain this last bit of the game. Since he had done so well with
playing at breaking rules, I thought I'd introduce a new twist. This time, I
took what he wanted to do, bop me on the head with the pillow, and instead
of making that against the rules, I made it the thing he was supposed to do.
This is a little twist that helps many children develop skills in being more
cooperative, as I explain more fully in the next chapter on learning to love
the games you hate.
“Okay,” I imagine you asking, “that explains the invitation to bop you,
but what was that bit about having him stand on one foot and sing?” That is
an attempt to help Robert with emotional regulation. Everyone has
aggression, just as we all have many types of impulses. The key is to
regulate these—to have a dimmer switch instead of only an on-off switch.
One thing I knew about Robert and aggression was that he had no dimmer;
if you were lucky, you could help him turn the fury off, but he didn't have
much skill at toning it down to manageable levels. So I took the aggressive
action—hitting me with a pillow—and I did two things with it. First, I
invited it, which has a profound impact on aggressive impulses. The
invitation makes the pillow bop a playful act instead of a hostile act. The
invitation also makes it an interaction between us, instead of something he
does to me. Second, I had him do it on one foot, while singing. It could
have been anything; that's just the first thing that came to my mind. The
idea was to change the action in some small way so he could begin to get
some control over it. If you can stand on one foot and sing while you bop
someone, you can possibly stop yourself from shoving a kid who steps on
your foot in line.
Here's another example of transforming behavior by first joining, then
leading. Betty teaches an art class for nine children, ranging in age from
three to twelve. One day, they were having a hard time focusing and
concentrating. She took them to the Mount Auburn Cemetery, where she
had hoped they would calm down. They didn't.
Near the tower, which is a structure with a skinny spiral staircase, Betty
had them put down their sketch pads and materials. She was speaking
slowly and deliberately, and they were surely thinking that she was
expecting them to settle down and work. All of a sudden, she shouted, “Last
one up the tower is a rotten egg,” and she led the way running up the tower.
At the top, she said, “Now we have to run down,” and she started down, the

 rest following boisterously. As she went down, she slowed the pace
gradually, until near the end they were going very slowly. She started
saying, “Feel the gravity pull your foot down as you take a step….” By the
bottom, they were calm, focused, and ready to draw. By first joining the
children where they were (boisterous and wild), Betty was then able to lead
them to a new place (settled and grounded). She said it was the best class
ever.
OceanofPDF.com

 CHAPTER 11

OceanofPDF.com

 LEARN TO LOVE
THE GAMES
YOU HATE
“Those who'll play with cats must expect to get scratched.”
—MIGUEL DE CERVANTES

So far, we have assumed that adults want to go to the world where
children live, at least to visit. But what about when we don't? What about
when that world disturbs or aggravates or scares us? What about when we
just want to get them to stop what they are doing, and never do it again, and
we don't want to be playful or lighthearted about it?
In the chapter on connection (chapter three), I referred to Max, the hero
of Maurice Sendak's Where the Wild Things Are, who returns from his
fantasy world to the real world because he wants to be where someone
loves him best of all. But before that, he unleashes the wild energy that
parents find so destructive and unsettling. He imagines taming a bunch of
wild creatures, who make him the king of all wild things. “ ‘And now,' cried
Max, ‘let the wild rumpus start!' ” The wild rumpus is Sendak's fanciful
shorthand for all the things children do that make adults uncomfortable, or
horrified, or furious. In psychological terms, there are three key themes
lurking underneath every wild rumpus: dependence-independence,
aggression, and sex.
OceanofPDF.com

 —DEPENDENCE (“I CAN'T!”) AND INDEPENDENCE
(“I'D RATHER DO IT MYSELF!”)—

Babies are born completely dependent on us, and yet they are already
separate beings, with their own needs, desires, and preferences. Throughout
their lives, they experience powerful drives to be both dependent and
independent. Both drives can be confusing to adults. Think about children
who cling to their parents or their teacher, or have a hard time trying new
things, or who seem to regress to a younger stage whenever they are under
stress. Their motto is “I can't.”
On the other hand, children can exasperate us by running out into the
street, by breaking rules, by insulting us and pushing us away, by getting
into trouble, by ignoring our superior wisdom and guidance. The motto this
time is “I'd rather do it myself.” Some children seem to flip-flop back and
forth between dependence and independence, and we simply can't keep up.
One minute they want to go to the store alone; the next minute, they want to
ride in the baby's carriage.
I have described disconnection and powerlessness as locked towers.
Children may literally lock themselves in their rooms, or hide underneath
headphones, or maintain an emotional distance that lets no one in. When the
tower door slams, we can almost feel the wall that separates us. Other
children confuse us by looking as if they are too connected. They cling;
they cry if someone new picks them up; they hang on to mama's skirts; they
call home every day from college; they never move away from home. But is
this really a matter of too much connection? Actually, the problem is a
different version of disconnection. They can't connect with anyone but
mom, or with anyone new, or with their peers.
The teacher's lap, mom's skirt, the endless hours plugged into the
computer—these become the fortresses of isolation. Even when other
people are around, the overly dependent child does not connect with them.
The child clinging to her mother's lap is not looking happily out at the

 world, just waiting for a good moment to plunge in. Instead, she has her
face buried in a shoulder. As parents, we may like the coziness of this
burrowing in, or we may feel smothered and irritable: “Why do you have to
follow me around?… Are you physically attached to me or something?…
Go play in your room.”
One Playful Parenting approach to clinginess is to push your child an
inch or two away from you. Don't send him completely away, just put a tiny
distance between you. Try making eye contact and see what happens. Often
the result is a big burst of tears or a tantrum, as the child tries to retreat back
to that buried spot of safety. Yet we need to coax him out so he can see that
the world outside is safe as well, or at least that its dangers are worth
risking. When he is burrowed into your shirt like that, he isn't really
connecting with you, he is hiding. Gently push him to come out and join
you, and then help him notice the wide world. This strategy may not seem
like play, but it is a way of physically playing out the child's mixed feelings
about dependence and independence.
My friend Carla called me for help with her daughter, Isadora, who, at
eleven months, had an extreme case of separation anxiety. She screamed at
the very thought of being left with anyone other than her mom, including
her father or her grandmother, both of whom she loved. She would cry the
whole time her mom was gone, not just for a few minutes. I told Carla I'd
come over and give them a hand. She had someone take her older boy for a
while, and we sat talking for a few minutes while Isadora sat on the floor,
eyeing me warily.
I talked to Carla about all the stuff I've been saying in this chapter, and
suggested that we see what happened if I tried to hold Isadora. As if she
could understand me, Isadora started fussing and asking to be held by her
mom. I nodded to Carla to pick her up, and Isadora clung very tightly,
giving me a dirty look. I reached out and touched Isadora's shirt, very
gently, just barely touching it. Isadora started to cry, and she cried hard for
the next half hour or more, with her head buried in Carla's shoulder. Every
once in a while she would look out and see me still touching her shirt, and
she would cry some more. She seemed to be pushing her mom away with
one hand and clinging to her with the other, a very common pattern.
I suggested to Carla that she keep trying to make eye contact with
Isadora, and keep talking to her gently. Carla said that Isadora never cried

 like this with her, and this must be what it was like when she left. I said,
“Not quite. This time she gets to have you and not have you at the same
time, which is very different from being with you or being left by you.”
You see, most of the time Isadora was either with her mom, and
everything was fine, or she was not with her mom, and everything was
awful. She couldn't notice other people, even people she was very close to,
if her mom wasn't around. All she could see was not-mom. With anyone
else, she didn't cuddle in to cry, releasing the painful feelings; instead she
resisted all comfort and screamed. When I very gently tugged her away
from her mom, Isadora could still have her mother, while releasing the fear
of being separated from her.
Toward the end of all this crying, I asked Carla what she thought these
tears were about. She told me about having to hand over Isadora at the
hospital for a medical procedure when she was first born. Carla started to
cry telling this story, and Isadora stopped crying to watch her mom cry,
another common pattern. Carla held Isadora tight, telling her how much she
loved her, how afraid she had been at the hospital, and how hard it was to
have to give her to someone else to hold. After both had finished crying,
they held each other in a very relaxed way, looking deeply into each other's
eyes. Isadora even looked at me with affection, though she still wouldn't
come over to me. When I touched her shirt again, she just laid her head on
mom's shoulder and gave me a dreamy look. On later visits though, and
ever since, she has been very cuddly and affectionate with me. Afterward,
Isadora's separation anxiety was reduced significantly, and she no longer
howled when left with her dad or her grandmother.
Now, this hour of tears certainly wasn't play in the sense of fun and
games. Yet, in a way, it was play. I was playing at pulling her away from
her mom, instead of really taking her away. Perhaps an adult example will
make this clearer. I saw a man in therapy who couldn't stand it when the
hour was up, and he found a dozen ways to try to keep my attention instead
of leaving. He didn't care that I had people waiting. He couldn't take a hint,
or even a direct statement that he had to leave. I tried a few typical therapy
ploys to change this behavior, with no success. He refused to believe that he
had any deep psychological reason for wanting to stay. Each time he
insisted that he just needed to talk to me about “one more thing.”

 Then one day I decided to make it into a game. I said, “At about halfway
through the session, I am going to say ‘the time is up.' You can argue,
complain, beg, plead, whatever you want, for as long as you want, until the
hour really is up, and then it will really be time to leave.” He said, “That's
stupid; that will never work. I'll know that it isn't really time to go, and it
won't bother me.” I finally convinced him to try it, and it worked perfectly. I
said, “Our time is up,” and he said, “What do you mean? I just got here. I
need your help; I don't care how many people you have waiting….” Instead
of being annoyed and eager to rush him out—as I usually was when he
pulled this at the end of our sessions—I just kept saying, “Gee, sorry, our
time is up.” Instead of acting as if he just needed to talk about one more
thing, he was finally able to admit to being needy and dependent. At the
real end of the hour, I said, “Hey, look, the time is really up.” He started to
argue, and then gave a big smile and said, “See you next week.” And left.
That was it. No more hanging on for dear life at the end of the sessions. The
therapy sessions themselves became more productive, too, as neither of us
spent them dreading the ending anymore.
A very different Playful Parenting approach to excess dependency is to
reverse the roles so that you grab on to children and cling to them for dear
life. Children who cling are used to being sent away, and they dread it. We
may like being clung to at first, but eventually we get tired of it, usually
before their neediness runs out. Thus, every time they come close, they are
already tense about the impending separation. They hate separations so
much that they forget to enjoy the times they are actually together. When
we are the ones who cling, letting them be the ones eventually to squirm
away from us, they can notice the connection instead of focusing on the
separation. This doesn't take as long as you might think, especially if we are
really silly about how much we love them and how we are never going to
let them go. Once the tables are turned, they don't need to cling, so they let
go pretty quickly.
I discovered this idea by accident, when I was having trouble putting my
daughter to bed when she was very little. She wanted me to lay down with
her until she was asleep, but as soon as I got up she would wake up and
want me to stay. It was nerve-racking. Finally, I figured out that she could
never relax because she knew that as soon as she fell asleep I would leave.
No matter how long I waited after she fell asleep, she still woke up and

 caught me leaving. So I started getting up sooner, before she was all the
way asleep, saying that I was going to go put on my pajamas, and then I'd
come back and check on her. I told her that if she was still awake when I
came back, I would lie down with her again. Otherwise I'd kiss her good
night and tuck her in. She was almost always asleep before I was even out
of the room. On the rare times she was still awake when I came back to
check on her, all I had to do was give her a kiss, and she'd roll over and fall
right asleep—she could relax, I came back. Instead of bracing herself for
the separation, now she knew that the next thing that would happen was that
I'd be back, so she could relax and drift off to sleep. Thinking about this
solution to the sleep problem, I realized that clingy children are always
waiting anxiously for the dreaded separation. But if we cling to them, they
can be in charge of when to separate.
Many family conflicts happen when children won't do something
independently that we think they should be able to do (like dress
themselves, do their chores without being nagged, finish their homework).
Because they can do it by themselves, we think they should. But at these
moments, when children have taken a step toward independence, they may
need more contact with us rather than less. They need to balance all their
new accomplishments with some extra closeness. That replenishes their
supply of confidence so they can move on to the next step. Therefore, any
increase in expectations or responsibility should be accompanied by an
increase in playtime together.
When children regress—acting younger and less mature than they are—
parents often get extremely annoyed. This regression happens most often
when there is a new sibling or when children are under stress. Of course,
these are already difficult times for parents. Yet regression can't be
eradicated by punishing it or disapproving of it, because it represents a deep
need in children to go back to being a little dependent for a while. Then
they can regroup and move out toward independence again. If you fight it,
they will want to do it all the time, but if you enjoy it and make it a game,
they will get over it quickly. If your four-year-old climbs into the baby
carriage when the toddler climbs out, say in a delighted voice, “What a
marvelously enormous baby! I've never seen anything like it. Goo-goo-goo
baby.” When the child talks, exclaim how amazing it is that a tiny baby can
talk. Soon he'll get out of the carriage and show how he can run, jump, etc.

 His cup gets filled by the brief excursion into babyhood. To an older
sibling, it looks as though all a baby has to do is lie there in order to be
loved and appreciated by adults. After the refill, he can go off running with
a new boost of enthusiasm for being four. Other regression games are
quieter, like just letting older children cuddle in your lap long after they
have given that up, without teasing them about it.
At the other extreme, children exasperate adults by being too
independent. They want to be away from adult supervision and adult rules.
This is hard. We have to protect them, but we also have to let them spread
their wings a little. Sometimes all we need to do is relax and not hover so
much, trusting that they will be safe enough, even if we can't guarantee 100
percent safety. Other times we just need to find safe ways for them to
practice their independence. We can hold their hands while they practice
cutting with a sharp knife, we can follow a block behind while they go
“alone” to the store, we can go to a park where there is nothing breakable
and they can go wild.
We can also loosen up about things like mess, noise, and bathroom
humor, if those things bother us. Power struggles disappear if we don't fight
over them. And we can let them make more of their own decisions. When
my daughter was around two or three, she wanted to play with Band-Aids.
In fact, she wanted to cover herself head to toe with them. I found myself
saying sternly, “No, these are for when you get a cut,” as if play and first
aid are worlds that dare not intersect. I did the same thing with tape: “That's
not a toy!” But, of course, tape and bandages are toys (and fashion
accessories). Children don't make these distinctions. It turns out that my
“need” to keep Band-Aids hoarded away for medical emergencies was a
pretty dumb rule.
Children are into rules—making them, discussing them, breaking them,
negotiating them, arguing about them, enforcing them, finding loopholes,
turning other children in. Most children love games that let them make and
break silly rules. So invent a rule—like no giggling or no blinking—and
then make a big pretend fuss when they break the rule. This gives them a
chance to giggle about an area of their life that is very challenging.
Sometimes children will want to use their PlayTime to be completely in
charge of the rules. They may want you to follow the rules exactly, or they
may want you to break the rules and be punished. Adult involvement is

 crucial here, because other children will never allow your child to have so
much power. When children try to control the rules with one another, it
doesn't usually go over very well. Parents don't really like being bossed
around either, but I have noticed that parenting goes much smoother if we
cheerfully obey orders during PlayTime. It helps them cheerfully follow our
rules at other times. Well, maybe not cheerfully, but would you settle for
cooperatively?
My daughter made up a game that she calls Emma's Rules Monopoly. We
had played Monopoly a few times and it was starting to get a little boring,
so one time she asked me if she could make up some rules. I said sure,
thinking she would make the game more interesting in some way. Instead,
she made it ridiculously lopsided—in her favor. She got big wads of money
no matter who landed on what. I'd buy something and she'd take it away
from me, and so on. We both howled with laughter all the way through the
game, with me pretending to be surprised that each new rule made her
richer. We were no longer playing Monopoly, but a new game—perhaps it
could be called Life Is Unfair.
Some parents fear that letting their children play this way will leave them
unprepared for the cold, cruel world of their peers. Other children, after all,
would never let them get away with such selfishness. On the contrary, being
in charge of the play and the rules fills children's cup—and that refill then
leaves them more able to play happily on a level playing field with their
peers. It also helps them play out their tensions and upsets about the
confusing world of games, rules, and competition. We can help this process
along by exaggerating (in a funny way) the thrill of victory and the agony
of defeat.
Just to make it more confusing, sometimes children have their cup filled
by not being given a special break. Sometimes they like to be treated as one
of the big kids or one of the grown-ups, and to have to play their hardest to
keep up. My friend Susan told me about her nine-year-old son Mark. At
home, he insists on winning every game. So she was very surprised to find
him at the gym one day, playing basketball with a bunch of teenage boys.
They were not giving him any special breaks, and he was playing extremely
hard, but he was still the weakest player on the court. He loved it. The
“being in charge” and “letting me win” play gives children roots; the all-out
play with no special advantages lets them test their wings.

 OceanofPDF.com

 —AGGRESSION—

Many adults are disturbed by aggressive play: teasing, play fighting,
being superheroes, using pretend guns or toy guns, engaging in rough-andtumble play, and having battles for dominance and power on the
playground. As with dependence and independence, if we can understand
where aggressive play comes from and what purposes it serves, then we can
perhaps hate it less and join in more.
We've all seen pictures of bear cubs or lion cubs play fighting. Animals
tease each other, too. Frans de Waal, a primatologist, described a study of
Bonobo chimpanzees at the San Diego Zoo.1 They are extremely playful
and active, and a favorite game involves climbing down a chain into the dry
moat around their enclosure. One male, Kalind, often pulled the chain up
after another chimp had climbed down. He especially liked doing this to the
dominant male chimp, Vernon. “Kalind would look at Vernon with a play
face and teasingly slap the side of the moat. On several occasions Loretta
[the dominant female] rushed to the scene to ‘rescue' her mate by dropping
the chain back down.”
Play fighting and real fighting can be hard to tell apart. Here are some
clues I use: Is there any eye contact? Are they looking at the other person
for a response, or are they blind with rage? Is there laughter? Is anyone
getting hurt? Anthony Pellegrini,2 a psychologist who writes about roughand-tumble play, describes playful aggression as running, chasing, and
wrestling, accompanied by smiling and laughing. When play fighting ends,
children keep playing together happily. The stronger ones will hold back
their full strength in order to keep things roughly even (like Paul the baboon
in chapter six).
In contrast, real fighting involves hitting with fists, shoving, pushing, and
kicking. At least one child is usually frowning or scowling, and another
may be crying. Real fighting generally ends with the children unhappily
going their separate ways. The stronger child does not hold back, and
injuries are much more common. Bullies often mix rough-and-tumble play

 with real aggression. That is, they escalate playful fighting into real
aggression, or they disguise their violence as playful rough and tumble.
When we see aggressive play, we need to stay calm and relaxed, and
possibly insert some connection (as in the love gun, page 50) or help
children build confidence (as in the power room, page 60). When we see
real aggression, we need to help children cool down. That means either
holding them or giving them breathing room. Good aggressive play actually
helps children control their aggressive impulses and helps them deal with
the aggression they see around them on TV or in real life. Destructive
aggressive play is simply violence, and if unstopped it promotes more
violence.
I was playing with a girl named Ellen once. She was playing at hitting
me, and I was jumping out of the way. She was switching back and forth
between looking playful and looking angry. One time, when she just missed
hitting me, she caught the edge of the table and whacked her hand. When I
went over to make sure she was okay, she pushed me away and said it was
my fault. I said it was a case of the chickens coming home to roost. She
thought that was a very funny expression but didn't know what it meant. I
explained that she was the one being aggressive, and then she ended up
getting hurt. Later in the game, I pretended to fall just before I caught her,
and I hammed up a tragic scene of agony as I lay on the floor. Ellen laughed
and said, “The chickens have come home to see the roosters!”
Another type of play does not involve actual aggression but symbolic
aggression—superheroes, Power Rangers, action figures, pretend guns, and
so on. Some parents ban this type of play because it disturbs them, or
because they fear it will numb their children to the effects of real violence.
Banning this type of play does not work. It is almost always better to join in
with the play and transform it rather than to ban it. If children have a desire
to play these games, then that means the aggressive impulses and the
scenarios of violent destruction are already in their heads. You can't force
this stuff out of their heads by not allowing them to play. You can only do it
by playing with them. I know this will be very hard for some parents, but
give it a try and see how it goes.
Some people say fantasy gunplay promotes real violence; others say it
actually makes children less aggressive by letting them get it out of their
system. In fact, it can go either way. Are they getting lost in the violence, or

 are they having fun? Are they playing out scenes of aggression in order to
master their aggressive feelings, or are they getting sadistic pleasure out of
fantasizing about hurting people? Many parents forget to make an important
distinction between toy guns and pretend guns. Toy guns, especially
realistic ones, are more likely to promote destructive types of play because
they limit creativity. What else can you do with a gun besides shoot people?
Pretend weapons, on the other hand, grow out of children's own themes and
needs and concerns and can be endlessly creative.
Child psychologists are also quite divided on the issue of whether it helps
angry children to have them bash on pillows or rocks or trees. Some argue
that this is a healthy release of aggression; others say that it just reinforces
the aggression and teaches violence. I think both can be true, and it depends
on whether or not there is any human connection. A teacher in an afterschool program told me about a very successful intervention he did with an
eleven-year-old boy who was ready to explode with anger. The teacher put
his hand on the boy's arm and led him outside, saying, “Let's go whack
some trees.” They found some sticks and let off steam together, hitting tree
trunks and making loud noises. The effect was very calming for the child,
because a close connection with the teacher was at the heart of it. An
example at the other end of the spectrum is a client of mine who once spent
an hour destroying everything in his parents' garage. No adults were around,
just another boy who alternated between egging him on and trying to get
him to stop. This destructiveness was not therapeutic and just left the boy
with more of an appetite for violence, because he was trapped in a locked
tower of isolation.
In good play fighting, children can experiment with their physical
strength. With action figures, they experiment with the idea of power by
fantasizing about fighting, weapons, and superpowers. Again, try to help
children keep the play creative and lighthearted, instead of purely
destructive. I like to play bad guys or monsters who are just a little bit scary,
but also kind of funny, bumbling, and incompetent, so children can use the
play to overcome their fears. If the bad guys or monsters are too scary, the
play just increases children's fear.
In another area of aggression—children being mean to one another and
jockeying for dominance—parents often get very confused. Most children

 can be cruel or mean sometimes.3 Here's a spot where children are
experimenting with something very complex, so it's no surprise that feelings
and bodies can get hurt. Children need to experiment with social power
without too much adult interference, but we also need to be available to
protect children who are more vulnerable.
Two mothers in a parenting class told the following story. Their sons,
ages seven and eight, were at the playground with a mixed-age group of
kids that plays together often. The usual games of tag were escalating into
name-calling and wood-chip-throwing. One of their boys hit a girl in the
neck with a belt, raising a large welt. This boy is quite active and energetic
and somewhat impulsive, but this behavior was uncharacteristically violent.
The belt belonged to the other boy whose mom was in my class. Both
mothers were horrified by what their sons had done or participated in. It
later came out that an older boy, new to the group, had told them to do it.
The parents were even more upset by this explanation—that their sons had
followed the lead of a bully. The mothers did not understand how this could
possibly have happened.
They seemed to see their sons' behavior as monstrous, a sign of serious
disconnection from the human community. I agreed that it was a terrible
thing, for the boys as well as for the girl, but I also felt that there was a lot
more going on than just boys being wild, reckless, and violent. In fact, I
think they were engaging in social experiments: What happens if I ally
myself with a stronger peer? Will I be more powerful in the group? Can I
get away with telling Mom it was someone else's idea? The instigator—the
new boy who gave the two younger boys the idea—was doing his own
experiments: Can I get someone else to act out my aggressive impulses for
me? Who will get in trouble if they do, me or them? I'm new here; how
much power do I have because I am big? Can I make a place for myself in
this group by being the biggest and toughest?
I would describe both behaviors—the boy who tries to hand over his
aggression to a younger peer, and the boys who eagerly try out an alliance
with a stronger peer—as misguided attempts to figure out a difficult
problem. Of course, there are dangers, above and beyond the injury to the
girl who was hit with the belt. The older boy could come to enjoy the
cruelty and become sadistic; the younger ones could begin to be entranced

 by the power of the alliance and become his henchmen. At the same time,
we need to understand that the boys were trying to figure out what to do
with their aggressive feelings. They were experimenting with the
complexities of social interaction—making alliances, betraying friends,
giving orders, following orders, ganging up, etc. Their attempts worked out
badly, but they weren't monsters. Just as toddlers will pull a cat's tail to see
what happens, school-age boys will yell out “Everybody get Mickey” just
to see what happens. Girls are more likely to whisper such a thing
(“Everybody wear a dress tomorrow, but don't tell Susie.”).
The way to prevent these experiments from going too far astray is to
spend more time actually playing with children so that we can protect them,
and also so that we can model how to express aggressive feelings in a safe
way. Maybe we can spot trouble before it boils over, instead of waiting until
something bad happens and then yelling. You might let them gang up on
you instead of against a smaller child. Call frequent breaks so things don't
get out of hand. Fall over and get everybody giggling.
OceanofPDF.com

 —SEXUAL FEELINGS AND EXPRESSIONS—

This chapter is as good a place as any to tackle the difficult issue of
childhood sexuality. I know this topic makes many parents uncomfortable,
even a hundred years after Freud shocked the world with the news that
children have sexual feelings. We don't really know much about healthy or
normal sexual development in children, because young boys and girls are
exposed to so much misinformation and so much sexually explicit or
suggestive material before they are prepared to handle it. They get it from
their peers and especially from popular culture. Take a random ad and look
at the message to boys: If you drink a certain kind of beer, you will be
surrounded by gorgeous babes. And this is the kind of girl you're supposed
to find most attractive. The message to girls is even worse: This is how
you're supposed to look, and this is the most you can aspire to—to be the
prize for some guy who bought the right kind of beer.
Parents get very confused by children's discovery of sexual play and
masturbation. Sexual play between peers is generally nothing to worry
about if it is occasional, playful, and exploratory. Consider getting a
professional opinion if it is coercive, habitual, or goes too far. Make sure all
children have access to accurate information that is the right level for their
age. Above all, avoid punishing or humiliating the child. From the earliest
days of psychotherapy, therapists have been trying to help their patients
overcome the problems caused by being punished or humiliated for
masturbating or playing doctor when they were children. When children
make their dolls do sexual things, there is no cause for alarm. But if that's
the only game they want to play, or if you suspect that they are playing out
an experience of sexual abuse, then by all means get a professional opinion.
On the other hand, while sexual exploration and sexual play are perfectly
normal for children at all ages, some sexual play is children's way of
dealing with things that are confusing or scary or too much for them. They
have been exposed to more than they can handle, and they are trying their
best to deal with it. The way they deal with it, of course, is by playing,

 usually in secret, with another child. Then that child may have something
confusing or exciting to play out. In this case, the best response is to have
conversations about sex, answering their questions simply and honestly, and
to reduce their exposure to provocative movies, television, or nudity at
home. Some children have no trouble with mild nudity or sexual material;
others are disturbed by it.
I consulted with a family where the parents were worried about their sixyear-old daughter's frequent masturbation. I thought they were handling it
very well. They didn't freak out or punish her or forbid it. They asked her to
do it in her room and not when other people were around. Usually that's all
that parents need to do. But these parents started to worry because she
seemed to do it most after she had asked one of her parents to play with her
and they had been too busy. This suggested to them, and I agreed, that she
might be substituting the sexual self-stimulation for other forms of
connection, or as a way to deal with feeling lonely or bored (the same
reasons many adults masturbate). Masturbation is so intensely pleasurable
that it overwhelms the original need for connection and becomes a habit.
This girl's parents also noticed that she would masturbate while watching
videos—not pornographic videos, but just regular kids' videos—and they
worried that it couldn't be good for her to associate sexual pleasure with
zoning out in front of the television. I agreed with that, too. When I asked
more questions about the behavior, I discovered that she always
masturbated using a particular stuffed animal to rub up against. I
recommended that they use Playful Parenting to interject a little human
connection into this “play.” I suggested that they play a game during a time
when she wasn't involved in the sexual activity. The game was to pretend to
have that animal beg and plead with their daughter to be her new favorite
toy. “Please take me to school. Can I sit with you while you eat your
dinner? Please, please, please, please!” They made this animal plot and
scheme—in a humorous way—to overthrow her favorite stuffed animal, the
one she always slept with and took on trips. She laughed heartily at this
game, and the response was immediate and dramatic. The masturbation
stopped, but without any guilt or negative feelings about sex or sexuality.
Apparently, all she needed was a way to playfully deal with the feelings
that had become attached to the intense physical stimulation and had taken
on a sexual meaning. At the same time, the parents figured out how to

 spend more time together as a family and to figure out alternatives to
saying, “Go away; I'm too busy.” One thing they did that was very
successful was to say, “I don't have time right now; let's have a big hug and
play in fifteen minutes.” Like serving a snack after school to tide a child
over until dinner, that extra contact helped her manage the wait until she
could get some attention from her parents.
Preteens and teenagers face extreme pressures to be cool. Part of this
coolness is pretending to know much more about sex than they really do,
and pretending to have it all together about dating and romance. We need to
lose our dignity a bit in this area, so that our children then don't have to play
it so cool. We want them to know that it's okay to be curious, to not know
something, to be scared and confused. A playful way to convey that
message is to play the role of what Patty Wipfler calls the happy dense
person. “Let's go outside in our underwear and run around in the woods like
in that commercial.” “Hey, you keep calling each other fag and homo. What
does that mean?” “Oh my gosh, those people are kissing. Did you see that?”
“What on earth is that dog doing to that guy's leg?”
Remember the game for toddlers where we stumble and fall right before
we catch them in a game of chase, so they can feel competent and
confident? The preteen equivalent is for us to stumble a bit in this area of
sex and romance that is so loaded for them. As I like to say, it takes a
village idiot to raise a child. So I do totally uncool things, like ask them if I
can have the gum they've been chewing, or sing very corny love songs. I
say that I have a crush on Barney the purple dinosaur, or on Barbie.
Some children will start to take their clothes off or writhe around in your
lap at any opportunity. Adults are rightly worried when children's play
strays this far into sexual territory. No one wants to be seen as a pedophile
or child molester. But it's a paradox. In order to develop a healthy sexuality,
children need to play out the sexual themes that concern them. But we can't
help them play out their sexual feelings and confusions directly, the way we
can play at school if they are having trouble at school. We need to find safer
ground. First, we need to provide plenty of healthy, close contact that isn't
abusive, exploitative, or sexual. Any kind of physical play, from playing
sports to wrestling to running around outside, can help children dissipate
their excess sexual energy. Most children need much more of this healthy
physical contact and physical play than they get. Another good play activity

 is the sock game, which I described earlier, where each person tries to take
off the socks of the other players while keeping his or her own on. This is a
safe way to address children's feelings about having their clothes on and off,
and it's also lots of fun. For some people this game won't have anything to
do with sex; for others, it will be a symbolic way of playing out an
important sexual theme in a way that no one gets hurt or freaked out.
With married couples in therapy, I have them play a similar game. I tell
one of them to ask the other, “Can I put my finger in your ear?” The other
one usually says “Eww, gross,” or something like that. I have the first
person beg and plead, and soon both are laughing wildly. In a safe and
symbolic way, they are playing with the topic I call who puts what where.
An area fraught with tension becomes a playground for silly giggles, which
often translates into a better physical relationship.
OceanofPDF.com

 —INVITE THE BEHAVIOR YOU HATE—

Sometime when things are going smoothly, and you have slightly more
attention to spare than usual, invite your child to do the things you can't
stand. If your children are driving you nuts with their sibling rivalry, for
example, ask them: “Could you guys please have a fight?” (Or tease each
other, or take things from each other, or fight over who gets your attention,
or complain about who got a bigger piece of tofu, or whatever drives you
crazy.) “Would you do that for me? I'll watch and take notes.” Usually they
won't actually do what you ask, but if they do, just pretend to be a news
reporter. Watch with great interest, ask questions, ask them to do it again so
you can study it.
The idea of inviting behavior that you hate is that it gives the difficult
situation a playful twist. This twist usually lets the adult think better about
how actually to handle the situation, and it catches children off their guard.
“Instead of taking the garbage out tonight, could you sit like a lump in front
of the TV for a few hours?” “I'm in the mood for a big argument about what
time bedtime is tonight; what about you?” The invitation is a way of
following children, since you are responding to their usual behavior, but it
is also a way of leading, because you are turning the whole family dynamic
upside down. After all, getting on the floor means joining in with play that
we would rather ignore or eliminate, not just with play we enjoy. Inviting
the behavior we hate simply takes this idea a step further.
The other day my daughter had six girls over. I had to take them to the
park because of the noise level. On the way back I said, “Last chance for
shrieking.” They screamed those piercing nine-year-old-girl screams a few
times, and everybody laughed. One girl asked if she could have a solo. Not
only did inviting the screeching get it out of their systems, but it meant that
I could get away with asking them not to scream later.
If children start being obnoxious before you have a chance to invite it,
you can still play this game. “Hey, I see you guys are fighting! Can I watch?
I find it so interesting the way older siblings are so bossy, and the way

 younger siblings are so sneaky.” You can provide a running commentary, a
play-by-play, about whatever it is they are doing. “Wow! Ladies and
gentlemen, did you see that? He's lying there on the couch; he's been there
for three hours; he's not moving. It may be a new world's record, no, he
flicked his eyes a little; he may actually be preparing to move.”
The play-by-play narration can also be a good way to express what we
are thinking and feeling in a playful way. So often we either hold
everything in or we scream it all out. Neither of those is very satisfying—or
very effective. Try expressing yourself playfully instead: “I'm looking at the
unfolded laundry. I am turning to the child who was supposed to fold it four
hours ago. I am looking back at the laundry. I am starting to feel a
screaming fit coming on. No, wait; I'm calming down.”
Just about every behavior we can possibly hate can be transformed into a
game or type of play that we can enjoy. If a child has trouble following the
rules in games, and it bothers you, play a game like I doubt it, where
cheating is part of the fun of the game. If they lie, make up whoppers
together. You'll be surprised how joining the behavior, and making it
something fun that you do together, makes the problem disappear.
A friend of mine complained to me that her children had atrocious
manners, and that she was not sure what to do about it. I offered to take
them out to the park so she could get a break. They are great kids, ages five
and ten. I decided to try this Playful Parenting approach of making a game
out of the problem behavior. One of the children asked me which park we
were going to, and I said, “What horrible manners, I can't believe you asked
me that!” They both laughed. I said, “Next thing you're probably going to
ask me what my pocket number is!” I have no idea what a pocket number
is; I was just making something up. You won't be surprised that they spent
the next hour asking me what my pocket number is, and I played along,
begging them not to say such impolite things, warning them not to mention
pocket numbers at the playground. (They shouted out, “Hey, everybody, ask
Larry what his pocket number is!”) A lecture about bad manners would
have had no chance at all. This way, they got to laugh about an issue that
had previously been a source of great tension in the family. Another benefit
of this kind of invitation is that it helps you out of power struggles. At
dinner, instead of saying “Use your fork,” and getting into a no-win power

 struggle, you can say “Okay, everybody, there is to be no talking about
pocket numbers; it is not polite.”
While they rattle on and on about pocket numbers to play the game out,
they are using their forks and napkins and not fighting you about table
manners.
These techniques often bring a laugh. Inviting the behavior we can't stand
can change a problem behavior in a nearly miraculous way. Of course, not
every joining-in or invitation changes the behavior in question. Sometimes
it has a more subtle effect, improving our own outlook on that behavior and
our ability to handle it in the future. In other words, joining in or inviting
children's play that we hate sometimes changes the play, and other times it
changes how we feel about it. Either one is fine, as long as we no longer
hate what they are doing. After all, hating their favorite games is
invalidating to them, and hard on us.
OceanofPDF.com

 CHAPTER 12

OceanofPDF.com

 ACCEPT STRONG
FEELINGS (THEIRS
AND YOURS)
“Suddenly it's fun again.”
—RUTH, AGE 4, AFTER A LONG CRY over a minor playtime injury

Playful Parenting involves expecting and accepting strong feelings,
from little frustrations and embarrassments to heavy fears and deep-seated
grief. These emotions are at the root of most of the so-called behavior
problems that so exasperate parents. Children's play also includes happier
emotions of joy and excitement and exuberance as well, and these can be
just as difficult for adults to handle as the “negative” ones. Just think of the
times you have said “Settle down” when children have just been laughing
and having fun.
Before I talk about the relationship between feelings and children's play, I
need to back up and say some things about emotion. Everyone has
emotions, all sorts of them. We can experience pure joy and contentment,
for example, or we can feel bad in a variety of ways—hurt, afraid,
embarrassed, frustrated, sad, angry, anxious, jealous. When we have a
feeling, if we're in luck, we can express it freely, showing our zestful
exuberance if we are feeling joy, crying if we're sad, trembling and shaking
with fear or anger, laughing and blushing with embarrassment, having a
temper tantrum if we are frustrated or outraged. Unfortunately, we have all
been inhibited from this free expression of emotion: “What are you
laughing at?” “Never let them see you sweat.” “Don't you dare talk to me
that way.” “It's not ladylike to shout.” “Go to your room until you can be in
a good mood.” “You're fine; you're not hurt.” “Crybaby!” “You're so cute
when you're angry.” And the infamous “Big boys don't cry” or “I'll give you
something to cry about.”
If emotions are not expressed freely, either the emotion is locked away,
creating all kinds of problems as children grow up, or the emotion leaks out
in indirect ways. Children may bottle up everything and then explode when

 their younger sibling touches their toys. Children going through the pain of
a parental divorce or the loss of a grandparent are well known for not
talking about it, then turning around and hitting other children, being surly
and mean, or refusing to do homework or chores. Children say “I hate you”
because it feels too vulnerable to say “I'm scared and I need you.” Anxious
about not being prepared for a test, children might say they are feeling sick
and can't go to school. Older children begin to find stronger ways to keep
emotions buried away, such as with alcohol, drugs, and casual sex.
Playful Parenting helps bring children back to the free expression of
emotion and out of the pitfalls of burying those emotions inside or having
them come out sideways. These unexpressed or indirectly expressed
emotions are a sign that children are trapped in the towers of powerlessness and isolation. Children who are feeling confident and connected are
either able to play happily, or are able to let us know how they are feeling.
They let us know in words, or through the direct release of emotions, or
through the themes in their play.
OceanofPDF.com

 —CONTAINING FEELINGS
VERSUS RELEASING THEM—

I was baby-sitting my niece once when she was around two years old.
She had a hard time saying good-bye to her mom and dad and started to cry
when they finally left. I went to hold her and comfort her, but she hid under
the table and told me to go away. I asked her if I could come under the table
with her, and she said no, I should leave the house. I said I couldn't do that,
but I would move farther away. I stepped back a few feet and sat on the
floor and asked if that was far enough. She said yes. In between our
conversation she was crying quietly. After a few minutes she came out from
under the table and sat on my lap. She said, “The tears just popped out.”
“They certainly did,” I said, and we both smiled.
“Let's watch Cinderella,” she said. “That wicked stepmother is really
really mean.” If I had left the room, she would have been all alone with her
sadness. If I had moved in too close, she would have been mad at me for
crowding her. What happened instead was that she was able to cry in a way
that released the pain of separation, which made it possible for her to make
the transition to enjoying herself with me. Many adults say that it hurts to
cry. I think that's because a part of us is always fighting against releasing
those tears. When my niece talked about her tears just popping out, she was
expressing how easily tears can flow if you aren't trying to shove them back
in.
Most of us use up lots of mental energy holding our emotions back and
trying to get children to hold theirs back. But emotions have a drive to be
released, no matter how much we try to hold them in. The result is a tug-ofwar, an inner battle between releasing and containing emotions. Contain
them too much, and you get explosions or symptoms of too much pressure
building up inside—stress, anxiety, violence, depression. When the
emotions erupt, it may look as if the problem is too much emotional

 expression, but really the problem was not enough expression, which led to
the eventual eruption.
For many children, emotional release is most likely to come when they
are unable to keep the lid on anymore. That's why children are more
emotionally expressive late at night, or when they have a fever. Their guard
is down, so the emotions escape. They scrape their knee and cry for an
hour: I might as well cry about everything stored up, now that I've started.
One strong emotion, too powerful to hold in, can result in a flood of other
emotions, which have just been waiting for an opportunity to come out. So
a torrent of giggles can shift instantly to a flood of tears, or vice versa.
That's also why angry outbursts often include a long list of things that
happened long before, or that don't have anything to do with the person
being yelled at: As long as I'm yelling, there are a few other things I'm mad
about. Once the feelings start to come out, there's no stopping them, which
is why some children reject all of our efforts to make them feel better.
Since men are especially pressured to hold all those vulnerable emotions
in, it's no wonder that they have a hard time with crying babies and
emotional children. A study of college men found that they reacted to a tape
of a baby crying as though it were more painful than a fire alarm. Given the
chance to drink alcohol, they drank more than students listening to other
loud noises.1 It's not surprising that so much child abuse against young
children happens when they are crying. When I worked with men who
battered their wives and children, they often described the unbearable
feelings of agitation and “jumping out of their skin” that they experienced
when they were faced with a woman or child who wouldn't stop crying. Of
course, the man's escalating aggression just increased the crying and the
fear, which then intensified his need to stop the crying, no matter what it
took. That isn't the only scenario of battering and child abuse, but it is a
common one. In nonviolent homes, tears and tantrums are still a powerful
force, and they have the power to stop people in their tracks. Many people
will do anything to get the crying to stop: bribe, threaten, tease, plead,
scold, send the child away, give in to unreasonable demands. If we just
accept the feelings and let them flow, they don't cause half as much fuss.
And after the tears are really done, everyone feels better.
OceanofPDF.com

 —TAKING TIME OUT FOR FEELINGS—

If giggles are the engine of play, tears are the lubrication that keeps the
engine running smoothly. While playing with her cousins, four-year-old
Ruth hurt her hand. I held her while she cried hard for several minutes.
Looking at her hand, I was reassured that no medical attention was needed,
just comfort. After crying a while, Ruth told me the story of what happened,
and then she immediately began crying again. After a few minutes more,
she held tightly to me while the cousins returned to playing around us. They
had been watching closely. I think they were impressed by her lung power
and by my allowing her to cry without the usual distractions, bribes, or
threats.
Then, while deliberately looking away from me, Ruth started to squirm
away. I gently pulled her back, reminding her, “That really hurt.” She cried
a few minutes more and told the whole story over again. At that point, she
looked right at me with very bright eyes, then looked at her cousins, and
back at me, laughing now. “Suddenly it's fun again,” she said, and climbed
down to play. I know most people would have let Ruth go the first time,
then figured the episode was finished. I held on to her a little longer in order
to promote emotional healing, instead of telling her to get over it. After
crying a little more, she was really over it.
Most children learn from us to short-circuit the healing process, to cut off
feelings as quickly as possible. But they do this without finishing the
important job of releasing their emotions first. That makes it likely that
when they return to play, they will be fearful, or reckless, or nothing will be
right, or they will hurt themselves again right away. More and more young
athletes are becoming permanently injured from playing on after they've
been hurt. Therefore, we have to help them finish the emotional task of
releasing their backed-up reservoir of tears or other feelings. They will
never get every last drop of feeling out—there is always more—but we
need to help children express enough of it so that they can go on to function
well and find the room to be happy. In order to do that, most children need

 to be reminded that crying is okay, that being afraid or angry is okay. That's
hard for us parents, who want our children to be happy (and quiet!). Yet a
happy side benefit of helping children release these feelings is that it fosters
a deep connection between us.
When Ruth was sitting in my lap, she told me the story of what happened
to her hand. Later, when I reminded her that it was okay to notice that it
really hurt, she told me the story again. I think that those retellings of the
story, in addition to releasing the tears, were what allowed her to go back to
playing so happily. Some children won't tell the story on their own, so we
need to ask them. Then, since the story is probably very short, we can ask
them to tell it again. Most children love that; it signals that we really care
about what happened to them. Also, when you repeat a story over and over,
it loses its sting. If the child is too young to tell the story, or doesn't want to,
you can try telling it to them. “You were having so much fun playing on the
bench and then bang, you hit your head. That really hurt.”
Another reason for telling the story is that it strengthens the relationship
between you and your child. Healthy emotional expression requires a close
connection. We can cry alone, but it is so much more healing to cry on
someone's shoulder. That's why I recommend that parents not send their
children to their rooms to cry alone, or leave them alone to cry themselves
to sleep. It is more time-consuming to stay with them, to help them let out
their feelings of loneliness and sadness, but those feelings don't just go
away because we shut the door on them. In fact, I am starting to see eight-,
nine-, and ten-year-olds in my practice whose parents followed the advice
to “let them cry it out” when the children were babies. These infants were
seen as manipulating parents into cuddling with them or lying down with
them to sleep. These children now are having trouble sleeping through the
night because of fears, nightmares, and worries. In my less mature
moments, I feel like saying, “I told you so!”
OceanofPDF.com

 —ADULTS' UNFELT FEELINGS—

When emotions are unexpressed, I call them unfelt feelings. They still
affect us, even though we hope that denying them will make them go away.
Because each of us has our own pile of unfelt feelings, being with children
who are in the midst of a strong feeling either feels as if we're being
tortured or as if we're torturing them. We feel as if we're being tortured
because the release of their raw emotion is so intense that it's harder for us
to keep all our own unfelt feelings buried inside. So we end up with a battle
in our own heads between releasing feelings and holding them in. We feel
as if we are torturing children when they cry because they are so
extravagantly expressive of their deep feelings. Crying over a minor upset
or a little injury, children seem to act as though they have just invented pain
and suffering. Partly this is to make sure we will give them some comfort
and loving attention, and partly it is because they don't have the inhibitions
against pure emotional expression that we grown-ups have.
Given how hard it is to listen to children's emotions and express our own,
it's no wonder that parents go to such great lengths to get children not to
cry. These efforts range from friendly to abusive, from offering sweets and
bribes to yelling at them to shut up. I used to see an eight-year-old boy at
his house for play therapy. He always wanted a sweet snack as soon as I
came over. I suggested that his mother hold off, since so many children use
sweets to stuff their feelings back inside, and part of my play-therapy
approach is to bring the feelings up and out. She agreed, but she was
skeptical. One day she told me that I wouldn't be able to see her son for
several weeks because of various scheduling conflicts. I said, “Oh, that's too
bad.” He looked right at me and said, “Mom, I want some Fruit Loops.” I
said, “I'm going to miss you, too; three weeks is a long time.” He screamed,
“I want Fruit Loops now!” She gave me a look that said, Oh, so this is what
you meant about sweets and emotions.
Tears and tantrums aren't the only feelings that bother adults. We are
often annoyed or aggravated when children are too excited or exuberant.

 Maybe it's too noisy for us, or we are worried they will break our precious
knickknacks. Go outside with them if you need to, but try not to discourage
their excitement and exuberance. Before you know it, you'll be nostalgic for
that childhood energy once they are loafing around the house. Join in the
fun. It will be good for you, for the children, and for your relationship with
them.
Some adults are bothered even by the most delightful expression of
childhood emotion. I have friends who live in a large apartment building,
where some neighbors complained because their daughters were laughing
as they walked down the hall. It wasn't the middle of the night, and the girls
weren't yelling, but I guess these grown-ups didn't want to hear anything
from children, not even happy laughter. Fortunately, when the neighbors
complained to the management, they could not find any rules or regulations
that prohibited children from being happy.
We all have some emotions that we find harder to handle than others. For
example, when a beloved nanny or baby-sitter leaves, parents are often
unable to help children grieve their loss. They may be jealous of the
children's attachment to the caregiver, or preoccupied with finding new
child-care arrangements. A friend of mine told me about moving across the
country when she was eleven, leaving behind her grandparents and cousins.
She only cried, however, when saying good-bye to her nanny, and her
mother was furious at her. Instead of the compassion and comfort she
needed for all of her losses, my friend was punished for not expressing the
right feelings about the right people.
In a divorce, it is exceptionally hard for each parent to set aside his or her
own anger and resentment and allow children to freely express whatever
they are feeling. Parents can't help thinking, How could you miss that jerk?
or How dare you be mad at me. Children end up with the idea that their
feelings aren't welcome, on top of all the other pain of the situation. Of
course, they still feel all that anger, betrayal, and loss, even if no one wants
to hear about it. Unable to express the feelings freely, children may develop
behavior problems, or become depressed and withdrawn. A similar thing
happens when grandparents get sick or die. The parents are sometimes too
overwhelmed with their own feelings of loss to be very helpful to the
children. In both of these circumstances, it helps to have other adults

 available for children to talk to and play with—adults who aren't involved
in the family emotions.
OceanofPDF.com

 —HANDLING TANTRUMS AND FRUSTRATIONS—

I consulted with the Jorgensons, who were having trouble with their
fourth child (out of four boys), who was five years old. He had been having
huge tantrums for a couple of years, and they were getting worse instead of
better. Whenever I hear about tantrums, I have a few questions I ask
parents. I'll identify these in the following passages in italics. If your child
throws tantrums, go ahead and answer the italicized questions yourself.
What do you think the child is trying to express through the
tantrums? In the Jorgensons' case, they weren't sure. They thought he
was just being difficult or had gotten into a bad habit. When I pressed
them to think in terms of translating the tantrum into a message, they
thought that he was saying he was frustrated that he couldn't keep up
with his brothers. That makes sense. It is so frustrating to almost be
able to do things that you see other people doing effortlessly, but not
have your body work the way you are trying to get it to work. That's
why toddlers have so many tantrums. But the Jorgensons' son wasn't a
toddler anymore; he was five. The advantage of that is they could ask
him: “What are you trying to tell us?” Of course, a child this age may
not be able to put it into words, but it's always worth asking.
After a tantrum, is your child happier, more relaxed, confident,
connected, cooperative, or engaged? Most parents forget to ask
themselves this question. They have decided in advance that tantrums
are a problem, probably because they are so unpleasant (not to mention
the dirty looks from other adults at the grocery store!). But often
children are back to being themselves after a good temper tantrum, the
same way we feel better after we get something off our chests.
Tantrums are children's way of expressing and releasing frustration.
Once they've expressed it, they can move on. Sometimes a tantrum that
comes in the middle of a difficult task—such as homework or an art
project or mastering a computer game—is followed by a breakthrough,

 a burst of understanding or creativity or accomplishment. It's as if the
tantrum has stormed down the door of the tower of powerlessness. If
they can't express their frustration, or if they are punished for having a
tantrum, it continues to interfere with their happiness, their ability to
cooperate, or their achievements.
In her book on toddlers—who, after all, are the tantrum
professionals—Alicia Lieberman says, “When… the child finds his
will thwarted by higher powers, he may have no choice other than a
temper tantrum. What else could a toddler do? His language skills are
not developed enough to articulate his case persuasively. His access to
the family resources is minimal, so he cannot get his way by
threatening to withhold an allowance or take the car keys away…. The
temper tantrum—throwing oneself on the floor with a mixture of
heartrending crying and angry screaming—is a wonderfully eloquent if
seldom appreciated expression of the toddler's inner experience.”2
When older children are stuck in a pattern of tantrums, or they feel
worse instead of better after a tantrum, then they are probably not
getting rid of their frustration. Though they tantrum a lot, they may
never feel that they have fully expressed themselves, because no one is
ever listening. The family goes into overdrive to stop the tantrum, and
so the next time they feel they have to start from scratch. Or they are
sent away, isolated, during their tantrum, and they miss out on sharing
these deep feelings with someone and reconnecting afterward. Believe
it or not, sometimes all we need to do is let one or two tantrums run
their natural course, all the way to completion, with no attempts to
interrupt it. Then the children may stop throwing tantrums because
they finally feel as if they have really been heard.
To let a tantrum run its course, all you need to do is just ride it out,
staying near the child instead of sending him away or leaving him
alone or pestering him with questions and solutions. “If the parents can
remain emotionally available even while firm in their position of
denying something, tantrums can also teach a child that he will not be
left alone in his ‘dark night of the soul.' ”3
What is the family's usual reaction or response to the tantrum?
Most families have a habit of either caving in to tantrums or of never

 budging an inch, not wanting to reward what they see as negative
behavior. Ironically, both of these responses generally lead to children
having more tantrums instead of ending them.
In the first instance—that of caving in—the problem may be not the
tantrum but our habit of saying no because it is more convenient. And
when children start to whine and fuss, we suddenly find it more
convenient to say yes. The lesson to the child here is that our no
doesn't mean much, and the result is more tantrums, because she
believes she can get her way. Be firm and don't cave in if your no was
well thought out and you still stand by it, and try not to say no if you
aren't willing to stand by it just because of a tantrum.
On the other hand, tantrums may help us realize that we didn't have
a very good reason for saying no. But we may feel stuck; we don't
want to give in to the tantrum. We need to be willing to change our
minds if our no was unreasonable. Our children can tell the difference
between caving in to their screaming versus reconsidering our position
based on thinking about it some more. If we never budge once we've
made a pronouncement, we aren't really being consistent. We're just
refusing to consider points of view that differ from our own, refusing
to acknowledge that we were wrong or hasty in our decision. Those are
hardly the behaviors we want to model for our children.
Many children are sent away to their room or to time-out when they
have a temper tantrum. Or worse, they are teased and taunted. We are
embarrassed by tantrums that happen in public, and we feel helpless
when they happen at home. Children in the midst of a tantrum are
flooded with feelings, and they feel out of control. They need a loving
human being near them—maybe not within kicking range(!), but close
by. We may need to step outside and take a break first, to cool off, but
then we need to show them that their having strong feelings does not
isolate them from the community of civilized people. We want
children to learn that nothing inside of them is too awful to be shared
with us, not even overwhelming feelings of frustration.
If we don't, and they have to be all alone with these feelings, there
are two likely outcomes. First, children may be stuck in a cycle of
tantrums, hoping against hope that next time someone will listen to
them or stick with them. Instead, all that happens is the family gets

 more and more annoyed and hostile. The other alternative is even more
disastrous: Children learn the lesson that they're all alone in this life, it
truly is a cold cruel world, and you can't count on anyone when the
going gets rough. They retreat into a completely sealed-off tower of
isolation. So stay engaged with children, even when they are full of
tough feelings.
In the Jorgenson family, the boy's brothers ignored him or teased
him when he had a tantrum. That was really painful for him, since all
he wanted was for them to recognize him as one of the guys, to wait
for him, to give him a little slack in his efforts to keep up with them.
Understandable goals, but big brothers are not the likeliest bunch to
give comfort and support to a tantruming little brother.
What have you tried to do to end the tantrums? This is the
therapist's trick question. We never want to suggest something that's
already been tried and hasn't worked. Yet this question lets parents see
that they do have strategies, some of which actually help. It also helps
parents see that they often keep doing the same thing over and over,
even though it never helps. The Jorgensons had set aside time to play
with each of their sons one-on-one, and had even set aside PlayTime
for the five-year-old to have with both parents. That's something I
recommend for large families, even though I know it can be nearly
impossible to arrange. While the tantrums decreased, they didn't
disappear.
After listening to what else the Jorgensons had tried, I made a few
suggestions. In addition to PlayTimes that focused on doing whatever
he wanted to do, I recommended PlayTimes during which the parents
set up games that directly addressed his difficulties with frustration.
For example, follow the leader could give him a chance to be leader
for a change, and give him a chance to follow someone who wasn't
trying to leave him behind (like his big brothers often did). Another
idea was to have PlayTimes with this boy and just one of his brothers,
who might be more inclined to match the younger child's pace one-onone than in a group.
Since most of the tantrums happened on family outings, such as
trips to the playground, I suggested that they ask him before they left
the house, “How do you want this to go today?” You need to be sure to

 have a casual, pleasant tone of voice with this question, not to be
sarcastic or cutting. “Shall we have a fight?” I think it helps to call it a
fight instead of a fit, since then you are making it a family problem and
not just blaming him. “How do you want it to go when I say it's time to
leave?” “What should we do if the big kids want to do something, and
you can't keep up?” A boy of five might not be able to answer all these
questions, but at least he'll know you are thinking about the situation
and trying to include him in solutions.
My favorite tantrum preventer involves jumping in playfully when
you see things beginning to get out of hand. I'll say things like, “One
of us needs to scream. Shall I, or do you want to?” Or, “Everyone's
starting to get a little frustrated, let's have a giggle-fest.” A giggle-fest
is when everyone pretends to laugh until they are really laughing. Or,
“I challenge you to a thumb-wrestling match to determine the
championship of the world.” These types of silly comments take the
edge off the frustration and can restore a playful mood.
Is there a pattern to the tantrums? Often, if we stop to notice,
difficult times follow a pattern. Usually we are so absorbed by the
outburst that we miss the buildup. For example, when my daughter
was a baby, she hated having her face wiped off after meals. She
would whine and fuss and I would get irritated and exasperated. It
didn't happen all the time, so finally one day I decided to see if there
was any pattern to it. There was. There usually is, if you look hard
enough. When Emma and I were “talking” and looking at each other,
and I showed her the washcloth and waited for her to stick her face out
in that cute way one-year-olds do, everything went fine. If I was
preoccupied and ready to get the meal over with, and I grabbed a cloth
and started wiping her face without any connection, she made a fuss.
Once I figured that out, it was a very easy problem to solve. Just make
sure to connect first.
Tantrums are surprisingly common in families where children
almost always get their own way. What's that all about? I think
children use limits as a chance to unleash their stored-up frustration.
When they almost never hear no, they store up their frustration for
long periods, and it comes barreling out when a limit finally confronts
them. The solution is actually pretty simple. During PlayTimes, make

 up funny nos and let children play with these pretend limits. With a
young girl named Johanna, I make up silly rules constantly. No
giggling! No standing on both feet! No breathing! When she breaks the
rule, I pretend to be so mad I can't see straight, so, of course, I fall over
trying to catch her.
OceanofPDF.com

 —HANDLING EXPRESSIONS OF ANGER—

For many families, expressions of anger are even harder to handle than
tantrums. With children's anger, we always have to decide whether we can
help them release their feelings in a playful way, or if we need to tread more
gently. Either way, the important thing is to stay connected. “You need to
help your child stay in the relationship even when anger overwhelms him.
You can do this by making him feel safe.”4 Acknowledge the anger, talk
soothingly, stay calm. Be firm about basic safety limits, but don't go away
or send children away, unless you need a break in order to stay calm. Don't
force children to pull it together or go to their room until they can come out
with a smile on their face. They need to recover in their own time, which is
usually longer than our patience. When the anger is milder, it can
sometimes make for a playful encounter, provided that they do not feel
teased or invalidated. To play with these minor angry feelings, I either
reflect the angry face back to them in an exaggerated form, or I pretend to
run shrieking from the room from the power of their glare. “Oh no, not the
look!”
When the anger is stronger, with screams, curses, punches, and kicks, we
naturally feel overwhelmed and even angry ourselves. We often strike back
aggressively or with severe threats. We may scold or criticize or lecture.
Have you noticed that these typical responses don't usually work too well?
We usually keep trying them anyway, but when children are feeling intense
anger, they are not able to reason or talk or listen very well. If it's safe, they
just need room to storm and yell and stomp. If they are hurting someone
else, or themselves, or breaking valuable things, then they need to be held,
gently but firmly. That can be hard, especially since this kind of holding
really works only if we are calm and soothing, not furious and vengeful.
Talk gently. Try not to take their angry words or aggressive actions
personally. They may be parroting back mean things that were said to them,
or they may be indignant over some past injustice or mistreatment.

 Most experts in childhood emotions agree that anger covers up other,
more vulnerable feelings, such as pain and loss and fear. Children guard
these feelings with a minefield of insults, curses, and violent attacks. This
angry front is intended to keep the more tender feelings from being
exposed. Instead, the anger usually drives away the very people who could
help them with these painful feelings. As author Patty Wipfler says, “It's
unfair and irrational, but it seems that when children have felt endangered
and helpless, they direct their reaction—usually anger and mistrust—toward
the people closest to them.”5 If we can remember the hurt children
underneath the angry facades, and reach out calmly and persistently to
them, we will be rewarded with a more direct expression of the buried
feelings. Gently stopped from lashing out, children will release their scary
or vulnerable feelings directly through tears, trembling, or talking. For
example, if you stop violence with the most minimal, gentle intervention
you can manage, instead of with more violence or with threats or screams,
you'll usually get a burst of tears, followed by a clear discussion of what's
really going on underneath the anger and aggression.
I am not suggesting this approach to anger is easy. We are much more
inclined to yell or punish or scold or start to spank them—whatever was
done to us when we were little and we got mad at our parents. We may need
to talk with other parents about our own angry responses, as discussed in
chapter fifteen, before we can really deal effectively with our children's
anger.
OceanofPDF.com

 —HANDLING FEAR AND ANXIETY—

We don't want our children to be afraid, so we say, “There's nothing to
be afraid of; don't be such a baby.” Or we say, “You don't have to go in the
water if it's too scary.” But fear is fine; it is a basic human emotion and even
necessary for survival. The gazelle who calmly keeps napping when the rest
of the herd starts to run will be eaten by the lion. We need to help children
develop courage, not fearlessness. Confidence, not toughness. You have to
feel fear in order to be brave, otherwise you're just reckless and thrillseeking. You also have to push yourself to do what you're afraid to do;
otherwise you will never try new things.
At the same time that we tell them not to be afraid, we scare children. We
threaten them; we leave them alone; we expose them to terrifying movies
(and the nightly news). Many children are hit or bullied, by adults or other
children, or are exposed to other forms of violence in their lives. Some are
scared to go to school because of a bad social situation or because they feel
stupid. All in all, many children carry around a great deal of fear, but they
don't have much chance to express it.
The result of all this confusion about fear is either recklessness, or
anxiety, or shyness and inhibition. When children are reckless, they need
someone to play with them, to climb trees with them, in order to provide a
calming influence and a model of safe adventurousness. When children are
shy and inhibited, they need to be drawn out of their shell, again through
play. They may need us to go down the slide with them a few times before
they feel comfortable joining up with the other children at the playground.
Most shy children don't do very well with the typical sink-or-swim
approach. But they are not well served by just letting them stay home or in
the corner forever, either.
When people are anxious, they feel it in their throat or their chest or their
gut. That's because anxiety is fear that is stuck halfway in and halfway out.
They're afraid, but the fear can't be freely released. Anxiety is a
compromise. It isn't the full-blown expression of pure terror, but it isn't a

 sunny stroll in the park. The goal is to take that anxious feeling, that stuck
fear, and get it the rest of the way out. Play, creativity, and fantasy are all
great ways to help children do this. Some children relieve their anxiety by
talking about their worries. More commonly, they get their anxieties out by
playing. Perhaps they have a fantasy character who runs into trouble and is
rescued, over and over. They may spend hours designing or building
invincible spaceships, to symbolically protect themselves from harm. I
remember a few years ago worry dolls from Central America were very
popular in the United States. These are tiny dolls that a young person can
whisper their worries to. Talking to a doll is a nice bridge between talking
fears out and playing them out.
Artistic expression is one of the best ways to release anxiety or fear,
whether it is by singing, drawing, dancing, sculpting, or writing. “Give that
tight knot in your throat a voice. What would it say?” “If those butterflies in
your stomach did a dance, what would it look like?” “Can you draw that
scary monster from your nightmare?” Many children will bring fear and
anxiety into their play without any push from us in order to master it.
Others will need an invitation, such as, “Let's pretend we're going to the
dentist,” or “That was really scary last night; let's play a game about it.”
Parents today are pretty shocked about how neglectful parents used to be
in the olden days. Now some parents think their job is to protect children
from every hurt and danger. But that is not possible, and not desirable.
What we need to give them instead is the strength, the confidence, the
skills, and the connection with others that allows them to cope with being
hurt, and even grow from it. Of course, we provide basic safety and try to
keep the big dangers away, though some things such as illness and injury
are largely beyond our control. Why do we keep playgrounds open even
though it's possible for children to break an arm or a leg? Because they have
to play, even with the risk. The harsher realities of life—death,
homelessness, war, poverty, injustice, violence—are scary to children, but
we can't keep them sheltered indefinitely. Don't be surprised if these themes
show up in your children's play.
OceanofPDF.com

 —HANDLING CHILDREN'S TEARS—

Tears are good. When we release grief and loss and sadness through
crying, we generally feel much better, think more clearly, and recover.
These benefits are especially true when we cry with someone who is caring
and empathic. I have spent years trying to help adults in therapy, especially
men, to cry so they could effectively heal from their traumas. Then I
became a parent and I was surrounded by people trying desperately to get
babies not to cry. Very few adults seem to realize that crying is the only way
for babies to forcefully command our attention and express themselves. In
addition, people seem to think that if you stop babies from crying you've
actually stopped them from being sad or hurt. On the contrary, you've
stopped their natural healing process, and the hurt just builds up inside. I
like to think of crying as getting “un-sad.” I know it ruins the metaphor, but
a good cry actually fills children's cups, especially if they are being held and
comforted.
Crying is babies' first form of communication, followed by gazing into
our eyes, then smiling, then other sounds. The original cry stands for every
single thing babies want to say, before it separates into a hunger cry, an
angry cry, a wet cry, and so on. Therefore, stopping them from crying is the
same as telling them to shut up. Of course, if they are crying because they
are hungry or wet or tired, you feed them or change them or put them to
bed. They will stop crying because they are happy now. But often babies
cry just to express themselves, or to release their pent-up frustrations and
tensions from the drama of all their new experiences.
The questions that I ask parents about tantrums work pretty well for tears,
too. “What do you think the child is trying to express? Are they happier and
more connected with you after a cry? Do you go into gyrations to get them
to stop: begging, pleading, threatening, bribing, sending them away? If so,
what happens then? Is there a pattern in your family of teasing people or
humiliating them for crying? Have they ever seen you cry? Have you tried
staying with them, physically and emotionally, listening to them cry for as

 long as it takes to express themselves fully?” I also ask parents to recall
their own history of crying as a child. “Did you have to cry alone in your
pillow, or not cry at all, or were you lucky enough to have a friend or parent
or caregiver who offered a shoulder?”
If I limit myself to one piece of advice to adults about children's crying, it
is this: Please do not send them off alone to cry. Tears can be a tremendous
opportunity for strengthening a connection between any two people, but
especially between parent and child. There is nothing as satisfying as the
feeling of a baby falling comfortably asleep on your chest after a big fuss. If
you always cut the tears short, or hand the baby over to someone else when
she cries, you never have this wonderful experience.
One sign that tears are related to connection is what I call peeking out.
Someone who has been crying hard, or having a tantrum, or digging their
face into your shoulder to avoid eye contact, will occasionally peek out. It's
a wonderful thing to see. If children have been crying hard for a while, they
will often peek out, make eye contact, and then, seeing a loving, relaxed
adult, will go right back to the tears. They aren't sad to see you, but they are
reassured that they are safe, which means it is okay to cry. Eventually they
don't just peek out, but look deeply into your eyes. If they don't peek out,
they may need some additional contact from us. Talk to them in a soothing
voice, call their name, snuggle in closer, peek in at them. If you rush to stop
the crying, you will never experience this.
Peeking out is not to be confused with something that children do when
they are fake crying. They will look out to see what effect the crying is
having on the adult. Is it working to get me what I want? Fake crying is a
mystery to most parents, if not downright infuriating. Some children fake
cry because they have learned from adults that tears get a powerful reaction.
But more children who fake cry have a river of unshed real tears inside but
don't feel safe enough or close enough to anyone to let them out. They are
testing the waters to see what kind of reception their real tears might get.
That's an unfortunate strategy, since most adults react to fake tears with
anger and rejection. Children assume—rightly or wrongly—that their real
tears will meet the same reception. Actually, the best response to fake tears
is playfulness. “Hey, I think you're faking it. That makes me so sad,
waaah!” “I'm not fooled by those fake tears, but I'll play a game with you if
you want.” If children have a reservoir of real tears locked inside, then fun

 playtime and extra closeness may make it possible for her to spill them out
eventually.
The term crybaby is an awful slur. It reinforces a very destructive idea
that crying is bad, weak, and immature. However, some children actually do
cry a lot, for no apparent reason. Just because we don't know the reason,
though, doesn't mean they don't have a good one. Emotions don't come
from nowhere. It is presumptuous for us to decide which tears to be
compassionate about and which ones to dismiss. Since we usually stop tears
before they are done, some children get stuck in an endless loop of trying to
express their feelings through tears, only to be stopped midway. Every time
they cry, they are shushed up. They never get to finish, and therefore they
keep starting. To their parents or their peers, they seem like crybabies. From
their own perspective, they never get to finish a cry. Have you ever tried to
have a conversation with someone who kept interrupting you? You either
give up on whatever you have to say, or you keep making false starts.
Children are often full of deep feelings that they can't get out. The real
emotion is just too intense to handle. So they pick some little thing to get
upset about, a pretext. I was trying to describe this idea of pretexts to my
friend Alice. I wasn't explaining it very well, partly because I was also
dealing with my daughter, who wanted ice cream. She was three at the time.
We were at a restaurant, and I had seen a sign that said blue ice cream.
Emma wanted some of that. I had been telling Alice that I thought Emma
was frustrated and sad that her mother was away at work so much, even
though she acted as if it didn't bother her. Emma said emphatically, “No, I'm
not!” The ice cream came, and it certainly was blue. Emma immediately
burst into tears. I asked her what was the matter and she said she thought it
was going to be a different shade of blue. She climbed into my lap and
sobbed. I turned to Alice, who said, “Oh, I get it—pretext.” These were not
tears about blue ice cream but about missing her mom.
OceanofPDF.com

 —PUTTING THE BRAKES ON WHINING—

I was hiking with my daughter and another seven-year-old a couple of
years ago, and we were getting close to the top of the mountain we were
climbing. My wife and daughter were up ahead, and I was staying back
with the other boy and his mother. He was flopping over and begging his
mother to carry him and whining that he couldn't go another step. I'm sure
you know the voice I mean. It seemed to me to be just feelings, not real
fatigue, so I started encouraging him. What I wanted to do was yell at him
to stop that awful whining. I kind of knew that wouldn't help much, though.
I also knew that the way he was talking and flopping his body was making
it harder for him to keep going, not easier. But how to get him to do
something else without being the big adult authority trying to make him
stop whining? As you can tell, I am a big fan of letting kids have their
feelings rather than shutting them up. On the other hand, I also believe that
whining isn't a true expression of feelings, but a spinning of wheels when
children can't quite get the feelings out, but can't be happy, either.
So I tried something new. I said, “You know, that kind of voice is like
brakes, like putting on the brakes of a car. It actually makes you go slower
and makes it harder to climb. There's another kind of talking that's like
putting on the gas.” And I proceeded to use my cheeriest voice, saying “I
can do it; no big old rocks are going to stop me. I don't care how tired I
am.” He stopped whining and started climbing. Whenever he started to
mutter and complain, I said, “Wait! Don't hit the brakes, we're almost there.
Step on the gas.” I'd talk in my gas-pedal voice and get him to talk in that
voice, too. He'd get another burst of energy. At one point he wanted to stop
again. For the first time he said it in a relaxed, nonwhiny voice: “I need a
break.” I said, “Oh, a refueling stop! Great. Let's have some water and
raisins. This is a gas break, not a brake break.” We made it all the way to
the top, and he was very proud. So was I. I was glad to find a new way to
talk to people about why moaning and complaining doesn't really help
much, and why using a powerful or cheerful voice does help, even if it may

 feel like pretending. In fact, though, it isn't pretending. It's choosing to be
positive and upbeat instead of miserable, even if you feel like whining.
One thing I hate about whining (besides the obvious) is that it is neither
hot nor cold, neither fish nor fowl. It isn't the healing release of painful
emotion, and it isn't carefree happiness. Because we have inhibited
children's straightforward emotional expressions, most of them can't freely
express raw emotions like deep grief or pure terror or intense rage. But they
can't hold it all in, either. So it comes trickling out—in whining, in jealousy,
in boredom and loneliness, in destructive behavior, in stomachaches and
other physical symptoms. Our job as parents is to help our children let these
feelings out more directly, especially through playfulness and our close
relationship with them.
When the feelings don't come out a little at a time, they can come out in
huge bursts, often when least expected. My colleague Sam Roth and I were
consulting with the staff of an after-school program. They described a girl
who had a huge tantrum, the biggest they had ever seen. It lasted an hour
and a half. She was inconsolable during that time. The teachers were
especially surprised by this tantrum, because she was Child of the Week
that week. Sam explained that being flooded with so much attention left the
girl unable to use her usual strategies to keep her feelings under wraps.
When we have buried emotions, we need to keep a certain distance from
people, or else the closeness will tug at those emotions. Being Child of the
Week broke through that wall, and the dam burst.
Many parents are familiar with this same scenario from children who fall
apart at their birthday party or at the end of a perfect day. Receiving all that
happiness and warmth makes it hard to hold all those tears in any longer. It's
awfully confusing to adults.
OceanofPDF.com

 —EXPERIENCING THE “BIG CRY”—

My last point about tears has to do with a certain kind of “big cry” that
combines what I have been saying about tantrums, fears, and tears.
Whenever a child is learning something, especially something they really
want to master, they inevitably experience frustration. They've almost got
the hang of that jump shot, but not quite. Everyone else seems to understand
the math homework, but they don't. They have an idea in their mind of what
they want to draw, but they can't get it down on paper. Sometimes they are
so motivated that they keep trying in spite of the frustration, or a gifted
teacher helps them make the leap to “getting it.” More often, they give up,
or stop putting all their effort into it. This outcome is a big loss for children.
What they need here is a chance to express their emotions, their frustration,
sadness, and fear, so they can get back to the challenging task at hand. That
usually just takes persistent encouragement: “I know you can do it. Don't
give up. You are a great artist; give it one more try. I'm confident you'll get
it.” But don't expect them to say “Thanks, Dad,” and go back to it. Instead,
they are likely to say “I'm stupid; I'm terrible at this. I'll never understand
it.” They may well burst into tears or try to tear up their artwork. Just sit
close and let them vent. Keep being calmly confident, without exerting any
pressure. If they are able to finish expressing all the emotions blocking their
way—and be prepared for that to take a while—they will often go back to
their activity with renewed enthusiasm, creativity, skill, and pride.
OceanofPDF.com

 —ENCOURAGING EMOTIONAL
LITERACY THROUGH PLAY—

This chapter has focused on strong emotions, and maybe you're
wondering where play comes in. Everybody's talking these days about
emotional intelligence, emotional literacy, emotional competence. In a way,
that's what Playful Parenting is all about, since play is children's way of
expressing themselves and their emotions.
The child's world is a world of great emotional intensity… that can
only be fully expressed through children's spontaneously generated
play…. The process of play provides healing for hurts, releases
emotions, [and] dissolves tension…. Play is one of the most important
ways in which children learn that they can safely express their
feelings….6
Emotional competence means that we have a dimmer switch, instead of
just an on-off button, on our feelings. We want children to be able to
express strong feelings in a modulated way, safely and respectfully, but
directly. We don't want them to have a switch that is stuck on off, or that
can't be shut off at all. We can help by being direct and open about our own
feelings. In fantasy play, we can introduce characters with rich emotional
lives. We can teach them how to identify the bodily sensations that go with
different emotions. I've had many adult clients, mostly men, who didn't
know that sweaty palms and a pounding heart were signals of fear, or that
the burning sensation in their eyes was tears that were trying unsuccessfully
to come out.
Emotional competence means that children have developed from the
stage of acting out their emotions, to expressing them through play, and
ultimately to verbalizing them. Without words or play to express
themselves, children can let their feelings lead directly to impulsive
behaviors, like slamming doors or hitting or screaming. We can help

 children along in this development by asking them what they are feeling,
asking what they think other people might be feeling, or asking about their
doll's emotions.
As parents, we would like children to hurry up and be at that final stage,
right now, where they can say it in words. But development takes its own
time. Besides, I think we rely too much on this insistence that children “say
it in words.” Children may be highly verbal but emotionally immature. And
many feelings are simply too strong for mere words to carry. Just because
children can say “I'm mad” or “I'm sad” does not mean that they have fully
expressed themselves. They need to cry or storm around, too. I also find
that many adults misunderstand the concept of children acting out their
emotions. They think it's a kind of misbehavior that should be punished.
They don't realize that acting out is the best children can do at the moment
to express their emotion, and that you can't just stop the acting out without
finding some better outlet for that feeling.
Before children can learn to talk about their emotions instead of hitting
someone or collapsing in a puddle of tears, they need to learn how to play
out the feelings. That crucial middle step is often overlooked. To help
children take that step, we can ask them to draw their feeling, or make up a
story about it, or do a dance that expresses it. Play therapists are fond of
saying, “Show me with these two puppets what happened and how you
felt.” Another playful way to build emotional competence is to pretend to
have a feeling that children are having trouble expressing. You can model
the safe release of that feeling: “I am so mad! I am going to punch this
pillow.” You can exaggerate an emotion they are denying they have:
“Waaah… I'm so scared I'm going to faint…. Grrrr, I am so mad I could
spit.” When one child hits another, or says something mean, I often say,
“Ouch, that hurt,” because the children are acting too tough to notice any
pain.
There's a “game” that children play that I call emotional hot potato. The
one rule is you try to pass unwanted feelings on to someone else. Adults do
it all the time, too. We're upset, so we pick a fight or put someone down.
Then the other person gets upset, and, like magic, we feel better. I was
playing with a seven-year-old boy, and he fell and hurt his leg. He was lying
on the floor holding his leg. He was a kid who hurt himself a lot, because he
played quite wildly and recklessly. I went over and talked to him about how

 he got hurt and tried to get him to say “ouch” a few times (as usual, he was
grimacing in pain but saying he was fine). When he didn't want to say ouch
anymore, I said it, which made him laugh. Suddenly he started hitting me,
even though his leg still hurt.
His father, who had up to then been only watching, came over and told
his son angrily to quit hitting me. I said to the dad that I thought what was
happening was that his son had gotten hurt, and he didn't really want to feel
how badly it felt, so he was trying to hurt me so that I would hurt instead.
The boy nodded his head vigorously in agreement, with a giant grin on his
face, all through this explanation. He even stopped pummeling me for a
minute to listen. He seemed to think that what I was describing was a
perfectly natural and reasonable thing to do. And in a way, it is. If you don't
have the resources to handle a feeling, you would do well to eliminate it.
One of the best ways to eliminate it is to pass it on, like a hot potato. As
playful parents, we can give them more workable ways of handling their
feelings.
OceanofPDF.com

 CHAPTER 13

OceanofPDF.com

 RETHINK THE WAY
WE DISCIPLINE1
“There are many terrible things in this world. But the worst is
when a child is afraid of his father, mother or teacher. He fears them,
instead of loving and trusting them.”
JANUSZ KORCZAK

Playful Parenting is based on an attitude of respect toward children and
an attitude of wonder toward their world. If children are happy and we are,
too, that respectfulness is pretty easy. It's harder when they're miserable or
making us miserable. Something must be done when children yank the cat's
tail or hit their friend on the head or don't do their homework or come home
drunk. I am as opposed to letting things like this slide as I am to harsh
punishment. Something indeed must be done, but punishment and threats
are not it. When punishment falls short—and it always does—there are a
variety of alternatives that work better. Taking a fresh look at discipline and
children's behavior, we can see that closeness, playfulness, and emotional
understanding are better bets than punishment, behavior modification, and
too much permissiveness.
OceanofPDF.com

 —COOL OFF—

Effective discipline rarely happens in the heat of the moment. Before
you try to deal with a problem, count to ten, take a break, wait a few hours
for things to settle down, call a friend. Of course, we have outbursts of
emotion when we get kicked in the shin, or our favorite lamp gets broken,
or the big sister is teasing the baby—again. But these outbursts do not need
to be the basis for our response to the child. Cool off.
A FRESH LOOK AT DISCIPLINE
Cool off
Make a connection
Choose a “Meeting on the Couch” over a “Time-out”
Play!
Instill good judgment
Look underneath the surface, at the child's feelings and needs
Prevent instead of punish
Know your child
Set clear limits
Talking to other parents is one of the best ways to cool off. They
understand how mad we get, how exasperated and frustrated. We're not the
only ones who ever wanted to shake children, or slap them. Other parents
may offer a reality check—“They are just being kids, don't sweat it”—or
they may offer support—“I'll be right over to take the kids so you can take a
walk or a nap.” Other parents understand the hopes, dreams, fears, and
worries we have for our children. Just talking to other parents can unload
our feelings of frustration and anger, which makes discipline a whole lot
easier. If you don't have anyone you can call, and you feel that things are
getting out of hand, Parents Anonymous (www.parentsainonymousnatl.org) is a great organization that can help.

 I can't quite believe we've reached the twenty-first century and people
still hit their children, but it's true. Some parents hit only when they are
overwhelmed, and they feel terrible afterward. Others think corporal
punishment is necessary for discipline, while a few think it is actually good
for children. Some adults insist that a good wallop never did them any
harm, but the actual research suggests the opposite. Other people have
written whole books on this topic, so I will just summarize: Hitting children
makes them more aggressive, more antisocial, and more likely to end up in
prison or with serious emotional problems.2 There are other kinds of
punishment just as harsh as hitting. Humiliation, name-calling, sarcasm, or
threats can leave emotional scars that last much longer than bruises. Even if
we don't ever hit children, we may still need to cool off before we decide
how to handle a problem.
OceanofPDF.com

 —MAKE A CONNECTION—

I think it is obvious by now that I see most “misbehavior” as really just
a matter of disconnection. Children who feel connected also feel inclined to
be cooperative and thoughtful. So instead of punishment, which tends to
create an even bigger disconnection between parent and child, try thinking
about how to reestablish a connection. When was the last time you had
PlayTime together, or a cuddle, or just hung out together? When you look
your children in the eye, is there anybody home? Is their cup empty; is that
why they're acting up? Is yours empty? What do they need for a fill-up?
How about you? Reconnecting might require a hug, some quiet time
together, wrestling or running around outside, a snack, or a talk. For more
serious disruptions, I recommend what I call the meeting on the couch.
Most punishments involve exerting power over a child, which just increases
his or her sense of isolation and powerlessness. Meetings on the couch build
connection and empower children. At the same time, they give us an
effective way to provide real discipline: the teaching of our values and
principles.
OceanofPDF.com

 —CHOOSE A “MEETING ON THE COUCH”
OVER A “TIME-OUT”—

Whenever there is any problem, either a parent or a child can call a
meeting on the couch. It could be anywhere, but we use the couch at my
house. The goal is to get reconnected. I always assume that whatever the
problem is, disconnection either caused it or made it worse or made it
harder to solve. The rule is that if someone calls a meeting on the couch, the
other person has to show up for the meeting. Once you are both at the
couch, anything may happen.
You might talk seriously about what has been going on, or you may not
even talk about it, just take the chance to reconnect. Children may let loose
a big volley of tears about something that's been bothering them, that
they've been holding in. You may rant and rave a little about your
frustrations—the living room is a mess, the homework isn't done, the noise
level is deafening—and then give them a chance to talk. You might repeat
your insistence on basic rules and values—everybody does their share of
cleanup, for example, or no teasing the baby. Sometimes just changing the
scene and making reconnection the top priority can create a dramatic
difference, and the tension is gone as soon as you get to the couch, so you
might end up just goofing around and being silly together. The anger and
frustration are forgotten and connection is reestablished. Try to stay on the
couch until both of you are ready to go back and do things differently from
before.
I hope it's clear how this technique differs from a time-out. There's no
power struggle about how many minutes are left, no dragging children
kicking and screaming to their room. Best of all, it is something that parent
and child do together—unlike punishments, which are things that adults do
to children. One thing I like about meetings on the couch is that they are not
just for misbehavior. You can call a meeting if you notice your child is sad
or blue, or if you have both been irritable lately, or if you haven't had a

 chance to connect for a while, or if you need to decide what to do over
school vacation. The other thing I like about these meetings is that, unlike
punishment, usually everyone leaves feeling better.
In Playful Parenting, discipline is a chance to improve your connection
with your children instead of forming another wall that separates you. The
best way to make discipline more connecting is to think We have a problem
instead of My kid is misbehaving. When discipline is presented to children
as a joint problem requiring a joint solution, things go much better. There is
less lying (“I didn't do it!”) and less sneaking (figuring out how not to get
caught, instead of choosing to do the right thing) if parents are not in the
role of policeman, judge, and jury. If we are all in this together, the result is
always more cooperation. That's why I say “We need a meeting on the
couch,” instead of “You go to your room.”
When I talk to parents about punishment, they are often shocked when I
say that I am also opposed to time-outs. But with the emphasis in Playful
Parenting on connecting, it really shouldn't be a surprise. Timeouts were
supposed to be a humane alternative to whacking children, but they have
somehow become the ultimate “positive parenting” tool. The main problem
with time-outs is that they enforce isolation on children who are probably
already feeling isolated and disconnected.
A few years ago I was sitting in my car while I waited for my friend Lena
to come out of her apartment. I was listening to a show on the radio, a callin show about handling children's behavior problems. The “expert” on the
radio was saying that young children who want to come into their parents'
room at night should be locked out, and kept out no matter how much they
cry, even if it means they eventually fall asleep curled up outside the door.
Lena got in the car, hearing just the end of this advice. She said, “Oh, is this
that show about dogs?” No. Most dog experts are more understanding of the
animal's need for comfort and contact when they are feeling sad and lonely.
In most homes and schools, time-out is used as a punishment or as a way
to control children's behavior. But look at how the term is used in sports.
You take a time-out for yourself or your own team. You don't give a timeout to the other team. This type of time-out, a break for everyone, is an
excellent idea. At my daughter's preschool, Susan Engels, the head teacher,
would say, “Time-out! Break in the action!” Everyone would freeze, and
she could step in to redirect the play, get close to someone who was about

 to explode, stop a conflict before it got out of hand, or tone down the
activity level. This type of time-out is nonpunishing and non-isolating. In
fact, it is a way of joining in children's play and making a connection.
Another way time-outs can work in a positive way is if children have a cozy
place where they can go to calm down or feel comforted when they choose
to go, not when we choose to send them.
Given everything I have said about the importance of connection and
paying attention to children, you might guess that I hate the phrase, “He
was just looking for attention.” For years, the standard advice has been to
ignore such behavior. I don't get that. We don't say, “He keeps asking for
food, but just ignore him; he's only saying that because he's hungry.” We
don't say, “Your cup is empty, so I'll make sure you don't get a refill.” If
someone is looking for attention that bad, I figure they must need some
attention! If we give them enough of the good kind, they won't be so
desperate that they'll settle for the bad kind.
For most children, I think time-out is just a nuisance. For a few, it may
even help them settle down or think about what they are doing before they
do it. For certain children, though, it's a torture. These children want and
need contact, they are afraid of separation, and they see time-outs, or being
sent to their room, as banishment. They will create more trouble resisting
time-out than they were causing in the first place. They will make pathetic
promises to be better, to behave, to do anything you ask, but they will not
be able to keep these promises. They were made out of fear, and the
behaviors may not actually be under these children's control. For these
children especially, a meeting on the couch is a much better bet.
I said above that most punishments disrupt the connection between
parent and child. That's true, but sometimes punishment does get the child's
attention. Perhaps it goes without saying, but in order to connect with
someone, you have to have their attention first. With all the obstacles to
connection, and especially with all the distractions available today, that can
be hard. Children may need to hear a louder tone in our voice, or to feel a
hand on their shoulder, or to see us look right in their eyes, in order to tune
in to us. Remember, the goal is to get their attention in order to make a
connection, not to scare them or show them who's boss. If we focus on
getting their attention, we can probably think of more effective ways than
yelling or threatening or hurting them. Sometimes we go too far, and after

 we get their attention, we lose it again by going overboard. When children
are sitting resentfully in their rooms after being hit or grounded, we'd like
them to be thinking about what they've done. Instead, they are more likely
to be plotting how to make our life miserable in revenge, or how to make
sure they don't get caught next time. Once you have their attention, and you
use it as the basis for a real connection, you will get real cooperation, not
resentful (and temporary) obedience.
Like every therapist, I've heard countless bitter stories from adults—
especially men—about the effects of being harshly punished and
relentlessly criticized, when all they wanted as children was to be cherished
and accepted. The saddest stories were from groups that I led for men who
battered their wives and girlfriends. Many of them also hit their children,
and virtually all of them had been beaten when they were boys. They
passed on the violence that was done to them, and some of them even
defended it: “My daddy hit me with a belt, and there's nothing wrong with
me.” When they were able to break through their defensiveness and really
talk about what it was like for them growing up, many of them said that the
worst part wasn't the violence, but the lack of any tenderness from anybody.
These men were not terribly lovable, but I'm sure they were regular little
babies once, just like you and me. When they started heading down the
wrong path, not one of them got any love or gentle guidance, only more
harsh discipline. We are often reluctant to give out love to people who have
been bad, even when it's what they need. I have always liked the poem by
Edwin Markham, which A. S. Neill quotes in the beginning of his book
Freedom—Not License!:
He drew a circle that shut me out—
Heretic, rebel, a thing to flout.
But Love and I had the wit to win:
We drew a circle that took him in!
OceanofPDF.com

 —PLAY!—

A lot of parents can't imagine being playful as a form of discipline.
Discipline is supposed to be deadly serious. Don't believe it—play! My
friend Roger told me a story about being with his children at a historic site
when it started to pour. His family and a few other families were trapped in
an old barn with nothing to do. Several of the other children quickly got
bored and started trying to chip chunks of plaster off the wall. Their parents
yelled at them, threatened them, fumed at them. Roger realized that with no
TV or activities or store-bought toys to entertain them, all these children
knew how to do was complain and then act up. All the parents knew how to
do was yell and threaten and punish. Roger suggested to his children that
they play an animal guessing game, like twenty questions, and invited the
other children to join in. Soon everyone was perfectly happy as they settled
into a game. All they needed to do was play.
Are you having battles with your children over bedtime? Play bedtime.
Having battles over dessert? Play dinnertime. It doesn't really matter if you
play a mean mother who says no dessert, or if you play an absurdly nice
mother who says “We're having ice cream for dinner tonight.” Whatever
makes them laugh. Having trouble with back talk? Pick up two dolls, and
have one talk back to the other. You'll have fun imitating children's
obnoxious behavior and making up snappy comebacks. Children will think
it's a riot. If you're having trouble with rules, make up a rule you don't really
care about, and play at making, breaking, and punishing that rule. Instead of
one more round of “You have to get dressed, right now,” try saying “There's
only one rule: You can't wear one red shoe and one black shoe!” See what
happens. I guarantee this will not train them to break real rules, but will
instead help them to be more cooperative.
Often children don't even need a specific game—they just need to play
more. A huge number of so-called behavior problems would be solved
overnight if all children had a safe, fun place in which to run around until
they were tired. One of the things I have never understood about school is

 the way that kids—especially boys—get punished by having recess taken
away. If they can't sit still or behave with recess, I don't know how they are
going to do it without that chance to let off some steam.
A playful tone goes a long way toward keeping discipline from being
harsh. Again, this is especially true for boys, who are more likely to be
targets of that kind of discipline.3 I saw a father and son in the grocery store
the other day. The boy was into everything, and the father was getting a
little frustrated. At the checkout line, the boy tried to sneak a candy bar. The
father said, with a hint of severity in his voice, “Put that back; you can't
have that.” The boy hung his head and sullenly put the candy back. The
father softened his voice, “Nice try, though.” The boy gave his father a big
smile. “Hey, Danny, want to carry my change,” asked the father, and the
boy suddenly lit up.
Not only did this father backtrack from his initial impulse—to fuss at the
child—but he then did something much more effective. He joined playfully
with the child, congratulating him on his attempt to get one over on his dad.
Then, he recognized that what the boy needed and wanted was some
autonomy, something of his own to hang on to. The dad gave him a job,
carrying the change, which made him feel big and valuable. He left the
store feeling six feet tall. If the episode had ended with his being scolded
for trying to get the candy bar, the boy might have left the store feeling
small and misunderstood, feeling guilty that he wanted something
forbidden, or resentful that he couldn't have it.
That scene at the grocery reminded me of my favorite playful approach
to discipline. I say things that sound like threats but are kind of goofy. “If
you do that again I'm going to have to sing the ‘Star-Spangled Banner.' ” A
similar strategy to ease tensions is to pretend to be upset, which helps us
unload some of our feelings without dumping them onto our children in a
hurtful way. In fact, if you review all of the principles of Playful Parenting,
you'll see how appropriate they are for preventing and dealing with family
struggles. Join with them, connect with them, rough-house, follow their
lead, tune in to them, have fun. Do something totally different from your
usual response: “You spilled the milk again? I'll have to do my milk-spilling
dance.”

 In the rush to punish children, we forget that the essence of discipline is
to teach. Remember how dropping the food off the side of the high chair is
a one-year-old's way to learn about gravity? We shouldn't be punishing their
first science experiments! Children a little older love to do experiments
about the difference between knocking something over (or hitting someone)
on purpose or by accident. They probably don't even know that they are
being philosophers and scientists, trying to figure out free will versus
determinism, cause and effect. Do things just happen, or do I make them
happen? If I push Murray into Carole, was it me who knocked her over, or
was it Murray? Like everything else, children learn about this through play.
I like to help this along by taking a child's hand and making her (gently)
whack someone else. “Stop hitting him,” I say. “That's not nice.” When
they are just learning these complicated concepts, they think that's
hysterically funny. On the other hand, when we punish children for doing
something on purpose, before they really grasp that concept, we haven't
helped them learn it. I have seen so many children who think the phrases “It
was an accident; I didn't mean it; I'm sorry” are magic words that will ward
off punishment. Adults treat these like magic words, too. Yet if one child
constantly knocks other children over, even if each time is an accident, you
still have a problem. What's worse: to do something on purpose and feel
bad about it, and sincerely apologize, or to do something by accident and
not care?
I think parents avoid playfulness in difficult parenting situations because
they are afraid of rewarding bad behavior. I have to remain stern and angry
and cold so he'll know he did wrong. But being playful is not about rewards
or punishments, it is about restoring the missing ingredient—connection—
that caused the problems in the first place. Take the risk of being playful.
You will do a much better job of teaching your values and getting
cooperation with your rules by being playful than by being stern.
OceanofPDF.com

 —INSTILL GOOD JUDGMENT—

Instead of trying to get children to be obedient, I recommend that we
strive for them to have good judgment. Obedience lasts only as long as we
are in the room with them. It does not help a child know what to do in a
brand-new situation. I think every parent has had this experience: Children
do something so wild that we never thought of making a rule about it. We
usually punish them anyway, because they “should have known better.” But
we can't expect them to have the flexible intelligence to figure out what is
right or wrong in a new situation if we have taught them to obey only by
enforcing rules. Our world is so complex that children need to have
intelligence and good judgment, not just rules.
The goal of most punishment is obedience. Good judgment, on the other
hand, comes from talking with children, brainstorming about how they
might handle different situations, and discussing moral dilemmas. We have
to be on the same wavelength with our children before we can have these
types of conversations, so connect first. Connecting with children after
they've done something wrong, listening to how they feel about it, and
telling them calmly how we feel, all do much more to instill good judgment
than punishment does.
Children develop into thoughtful, considerate, honest, and kind adults
because of love and affection, because of high moral standards, and because
of a close relationship with someone who models those values. I have never
seen anyone punished into being good. Bribes don't work either. Promises,
threats, rewards, and punishments have been called “the most primitive way
of dealing with human beings.”4 Since humans can think and reason, and
because close connections are so important to us, it makes more sense to
use loving and talking as the basis for our discipline.
Behavior-modification programs try to bypass thought and go directly to
our response of rewards and punishments. That might be why they don't
work that well. In a common misunderstanding of behavior modification,
my friend Lucy rewards her son Alexander when he stops being whiny and

 obnoxious and demanding. Do those behaviors disappear? No, he increases
them, so he can be rewarded for stopping! Another mistake is trying to stop
a behavior, through rewards and punishment, that children actually have no
control over. A newborn, for example, is in big trouble if his parents can't
stand his crying. No matter how badly he may be punished for it, he can't
make himself stop. I've seen older children punished for not learning to read
fast enough, for getting a math problem wrong, for being fidgety, for
focusing so intently on a book or a game that they don't hear their mom call
them for dinner. These are all examples of things that children may not be
able to change, not even for a million dollars or to avoid a beating. Most
parents just keep searching for a more effective punishment instead of
reconsidering the whole idea of punishment.
Recent work on the brain suggests that punishment has a different impact
on different children. The surprising thing is that punishment has the least
impact on the very children who are most likely to be punished.5 That is,
certain children are more impulsive, have a harder time developing a
conscience, and have trouble making connections with people or feeling as
if they are part of a community. These traits make them more likely to get
into trouble. These same traits make them less able to make changes in their
behavior because of punishment or fear of punishment. With these children,
punishments escalate, getting more and more severe, but they continue to be
ineffective. Those children who have strong consciences and who hate the
idea of getting into trouble, meanwhile, don't need punishment. These same
traits make it possible for them to behave just by telling them what we
expect.
What misbehaving children need instead of punishment is help in
organizing themselves. That doesn't mean having a tidy room. It means
having the ability to process incoming information and organize an
effective response. Most punishments disorganize children further. To help
them organize, provide a quiet space, with fuzzy toys, blankets, and pillows.
Rock them in a rocking chair, go to the swings, hug them and hold them
close. Older children also benefit from these activities, even though they
may seem geared to younger children. Disorganized behavior is partly the
result of not getting enough of those kinds of comforts or rhythms in their
life when they were infants and toddlers. For older children, a structured

 schedule, art projects, and safe roughhousing can be additional tools in
fostering this type of cognitive organization.
OceanofPDF.com

 —LOOK UNDERNEATH THE SURFACE,
AT CHILDREN'S FEELINGS AND NEEDS—

If we take children's needs and feelings as our starting point, our whole
approach to discipline changes. Imagine that your children's behavior is a
coded message. (Actually, children's behavior is a coded message.) To
break the code, translate what they are doing into a sentence that starts with
“I need_____” or “I feel_____” Fill in the blank, and then respond to that
need or that feeling, not to their behavior. So if a toddler starts pulling
everything off the counter, he may be saying, “I need something to do, and I
want somebody to do it with.” If an eighth-grader starts forgetting to do her
homework, she may be saying, “I'm scared of high school coming up; I'm
not sure if I'm ready.” You may not always be right about your translation,
but it always helps to try to find the need or the feeling underneath every
behavior that bugs you. It can also be fun, which is a nice change from
frustrating and infuriating. Here Are Some Common Translations That Fit
Many Problem Situations:
You're bored? You must be feeling lonely. Let's play a game, or we
can invite someone over.
I can see you're starting to get discouraged, so I am going to give
you encouragement.
You and I haven't had much time together, so maybe that's why
you've been so annoying. Let's do something special.
You seem sad, so I am going to comfort you.
You need more room to run around and get some energy off. Let's
go outside.
You seem mad, so I am going to hold a big pillow so you can
whack it.
You've been trying to get my attention all day, in all kinds of ways,
so I'm going to put down my book for ten minutes and give you my
undivided attention.

 You seem too fidgety to sit still. Let's dance!
You seem overwhelmed. I am going to help you calm down. Let's
take three deep breaths together.
You've been really nasty toward your brother lately. What's the
matter? I'd like to hear about what's bothering you.
You seem cranky and irritable. Let's have a snack and see if that
helps.
Note how none of these translations lead logically to a punishment. It
doesn't make much sense to say: You are feeling bad, so I am going to yell
at you. You are lonely, so I am going to send you to your room. You are
feeling disconnected from other people, so I am going to hit you. You're
hungry, but I'm going to take your toys away instead of feeding you.
Absurd! Punishment enters into the scene because of our own feelings: I am
mad, so I am going to yell at you. I am frustrated, so I am going to have a
temper tantrum. I am scared, so I am going to scare you. I've had a hard
day, so I'm going to take it out on you.
When children have been “bad,” it's hard for parents to remember that
children need comfort rather than punishment. If you focus on the
underlying need and feeling instead of reacting to the surface behavior, it is
less confusing. No one ever died of a punishment deficiency, but babies do
die or get sick from not being loved. Giving children what they need is
always the best way to change their behavior. At the most basic level, we
are usually so exasperated with our children that we forget to ask the truly
important questions: Are these children unhappy? If so, why are they
unhappy?
As long as we are looking under the surface of our children's behavior,
we may as well take a closer look underneath our own behavior. When our
children misbehave, or worry us, or give us grief, we naturally get angry
and upset. When we try to discipline children while we are feeling this way,
we are much more likely to punish and yell. In fact, if we really look
honestly, I think we'll find that a lot of our discipline is just acting out our
feelings!
We act out feelings of revenge when children annoy us or hurt our pride.
We act out feelings of anger when they don't live up to our expectations. We
act out feelings of frustration when we've had a rough day and our

 children's noise level provides the last straw. We get irritable when we hear
their tears or fears or tantrums. Young children run out in the street and we
spank them, because we're scared and we feel guilty about not stopping
them. Teenage boys get an ear pierced and we blow our stack, instead of
calmly reflecting on the fact that they're getting older. Instead of acting out
these feelings (by yelling at our children or punishing them harshly), talk
about them. Maybe we need a giant preschool teacher following us around
reminding us to “Say it in words.”
OceanofPDF.com

 —PREVENT INSTEAD OF PUNISH—

One reason punishments are so ineffective is that they are after the fact.
To really have an impact on behavior, we have to prevent it, or interrupt it,
not react afterward. My sister Diane was consulting at a day-care center,
which had a problem with a boy who punched other children. They had
“tried everything,” meaning every form of punishment allowable by law.
Diane was sitting talking to a teacher, who said, “Now look, there he is; he's
getting ready to punch that girl.” The teacher could see it coming, but she
was just going to let him do it, and then try to come up with a punishment
that would work! Diane said, “Oh no, he's not,” and went over to grab his
arm in midswing. The boy was mad and boiled with anger as Diane told
him gently she wasn't going to let him hit the girl. At first, he was afraid she
was going to hit him—you won't be surprised to learn that this boy was hit
at home—but when she just held his arm gently, he burst into tears. For the
first time ever, he talked about feeling as if no one at school liked him. The
teachers had not been able to think in terms of prevention or feelings,
because they were so stuck on punishment. Interrupting a destructive
behavior isn't punishment. It is a limit. Limits help children gain control,
express their feelings, and think about what they're doing. Hearing about
this boy's frustration and loneliness, his teachers then could make a plan to
help him develop better friendships.
All the punishments the school had tried with that boy just made him shut
adults out of his life more and more. But effective discipline—the
interruption of the behavior pattern—led him to bare his true feelings.
Effective discipline leads to conversation and connection; ineffective
discipline to shame and separation. Our job, then, is to stay engaged with
children even while we're setting limits. That's hard, because often we're
angry or annoyed when we have to impose limits or interrupt a problem
behavior. But harshness and coldness from us just leads to isolation and
powerlessness from them. So make eye contact, talk softly, hold them as
gently as possible, take a breather if you're too hot under the collar.

 It should go without saying, but I'll say it anyway: Playful Parenting is
the best way I know to prevent problems before you even have to think
about discipline. The more playtime you have with your children, especially
play where they get to be in charge and you help them maintain their
closeness and confidence, the less you will need any of these alternatives to
punishment.
OceanofPDF.com

 —KNOW YOUR CHILD—

When I see what people punish their children for, it often looks to me as
if the child was doing something perfectly normal and ordinary for their
age. Toddlers throw a tantrum or won't share. Preschoolers can't sit still.
Eight-year-olds run down the hall. Preteens say “I hate you.” We punish
children for being messy, for being noisy, for being selfish, for being cranky
when they're tired, for being impulsive—in short, for being children.
Children cannot be punished into maturing faster, or scolded into somehow
skipping a step of child development. Of course, we need to manage these
behaviors, to help them move to that next stage of development when they
can share, or walk calmly down a hall, or be polite. But punishment does
not rush development. If anything, it slows down development.
We also punish children just for being different from us. We like to rush;
they like to dawdle. We sit quietly; they fidget. They like their room messy;
we like it neat. We like it quiet; they like it loud. We like it calm; they like it
wild. But punishment can't change a child's temperament any more than it
can speed up development. We are just different, but guess who gets
punished? Because we're bigger, we can get away with acting out our
annoyance. With children, we punish the things that bother us most.
When children get too old for time-outs, parents usually turn to strategies
such as grounding, taking away telephone or television privileges,
restricting time on the computer, threatening to take away toys. These
punishments don't usually work very well. They just cause resentment and
strife without helping children develop a stronger sense of morality. Of
course, you may well find that children can't handle having their own TV,
can't get their homework done if they have access to the phone after school,
can't control the time they spend online, and so on. Setting limits in these
areas is not punishment, it's parenting. It's a matter of knowing our children.
There is a big difference between imposing a sentence on children after
they mess up (punishment), versus sitting down together and figuring out a
workable solution for the future (parenting).

 Knowing our children also means knowing how they respond to different
types of discipline. What works for my child may not work for yours. But
all children are susceptible to being frightened by discipline that is too stern
or severe. Janusz Korczak, who wrote the epigraph at the beginning of this
chapter, was the director of an orphanage in Poland. He once gave a lecture
entitled “The Heart of the Child” to a group of students who were studying
to be teachers. Korczak brought along a four-year-old boy from the
orphanage. The students could see that the boy's heart was beating wildly:
He was frightened—so many strange people…. Speaking very
softly, so as not to add to the child's fears… Korczak told us “Don't
ever forget this sight. How wildly a child's heart beats when he is
frightened and this it does even more so when reacting to an adult's
anger with him, not to mention when he fears to be punished.” Then
heading for the door with the boy's hand in his, he added, “That is all
for today!” We did not need to be told any more. Everybody will
remember that lecture forever.6
OceanofPDF.com

 —SET CLEAR LIMITS—

If many families rely too much on punishment and harsh discipline,
other families go too far the other direction, into excess permissiveness.
Children need limits, guidance, and structure. These need to be applied
lovingly and in a relaxed manner, not in anger or revenge. Most of us think
we have to choose between “tough love” and “anything goes.” But we can
set limits and have high expectations for children while still having
empathy for their feelings and compassion for their needs.
First, we have to understand the difference between children's real needs
and their unrealistic wish to be the complete center of the universe. Catering
to children's every whim is not at all the same as meeting their legitimate
needs. You can't spoil a baby by giving him food when he is hungry. You
can't spoil an older child by giving her attention, love, or comfort. When
children have a need, fill it. That's not the same as waiting on them hand
and foot, especially as they get older, because they also have a need for
independence, and a need to feel competent and mature. We have to meet
those needs as well.
When we give something to children out of respect for their choices,
that's not spoiling them. After all, we control just about all the resources in
the family. They have to ask for things that we don't have to ask anybody
for. On the other hand, if we give something to children because we're
afraid of their emotional reaction, or because we feel guilty, we are on the
road to excess permissiveness. The true cause of spoiling is giving in to
children against our better judgment. Maybe we can't bear for them to
experience or express any sadness, anger, or frustration. We may refuse to
believe they could feel so bad, or perhaps we just don't want to listen to
them fuss. Either way, we aren't giving to the children. We are giving in.
As society changes, many conservative critics are whining for a return to
strictness and a rejection of the permissiveness of the Dr. Spock generation.
I think they miss the point. The real problem is that neither repression nor
permissiveness has provided children with the connectedness they need in

 order to be moral, responsible, and happy members of a community. The
pendulum has swung from beating children to spoiling them, but both
extremes are lacking in true connections between adults and children. The
strict parent ignores children's ability to make their own decisions. The
permissive parent ignores children's need to be a contributing part of the
family.
The extremes that adults go to in order to stop tears and tantrums reveal a
surprising similarity between abusive parents and overindulgent parents.
Abusive parents often punish children harshly for tears or tantrums, because
they can't stand to hear them. At the other end of the parenting spectrum,
overly indulgent families often give children their own way in order to
prevent them from crying or tantruming. Again, the adult can't stand the
sound of it, but instead of lashing out they bend over backward to avoid an
upset. That opens the door to emotional blackmail, and children can easily
become manipulative and bratty.
Parents who are excessively permissive usually think that they are
empowering their children. They might let their child lie or steal or not do
chores or sulk all day without any consequences or limits. All children
benefit from high expectations, especially the expectation to be a moral
person and to pull their weight in the family. If children are not provided
with firm, clear limits, they end up feeling either omnipotent or out of
control. Neither of those is real confidence. Omnipotent children are
outraged at any reminder that they are not in complete control of the
universe. Out-of-control children look at their parents and think, “Uh-oh, if
they aren't in charge, then who is?” The result is either fearfulness or
bouncing off the walls, or both. If limits are given lovingly and respectfully,
they provide structure and safety, and, hence, security. This helps children
feel less anxious about their own impulses. Limits also help children feel
safer about other dangers in the world: Mom and Dad are powerful enough
to keep me safe until I can leave the nest and fly on my own. But not so
powerful that I'll never be able to test my wings.
Patty Wipfler argues for a link between limits and listening: “Limit, then
listen as her bad feelings come rolling off.”7 All too often, limits either
aren't given at all or they are given in anger. We set the limit, and we don't
want to hear another word about it. Or we don't set the limit at all, because

 we don't want to hear the reaction. Stay engaged, knowing that the limit will
provide children with an opportunity to be sad or mad. If the limit was
reasonable, don't give up the limit because of this emotional reaction. Just
listen.
In my practice, I often hear from worried parents who are usually
indulgent, but who occasionally blow up at their children when they can't
take anymore. Then they feel terrible. This situation is very confusing for
children. The only time they ever hear a no is when the parent is furious. In
return, these children—who almost always get their way—have huge fits on
the rare occasions when they don't. All children need to hear nos that are
loving and gentle, not just angry or explosive.
In some families, frustrations come to a head with a tantrum or out-ofcontrol behavior by children, followed by an explosion by the parents, then
tears, reunion, apologies, hugs, ice cream. This cycle can become a habit.
The parents may think they are giving a punishment (the yelling), but from
the children's perspective, it is really a reward (the reconciliation after the
yelling). If children don't know how to arrive at the reconciliation directly,
they do it by setting off an explosion.
In indulgent families, limits are often a moving target. The parents may
actually say no a lot, but they don't ever follow through (except as above,
with a big explosion). We have to save our no for when we really mean it,
and then follow through firmly. That might mean physically restraining
children from hitting their younger sibling. It might mean sitting down with
them and watching them finish their homework. It definitely means that we
don't tell them what to do and then walk away and never notice if they did it
or not.
Empty threats, which are not followed through on, can be especially
anxiety-arousing for children. We may know we would never leave them in
the grocery store, but children aren't sure. Saying, “Stop, stop, stop, please
stop,” in a timid voice, also conveys a confusing message to children. They
aren't going to want to reward that behavior by stopping! They count on us
to keep them in check until they can do it themselves, and that kind of weak
pleading implies that we can't provide this safety net for them. Some
families bounce back and forth between indulgence and punishment. The
result is random and unpredictable. The limit might be stated twenty times,
for example, with no effect and no weight behind it. Suddenly the parent is

 furiously screaming: “I told you twenty times it was time to go!” Yes, but
the first nineteen didn't count, and the child knew it.
Punishment, ineffective discipline, and too much indulgence send
children to the towers of isolation and powerlessness. Playful Parenting and
the discipline alternatives that flow from it lead children out of these
towers. The single most important thing to remember is that everyone needs
a full cup of closeness and connection. Everyone. This last story is an
example of this.
OceanofPDF.com

 —AN UNEXPECTED HERO—

I was sitting on the veranda of a restaurant in Isla Mujeres, a little island
off the coast of the Yucatán in Mexico, when a drama unfolded at the tables
around me. At one table was a group of three young men, laughing and
drinking and having a merry time. At another table sat two other young
men, looking morose and not speaking to each other as they drank their
beers. If you painted this scene, you would make the first group glow with
light, while the second pair would be shrouded in shadow. After a while,
one of the miserable pair walked away, without either of them saying a
word of farewell.
The man who was left alone, a heavyset guy in poorly fitting clothes,
stared straight ahead into space, making a point of not looking over toward
the men at the other table. Suddenly, he turned to them and said something
in a deep voice. Then he turned back and stared into space again. From my
minimal understanding of Spanish, I recognized it as a rather foul obscenity.
The three men at the other table were surprised and angry. They looked over
at the man, glared at him, turned back to their beers, and shrugged at one
another. The man sitting alone began a regular, dull drone. Every twenty or
thirty seconds, in a monotone, he would repeat the word.
The men at the other table went through a wide range of responses to
this. They ignored him, insulted him back, yelled at him, threatened him,
cajoled him, tried to argue with him, told him to get lost, begged him to
stop. None of these approaches changed the pitch or the frequency of this
obscene metronome in the tiniest bit. Nothing they said even made a dent.
Finally, one of the three guys, my unexpected hero, said something like
“Hey, come over here.” The big guy seemed to think this was an invitation
to fight but wasn't sure. If it was, he didn't know what to do about it. The
young man asked him again to come over. The heavyset man got up slowly
and deliberately and came shuffling over, eyes staring down at the floor. I
tensed up a bit, not wanting to get caught in a crossfire of fists.

 Nothing like that happened. The man at the happy table said, “No, no,
bring your drink, come sit down with us.” No one seemed stunned by this
(aside from me, that is). The other man shuffled over, got his beer, and
shuffled back, standing a step away from the table. My hero leaned back
and twisted an empty chair around from my table, pulling it over very close
to himself. He made a little gesture indicative of wiping it off for the
newcomer. The big guy sat down. I could almost hear his muscles snapping
as he forced his body to bend. He looked lost and confused, but the group
made him genuinely welcome. There was no recrimination or teasing about
the cursing. The issue was resolved.
After a lot of fumbling, one of the men had stumbled over the elegant
solution. They all went back to laughing and talking. The man who had
given the invitation kept his hand on the big guy's back or shoulder all the
time, guiding him through the conversation. When there was a pause, he
gently urged his new friend into the opening, asking him a question. The
big guy would speak, then look quickly at his sponsor for feedback, ready
to drop it fast. When he was done, he would sink back into his seat with a
sigh. His sponsor would quote him, carrying on the conversation. And all
was well.
I sat there stunned. I promised myself I would always remember that
people just want to be close, no matter what crazy stupid ways they might
show it. And still, like most everybody else, I forget.
OceanofPDF.com

 CHAPTER 14

OceanofPDF.com

 PLAY YOUR WAY
THROUGH SIBLING
RIVALRY
One day, hearing the anguished cries of children in the street, one
of Abraham Lincoln's neighbors in Springfield, Illinois, rushed out of
his house in alarm. There he found Lincoln with two of his sons, both
of whom were sobbing bitterly. “Whatever is the matter with the boys,
Mr. Lincoln?” he asked. “Just what's the matter with the whole
world,” replied Lincoln resignedly. “I've got three walnuts, and each
wants two.”1

Few things upset parents so much as trouble between their children.
Parents get aggravated by the conflict—it's loud, time-consuming, and
emotionally draining—and they worry that the siblings won't be close when
they grow up. As you might expect, I like to think in terms of playing with
these feelings and behaviors instead of attempting to eradicate them. Playful
Parenting with siblings introduces the added dimension of playing with
more than one child and the complexity of family dynamics. To make it
even more complicated, I will also try to explain why all children, not just
siblings, have what is called sibling rivalry.
OceanofPDF.com

 —PLAYING WITH MORE THAN ONE CHILD—

Some aspects of Playful Parenting are very different with more than one
child, other aspects are modified a bit, and some are exactly the same. With
two, three, or a dozen children, we still follow the giggles, build
connections, foster self-confidence, and try to love the games we used to
hate. We also face the same basic decision about when to step in and when
to stand back.
When one child is suffering badly at the hands of another child, or is an
outcast of a group, we have to step in and help. If a younger sibling is being
beaten up, or the smallest child in the neighborhood is left out of every
game, these children need our assistance. Many adults in therapy complain
bitterly about having been overpowered by siblings or scape-goated by the
neighborhood group when they were young, while their parents let the
children work it out for themselves. On the other hand, if children actually
are able to work things out, then don't try to fix what doesn't need fixing.
How much suffering is enough to warrant stepping in? As Jeffrey
Trawick-Smith puts it, “Children need to get into arguments to learn how to
resolve them; they must be excluded from groups to learn play group entry
skills. They must play with disagreeable peers and bullies to broaden their
repertoire of social strategies. They must have play ideas rejected so they
can learn to become persuasive. When adults intervene too quickly in
conflict, these opportunities are lost.”2
Jean Piaget, the first great observer of children's play, noticed that
children learn about morality by arguing about rules. They actually need
those conflicts about whose turn it is, about whether the ball was in or out,
about what's allowed and what isn't. We tend to jump in to settle disputes
and spell out the rules because we can't stand the conflict, but conflict may
be the very heart of the game. One of the main achievements of childhood
play is figuring out how to deal effectively with conflict. They have to have
some conflict in order to figure that out. But you don't really learn about
conflict by being terribly bullied either. I think Piaget would be shocked

 that children's games are now almost entirely adult-organized and adult-led.
On the other hand, he might have liked the recent Poké-mon craze; it
involves such complicated rules that children can argue about them
endlessly.
I try to walk a fine line between stepping in and standing back, but it's
hard sometimes. There are persuasive arguments for both. My basic rule is:
Stand back, but with your eyes open. Just because we step back doesn't
mean we have to turn away and leave children entirely alone. Step in, but
with a light touch, not a hammer. When we decide to jump in, we usually
get carried away and interfere too much. I believe we can prevent the worst
problems without taking over. We can stay engaged, while still letting the
children be mostly in charge. We can offer a little help and then back off to
see if that was enough for them to figure out the rest on their own.
A step-by-step approach works best for me. I like just to watch at first,
then point out to children what I see. If they need more help than that, I ask
them what they think might help the situation. Finally, I step in more
forcefully, if necessary. I might start by just being a little more visible on
the playground.”I'm over here if you need me.” “I bet you guys can figure it
out, but call me if you need help.” When children come to us to be referees,
or judge and jury, it's tempting to dispense our wisdom. Try instead just to
listen to both children, without actually saying anything. Ask them
questions, but let them propose the solutions. Be interested, but not overly
worried. More often than not, they'll both walk away happy, thinking that
you were as wise as Solomon.
If a little more adult input is needed, I will often go up to children who
seem to be having trouble and say hello in a very friendly way, even if I
don't know them. Sometimes that simple adult contact is enough. If they
were shy, that hello might help them get up the courage to join in a game. If
they were being bossy or mean, the hello might help them play more
agreeably. I try not to convey the message that Big Brother is watching, but
just that help is available if anyone needs it.
Other times I'll say a little more: “What's going on here?” “Yikes, that
looked like it hurt.” If one person is being picked on, I might say, “It doesn't
look like he is enjoying that game as much as you are.” I will also state my
insistence on basic values: “Everyone needs to get a turn.” “That kind of
name-calling is not okay with me.” “We can't do this if you all can't be

 safe.” I try to just state the general principle, then let them work out the
details.
If these subtle approaches don't work, we can always lay down the law.
We can separate the bully from the victim (whichever one our child happens
to be). We can join in the game ourselves, which usually changes the
situation instantly. If one child was getting clobbered, the others will
usually gang up and try to clobber the adult instead. If no one could figure
out what to play, they will usually come up with something good that takes
advantage of our offer to play with them.
Two aspects of Playful Parenting—tuning in and roughhousing—are
especially complicated with more than one child. First of all, there is more
to tune in to, not just what is going on with each child but what is going on
between the children and within the group as a whole. We'll never be able to
notice everything, but we can be alert for key themes: Is anyone being
excluded, or ganged up on? Does one child use emotional blackmail
(whining and fussing if he doesn't get his way)? Do the others give in? Do
some children cheat at games? Do others make themselves the police
officer, enforcing all the rules? Do bigger or stronger children know how to
hold back so that they can play more equally with smaller or weaker
children? Do younger ones have any skills that help them keep up with
older ones?
The hardest part of Playful Parenting with more than one child is when
you tune in and you find that everyone is on a different wavelength. This
situation is most common with wrestling, roughhousing, and competitive
games. I was playing with a group of boys at a neighbor's house. There
were two brothers, age three and seven, and a twelve-year-old from down
the block. The middle one wanted to wrestle, and he was using all his
strength, so I had to really focus on no one getting hurt—especially me. The
youngest, thinking he needed to protect his big brother, cried out “Stop
hurting him!” and started punching me. Meanwhile, the oldest boy was
encouraging the seven-year-old to beat the hell out of me and kept asking
when he'd get a turn to wrestle me. There was a lot to keep track of! I had to
reassure the younger boy that his brother was not getting hurt; I had to keep
the actual wrestling from getting out of hand; and I had to tone down the
oldest one's killer instincts.

 A similar thing happens with competition, where one child wants to go
full throttle and another child wants to be allowed to win. Or a child who
isn't really able to keep up or play the game properly still wants to be
included. At these times, children need us to be more actively involved in
the play so that each child can get at least some of what he needs. We may
need to level the playing field so that younger children are not at such a
disadvantage. We can join their team, or suggest a change in the rules. We
may also need to coax the younger one away to another game so the older
ones don't have to hold back all the time.
As soon as there are two children, there is fighting—over a toy, the
remote control, or who got the bigger piece of pie. My favorite response to
this kind of conflict, whether it is between siblings or playmates, is to grab
the toy and run. The two children then bond together to try to get it away
from me. I don't do that all the time, since they also need to figure out how
to negotiate with each other. But making myself the target always helps
things get unstuck when children are locked in conflict. If they are hitting
each other, I'll say, “Bet you can't hit me,” and then run out of the room,
pretending to be scared. If they struggle over fairness, I'll pretend to be
crumpled into tears because I didn't get a turn. Or I'll grab a fork and
say,“I'm not sharing this fork with anybody.”If one or all of the siblings are
fearful, I will be the cowardly lion, afraid of everything, and let them make
fun of me instead of one another. These comments are like bait; sometimes
children bite and sometimes they don't. If they do, they will quickly show
you which sibling themes they want to play with.
Whenever there are three or more children, there are issues of inclusion
and exclusion. We don't want to put too much of a damper on their games
or their own choices about friendship, but we do need to make sure that no
one is completely excluded, scapegoated, or attacked. My friend Tina takes
the active approach. At the basketball court, she tells the medium-size kids
that she will help them not get kicked off by the bigger kids if they will
include the littler kids. Our job isn't to make everything completely fair, but
to compensate for any big power imbalances. We also hold out a high
standard for inclusion (no one gets left out or left behind), knowing very
well that children will exclude, but providing a guideline to strive for.
The best kind of play is open to everyone. It bridges differences of age,
race, gender, or social class. In an article on diversity and play, psychologist

 Patricia Ramsey3 notes that “when children are engaged in true play—
nonliteral, open-ended, and spontaneous play—they are creating their own
world, which can potentially accommodate everyone.” Our job as adults is
to help achieve that promise of inclusion. She explains how the best types
of play are universal and inclusive. Play based on TV shows or computer
games is much less inclusive. She tells a wonderful story about her sixyear-old son Daniel, adopted as an infant from Chile, and her three-year-old
adopted son Andres, also from Chile, who had been with the family for only
forty-eight hours. Daniel tried several times to get his new brother to play
Power Rangers with him. Andres did not respond, and Daniel became
increasingly frustrated and resentful.
“An hour later both boys are in the bathtub. They are blowing bubbles
and pouring water over each other and laughing gleefully. Andres sticks his
head in the water and comes up with wet hair. Daniel follows suit, and they
both shriek with delight.” What's the difference between these two scenes?
The water play in the tub—a universal way to play—bridged the cultural
divide. The Power Rangers game depended entirely on having watched the
show (or having spent hours on the playground with boys who have
watched it). One type of play brought them together, the other pulled them
apart.
OceanofPDF.com

 —EVERY CHILD HAS SIBLING RIVALRY
(EVEN IF THEY DON'T HAVE SIBLINGS)—

The feelings, thoughts, and behaviors commonly associated with the
term sibling rivalry are actually a part of every child's development,
including only children. With siblings, parents are often annoyed or worried
by the conflict. Meanwhile, parents of only children are often taken aback
by their child's “sibling rivalry” feelings and behaviors.
My friend called me for help a few years ago because her five-year-old
son Bobby was being mean to his little sister Tanya. He would be rough
with her, take her things, complain about any attention she received, and
have a fit if she so much as looked at any of his toys. At other times, he was
loving, gentle, and protective. My daughter and I came over to play with
them and give them a hand. Emma was five at the time, also. Usually when
the three of them played together, my daughter—an only child—would take
advantage of having a temporary little sister and dress Tanya up in doll
clothes. While Emma played junior mom, the big brother would get very
frustrated that his sister was monopolizing the attention of “his” friend.
I took the two older ones upstairs to the attic, the designated space for
physical play and loud noise. I asked the mom to keep Tanya downstairs. I
wanted both older children to be able to play through their feelings—
whatever they might be—without inflicting them on the little one. So we
were jumping on old mattresses and running around in the attic having a
good time. I grabbed a doll and said, “Look, it's the new baby, how cute,”
and I cuddled it. The two five-year-olds looked at each other, looked at me,
looked back at each other, ran screaming and giggling toward me, and
grabbed the doll. The big brother said, “Oops, she fell into the hot lava from
the volcano. I'll rescue her.” My daughter (the only child and the “junior
mom,” remember) knocked the doll out of his hands and said, “Bad baby,
you fell in the water, and a shark is going to eat you.” The play went on in
this vein for a half hour or so. It was a great game, though I was very glad

 the little sister was not there to watch it. Afterward, the three of them all
played together very well, and the older one's aggression toned down a bit.
Later I had the chance to spend time alone with Tanya, the sister. We played
games that let her be the more powerful one, such as chasing her but never
quite catching her, or wrestling and letting her knock me over easily and
noisily.
The point of this story is that all children have the feelings that are called
sibling rivalry, whether they have siblings or not. Children would much
rather work out these feelings through play than by actually hurting anyone.
They resort to aggression only when adults don't have the time or energy or
know-how to use play to help them work it through. Often parents of
siblings are burned out, while parents of only children don't realize that they
have to deal with sibling rivalry, too.
At the heart of sibling rivalry is a set of profound and universal
questions: Am I loved? Truly, absolutely loved? Am I wanted? Am I
special? Am I powerful? Will my parents stop loving me if they start to love
that other kid? Can I make the world bend to my will? Why can't I do what
I see that person doing? Why can't I get what I see that person getting?
There are certain ways these feelings affect younger siblings, older siblings,
and only children, at different ages. For everyone, though, the goal is the
same: to release and play through the feelings in order to be able to have
close, loving relationships.
Siblings have thousands of opportunities daily for working on these
issues (not always effectively, of course). Only children have to seek out
opportunities to play out their rivalry feelings. For months, whenever my
daughter would get in a car with her best friend and her friend's little sister,
the three of them would argue about who got to sit in the middle of the
backseat. They could easily have argued about this for hours (except, of
course, none of the parents could ever stand it for more than a couple of
minutes!). The interesting thing was that the sisters never argued about it
any other time, and Emma never argued about this with anyone else. It was
only when those three got together, and only in the car. Somehow this
situation became the playground for this older sibling, younger sibling, and
only child to play the rivalry game.
With siblings, the danger is not that sibling issues will be overlooked, but
that children will struggle with these issues constantly without any effective

 resolution. Some siblings manage fine, of course, but in other families the
older ones beat up the younger ones, while the parents assume that they are
working things out on their own. In other families, the younger ones figure
out indirect power sources, such as manipulation or sneakiness, and the
older one gets in trouble all the time. Neither of these scenarios actually
helps children to work through the daily frustrations of sibling life.
OceanofPDF.com

 —SIBLINGS AND REFILLING THE EMPTY CUP—

The image of the empty cup (see page 43) is useful to keep in mind
when thinking about siblings. The most typical manifestation of sibling
rivalry is competition for those refills. Older siblings watch the baby get
perpetual fill-ups, just for burping and farting and looking cute. Meanwhile,
they look at their own cup and it seems as if the level is always on low.
Even worse, nobody seems to care, except to scold them or punish them,
which empties their cup even more. Later on, the younger one may feel as if
the older one gets all the refills—a later bedtime, more privileges, a real
bike. In fact, much sibling conflict can be seen as trying to steal a refill
from the other child's cup—by stealing a toy, making her cry, winning a
competition, being smarter, getting him in trouble, and so on. Children are
natural Darwinians and Malthusians (life is a fight over scarce resources,
and only the fittest survive). In other words, when an older sibling says,
“You can't come with us, you're too little,” he is saying, I'm off to get a
refill and you're stuck here running on empty. When the younger sibling
says, “Mom, she's being mean to me,” she is saying, Please make up for the
inequality in our size by giving me more.
Clearly, we need to be more involved in providing ample refills so our
children don't have to steal them or fight over them. With siblings or
playmates, we fill those cups the same way as we do it one-on-one: with
attention, love, affection, listening, and (of course!) snacks. With one child,
refills provide energy and enthusiasm. With two or more children, refills
also help resolve conflicts, increase cooperation and inclusion, and promote
creative ideas for playing together. It's hard to get a good refill, though,
when you are always comparing your cup's level with everyone else's. And
it's hard to give out refills when there is so much jostling and fighting for
each drop. When children are pushy and obnoxious about getting more than
their share, we may not feel like filling anyone's cup. When siblings fight
because their cups are too low, often they get punished instead of
replenished. Their cups just get lower and lower.

 Caretaking responsibilities, such as when an older sibling takes care of a
younger one, can either fill a child's cup or empty it, depending on the child
and the duties. If the older child feels valuable to the family, and the
younger child feels well cared for, then everyone's cup can remain full. But
sometimes the older child feels angry, resenting the loss of playtime and
freedom. Or the older child can simply be an inadequate caretaker, leaving
the younger child's needs unmet.
I saw two boys, around ages seven and three, coming out of the public
library by themselves holding hands. It was a very sweet picture of big
brother protection and little brother adoration. As they headed to the car,
where their mother was waiting, the older one apparently got nervous about
the responsibility of crossing the parking lot with his brother. He started
shouting at him to go faster and to stay closer to him. The younger one was
crushed and scared, which made him go slower, and the older one got
angrier and angrier. Their cups, which started out brimming over, ended up
empty. If we are going to put children in the care of other children, we need
to teach them emotional skills and playing skills as well as basic safety. For
example, we can show older siblings how to let younger siblings be in
charge of the play sometimes. This role reversal gives everyone an
alternative to acting out the rivalry. The older one can feel important and
competent, and at the same time can symbolically work through the key
issues by “pretending” to be weaker or slower than the younger child.
My friend Jacob's son, Leonard, is an only child and a master of “fill my
cup first.” One time Jacob offered the Leonard and one of his friends ice
cream, only to discover that there was just a little left. “That's okay,”
Leonard said, “just fill mine up first, really full. She can have whatever is
left.” Leonard also taught me why children immediately want something
just because someone else wants it. We were over at their house one day
and my daughter asked if she could borrow a sweater. Jacob asked Leonard
to get Emma his red sweater. “That's my favorite sweater; she can't have
that. She can have anything but that.” He threw himself on the floor in a
major fit. “But Leonard,” his father said, “you haven't worn that in months.
I don't think it even fits you anymore.” “I don't care!” Suddenly this was
Leonard's prize possession. Before that minute, the sweater was just a
discarded piece of clothing. As soon as another child wanted it, the sweater
became a cup-filler. And there was no way he was going to let her get a

 refill from his sweater. With siblings and only children, every drop in that
cup is precious: I may not be low now, but you never know about tomorrow.
My friend Terry was five when his mother was pregnant with her fourth
child. He and his four-year-old sister were excited about the idea of a new
baby. Their older sister, though, at age seven, was wise beyond her years,
from having suffered the arrival of two new siblings already. She called a
meeting of the three kids. “Look,” she said, “I don't want to see either of
you being happy about this. There already isn't enough love to go around,
and when that new baby comes, it's just going to get worse.”
This story says to me that, as parents, we need to let children know that
there really is enough love for everyone to get a refill, even if a new sibling
or some other big event slows down the flow a bit. We also have to
understand that many children fear that their siblings' refills will come out
of their cup.
Most children seem to share this idea that refills are a scarce resource. In
fact, most of us adults feel the same way. No one is knocking on our door
offering us free refills. If we don't have enough ourselves to give our
children what they need, we have to get support from other parents,
relatives, friends, or therapists. What follows are suggestions for the various
types of resources that we can offer to siblings and playmates to fill their
cups. These are things they need from us when they are together. I hope
you'll agree that these resources don't have to be that scarce. We should give
them freely. You may be used to providing only one or two of them when
your children are at each other's throats. In the future, try the others and see
how they work.
Offer a solution. We are the parents, and we know our children
very well. Sometimes all we need to do is offer a solution to resolve
the conflict. “Go outside… take a break from each other… let's invite a
friend over for each of you… let's wrestle… let's have snack time.”
Let's say two siblings are fighting over who gets the last cup of juice.
You could make the conflict disappear by mixing up a new batch.
That's a simple and useful solution. Or you could tell them they have
to split it, but that is less useful. If we're always solving these conflicts
for them, they don't learn how to find their own solutions. One tip-off
that we're offering too many solutions is when the children reject them

 all in a snit. Instead of trying harder to come up with a solution
yourself, take that as a signal that they want to struggle through finding
one for themselves. If worse comes to worse, you can always take the
village idiot approach: “If you don't figure out how to share the juice,
I'll have to pour it on my head!”
Because sibling conflicts are so emotionally loaded, we don't always
come up with the best possible solutions. For example, some parents
“solve” every problem by punishing the older child and siding with the
younger one. Other parents will hear an older sibling beating up a
younger one and solve the problem by saying, “Keep the noise down,
boys.” The solutions we impose also tend to lack creativity: “Split it…
take turns… ten minutes each… you go first this time because she
went first last time… say you're sorry.”
Many parents think they have to choose between stepping in with a
solution, or stepping out of the picture completely. There are actually a
number of other resources we can offer children besides an adultimposed solution.
Give encouragement and inspire their confidence. In order for
children to create their own effective solutions, we have to stick
around and give encouragement and confidence. They will get
frustrated, as you know, and they'll often revert to the most primitive
method of dealing with problems—hitting, screaming, crying, tattling,
whining. So we can't just say, “Work it out,” and leave the room. Yet
we also can't jump in too soon with the answer, because that
undermines their confidence. We have to let them know that we truly
believe they can figure out a solution that is right for everyone, instead
of suggesting that we don't trust them to find a good answer
themselves. While they figure it out, we have to stand by and offer
encouragement, and stop them from hitting each other in frustration.
Encouraging children without butting in too much is a delicate
balancing act. I will often say things like, “I'm sure you guys can work
this out. Anyone have any ideas?” “I'm not sure what the right solution
is, but I bet there is one. Let's all keep thinking about it.” “Everyone
has to be included. How are you going to manage that?” “We can't
keep playing if you guys can't stop hurting each other. I have complete
confidence that you can figure out a way to keep the game

 nonviolent.” “This isn't working. Everyone is fighting over turns and
nobody is getting to play. What can we do so everybody gets a turn?”
Notice how these last few comments propose half of a solution—you
have to include everyone, you have to be safe—but they leave the
other half of the solution up to the children involved.
Another example of a half solution is to say, “Mark is really upset
about this; what are you guys going to do to make it right?” instead of
the more typical, “Say you're sorry,” or “It was an accident; he didn't
mean it.” There is nothing that irritates me more than children's
halfhearted, insincere apology just to get their mom or dad off their
back. Yet I see parents falling for it all the time.
I have found that children are remarkably responsive to
encouragement to figure things out on their own, as long as they can
count on our support. They may end up with the same solutions we
would have chosen, but it's different when they do it. Their solutions
are more creative, their apologies are more sincere, and their
compromises are more acceptable to everyone. Then they can truly
cooperate instead of begrudgingly taking turns.
Flood children with love and affection. Sometimes that's all we
need to do. If we fill their cups in the most basic way—a hug, a
cuddle, a story, a kind word, some special time together, their favorite
foods—they will figure out the rest. As much as I talk about play and
playfulness, there is also a time for just providing tenderness and
comfort. When one child hurts another child, for example, physically
or emotionally, you might want to listen to the tears first, before
brainstorming solutions or stepping in with a playful idea. When we
are giving out comfort, don't forget the one who threw the punch as
well as the one who got punched. That child needs some attention from
us, too, and I don't mean punishment.
When children are being mean, they are often sending us a signal
that they are in need of more love and affection. Unfortunately, they
may reject our love at those times. We have to be persistent and keep
at it until they know they are loved. The problem is that we may not
feel very inclined to offer much affection to children who have been
mean, or sassy, or difficult. Perhaps that's why children feel as if love
is a scarce commodity sometimes. If we get over our reluctance to give

 out love to children who have been “bad,” then it won't be scarce
anymore.
Children also have a need to give love and affection, not just receive
it. In addition to loving us, they can play out this need with baby dolls,
younger siblings, friends, or pets. Boys, unfortunately, are less likely to
get much chance at this loving and nurturing, except, perhaps, with
pets. With friends, since they can't hug or hold hands or say they love
each other without being teased or beaten up, they tease and poke and
pound and curse and put down each other. Boys do this to express both
affection and hostility. They are refilling each other's cups and spilling
each other's cups at the same time. This can be confusing to watch.
Protect. Even though it can be hard to tell when children are
hurting each other and when they are only playing, the next resource
we can provide them is protection from undue harm. We can't protect
our chil dren from every bump and bruise and emotional injury, and
we shouldn't try. But we must offer protection against the more deeply
harmful hurts that children can inflict on one another. We can insist
that a stronger child not beat up a weaker child, and we may need to
supervise more closely if someone keeps getting hurt. We have to
make sure children are not scapegoated or abused or terrorized.
Adequate protection, without too much intrusive meddling, does
more than just keep children from serious harm. It also helps them feel
safe. When children feel safe, they are able to get along much better
with one another, and to play more happily and freely.
Children need to know that they can have some freedom, but not a
license to hurt one another. In a program called Protective Behaviors,
children are taught that they have the right to be safe; others have the
right to be safe with them; there is nothing so terrible that you can't tell
someone about it; and you can keep searching until someone listens.4 I
think that is a wonderful set of messages to give to children. Until they
develop those internal abilities to keep themselves and others safe,
they rely on us to make sure that they aren't abused or abandoned. Like
every therapist, I have heard countless sad stories from adults who
have been traumatized and brutalized by siblings, while the parents
were oblivious or in denial.

 Provide perspective. As parents, it is easy for us to get wrapped up
in the details of our children's conflicts: Who did what to whom, and
who's going to pay? If we step back a bit, we can stay calm and reflect
back to them what we see and hear. Sometimes, magically, all we have
to do is point out each person's position in a relaxed tone of voice.
“You want the ball because it's yours, and he wants it because he's
never had a turn to play with it.” Simply listening and reflecting may
give them all they need. We can add a question at the end of our
observation, nudging them to re flect a little bit as they consider their
situation. “You want to play Lego, and you want to play basketball;
what are you two going to do?” A light tone helps as well: “Hmm, this
sounds like a bad case of it all started when she hit me back.”
Promote win-win outcomes. In the fields of negotiation and
mediation, win-win means that it is possible for everyone to feel
satisfied with the outcome. The alternative is called the zero sum
game, in which someone has to lose for someone else to win. It may be
impossible to achieve win-win every single time, but it can always be
our goal. The key to win-win is listening carefully to each child's
position and feelings. Often, underneath the irreconcilable differences,
there is room for an elegant solution that makes everybody happy. At
the very least, each child feels as if someone has listened to her and
taken her feelings into account. Everyone gets her say, but not
necessarily her way. When we jump in with solutions and
compromises, we may actually interfere with win-win outcomes. For
example, say that we jump into a sibling conflict by saying, “Stop
arguing and take turns. Ten minutes each. Jody, you're first.” They
refuse that solution, or reluctantly agree and keep arguing anyway.
Now consider if we said, “Okay girls, what's going on? What do you
want, and what do you want?” Nan says she wants to have it first,
because she thought of it, but she doesn't care if she has a long turn or
a short turn. Jody says she wants a long turn, because she loves that
toy, and she's afraid if Nan has it first she'll never have a chance.
Simple: Nan gets a short turn first, then Jody gets a long turn.
Everybody's happy, instead of nobody's happy.
Siblings need attention, time, and thought put into their relationship
with each other. Relationships can have an empty cup, just like

 individuals. In a perfect world, all siblings would naturally have
loving, cooperative, affectionate relationships. In the real world, for
any relationship to work, it must be nurtured. Set aside time for the
sibling relationship: “The next hour is going to be brother-sister time.
We can do whatever you want.” If they want to spend the hour arguing
about what to do, that's fine. Don't jump in and solve it for them. If
things have been especially hard, you may want to call attention to the
need for reconnection: “I've noticed that you guys have been
struggling with each other a lot, and I want to give you a hand with
your relationship. It's important for me that you have a close
connection.”
After you have introduced the concept, sit back and follow their
lead. Maybe they'll take that as an invitation to complain about each
other. If so, you can help them put their feelings into words and listen
to each other respectfully. Maybe they'll start roughhousing, using your
extra attention as a resource for playing out their struggle symbolically.
Maybe they'll have some great suggestions that you never considered.
Maybe they'll roll their eyes. That's okay, too.
Be playful. Imagine if you took all the time you now spend fussing
at siblings to stop fighting, and you spent it playing with them. What
would happen? I bet they'd fight less, enjoy each other more, and you'd
have fun, too. A great game for siblings is to grab the thing they are
fighting over and run. A three-way pillow fight is good, too.
In an earlier chapter, I described the technique of providing a playby-play commentary on the action in children's play. This idea works
especially well with siblings. It combines several of the resources
outlined above, but mainly it's fun. Imagine you're at a tennis match,
moving your head back and forth, and you are narrating the scene:
(Stepping into the scene of a big blowup between two siblings)
“What's going on?”
“He took my red crayon!”
“That's shocking!” (Head turn) “He says you took his red crayon.”
“I needed it, and he wasn't using it.”
(Head turn) “He says you weren't using it, and he needed it.”
“I was about to use it, and it's mine.”
(Head turn) “He says he was about to use it, and it's his.”

 In no time at all, they are laughing happily instead of fighting
bitterly. Our tone of voice—relaxed and a little bit like the happy
village idiot—helps shift things from conflict to giggles.
Give up the search for perfect equality. Give each child what they
need, rather than attempting to be equal. The demand for perfect
equality is a setup for disappointment. Debbie just got new boots, so
now Cathie wants a pair. She is on the verge of hysteria about it, in
fact, but her boots are perfectly fine for another year. The confusing
thing is that Cathie cer tainly needs something, and she's insisting that
what she needs is a new pair of boots. What she really needs is to have
her cup of love refilled. Seeing her sister so happy with her new boots,
she figures that would be a good way to fill her cup. We know that
won't really do the trick, but she doesn't. One option is to hold Cathie
while she cries about the unfairness of it all, reminding her that our
love goes deeper than a pair of boots. The other option is to find a way
to effectively meet the real need for “enough” love and affection.
A second-grade teacher asked me for help with a set of twin boys in
her class. She said that the parents tried desperately to make
everything absolutely even, but their tantrums about fairness got worse
and worse. I suggested that they forget about perfect equality, because
it would never be equal enough. Focus instead on the feelings of not
being loved enough. The teacher passed this on to the parents, who
gave it a try. The next time the mother came back from a business trip,
instead of bringing each of the kids the exact same treat as usual, she
got one strawberry-flavored and one raspberry-flavored candy. She
gave the raspberry one to Harvey, who had always been the twin most
preoccupied with fairness. He had a big fit, saying, “It's not fair, it's not
fair.” She didn't try to make things even, as she would have done in the
past, such as by giving them each half a raspberry and half a
strawberry. That would have just made Joel, the other twin, scream
about not getting what he wanted. Instead, the mother just held
Harvey. She was empathic with him, saying gently, “I know, it's not
fair.” They repeated that exchange about four hundred times. At the
end, Harvey looked up at his mother and said, “I like raspberry better,”
and hugged her. After that, things really turned around at home and at
school.

 OceanofPDF.com

 —THE HIDDEN POWER OF YOUNGER SIBLINGS,
AND OTHER MYSTERIES OF FAMILY DYNAMICS—

Because of our own histories, some of us are keen on protecting smaller
and weaker children, even if it stifles the freedom of the play. Others are
committed to protecting children's play from too much adult intervention,
even if feelings might get hurt or bodies get bruised. I used to always side
with younger children whenever I saw a conflict (guess who was the
youngest child in my family!). But I am beginning to realize that it is more
complicated than that. Families don't usually have simple villains or
victims. Now, when I see an older sibling hit or yell at a younger one, I ask
the “victim,” “How do you get back at him for that?” Most of the time they
just give me a little sweet smile with a twinkle in it, but sometimes they
come right out and tell me: “I get him in trouble…. I sneak into her room
and read her diary…. I mess up her stuff…. I practice how to annoy him.”
My friends Louisa and Ross have a repeated scenario with their son
Tommy, who is almost nine. Whenever the father and son play, Tommy
ends up crying, sulking, and angry, yelling at his father about something he
did wrong. Louisa then rushes over and yells at her husband, telling him
that he's gone too far, that he doesn't know when to quit, that he's just a big
kid himself. She accepts Tommy's presentation of the “facts,” because he is
the one crying and upset—and the youngest one of the two of them. Ross
gets defensive, saying things like, “He was laughing about it before; I don't
see what the big deal is.” When Louisa tells the story, her husband is the
one with the problem; Tommy is the helpless victim; and she is the helpless
bystander caught in the crossfire. When Ross tells the story, Tommy is a
bratty kid who always has to get his way; Louisa just makes things worse;
and he is the innocent bystander.
As soon as they frame the problem this way, they are already stuck.
Things are very unlikely to change. I proposed an alternative explanation to
Ross and Louisa. I reminded them about what often happens between

 Tommy and his little sister Lucy. They will be playing together happily,
Tommy will be too rough with her, and Lucy will scream and cry and get
him in trouble. Mom runs over and yells at Tommy. Sound familiar? I think
that Tommy is just playing a role-reversal game, playing out the scene
between him and his sister all over again with him and his father. Except
this time, someone else gets in trouble, while he gets to be the injured party.
Mom yells at Dad instead of at him.
In fact, getting the older one in trouble is one of the tried-and-true power
strategies of younger siblings. They have other strategies, too, and now that
I see these I am not so quick to protect those helpless little innocent victims.
I was playing Scrabble with Greg. His sister Barbara was sitting in the room
reading. Generally, Greg is the bossy older brother, while Barbara is the
sweet little sister. Barbara was fiddling with a cord, and whenever it
touched him, Greg yelled at her. She didn't respond, but she didn't stop
annoying him either. I asked Barbara what she does to get back at him when
he yells. They both answered me at the same time: “Nothing!” A minute
later Greg put down “peenut” on the board game and asked me if that's how
to spell peanut. Barbara chimed in, in a superior tone of voice, “I really
thought you'd know that, Greg. I knew that.” “Aha,” I said. “So that's how
you get back at him, with little zingers like that.” Barbara laughed. Greg
just looked puzzled and shrugged his shoulders.
OceanofPDF.com

 —PLAYFUL PARENTING WITH SIBLINGS—

The following story is based on what a mother in one of my parenting
classes told me. (Note: I have collapsed several playtimes [and fighting
times] into one story, in order to illustrate the basic principles of Playful
Parenting with siblings.) Dave and Alice have been at each other's throats
all afternoon. In fact, they've been at each other's throats for years; now, at
ages seven and eight, it is worse than ever. Mom can hear an aggravating
little voice in her head, the voice of her mother saying, “I told you not to
have two so close together.” She's about ready to scream. These children
need refills (so does their mom). They also need play that repairs their
sibling connection and play that helps them work through their feelings of
wanting to rip each other apart. They need help finding the road back to
exuberance and fun. Mom starts with offering refills for those empty cups:
She gives them each a hug, offers each of them five minutes of “Mommy
time” (undivided one-on-one attention), and suggests they break for a
snack.
Taking a breather, Mom now thinks to herself: “How do I make sense out
of what they are doing? It might be that they are not fighting only to drive
me crazy. Maybe they have some needs they are trying to get met; maybe
they are telling me they need more individual attention; maybe they are
scared that I love the other one more; maybe the little one is frustrated that
he can't do what the older one can, or the older one is afraid the younger
one is catching up and she won't be special anymore.” She tries to translate
their behavior into the language of connection: “Dave and Alice want to be
close—let's at least assume it even if it doesn't look like it—and there's only
one small problem: Alice will play well with Dave if everything goes
exactly her way. Dave will play well with Alice as long as no one tries to
tell him what to do. No wonder they have trouble. When their cups are
running low, Dave hits and Alice screams. That empties their cups more,
and lowers mine, too.”

 In the parenting class, whenever we talked about Playful Parenting, this
mother always said she didn't have time to get down on the floor and play.
As she told us these stories about her children's sibling conflicts, and her
ideas about them, we convinced her to try. I always suggest to parents that
they add up all the time they spend punishing and fussing and being
aggravated, and use that time to play. The class also reminded her that her
children's strong negative feelings toward each other were pretty normal,
and that underneath the anger and frustration they probably liked each other
a lot. This was very supportive advice and seemed to help the mother.
Afterward we all laughed, because we had just been talking about books on
sibling rivalry, and we agreed that the main message of these books is:
Sibling rivalry is completely normal; here's how to stop it.
Now comes the fun part. Using all that information and her new
perspective, Mom decided to get down on the floor and play for a little
while. But she wanted to make the most of it. She had tuned in to the
themes of their fighting, which matched the themes she had seen in the two
of them for years. Some of these themes were the following: each one
feeling that the other sibling gets more; the older one feeling that the
younger one is an intrusion; and the younger one feeling that the older one
is bossy. The mom didn't have a definite plan when she dove into the play,
but she was willing to try anything. In fact, diving in without a plan is an
excellent Playful Parenting strategy.
She decided to go for maximum impact by starting with very close
contact, so she grabbed both of them in the middle of their fighting over a
toy and tumbled all three of them onto the couch in a torrent of shouts and
giggles. She started hamming it up about getting a sword and dividing
herself in half so they each could get half. Then she imitated the two of
them fighting over her, “You got the liver, all I got was the spleen; that's not
fair! I had her first!” Perhaps she had guessed wrong about the deep
meaning of their squabbling, but at least she got their attention. Her usual
technique of yelling at them to stop fighting never got their attention. She
watched them closely to make sure they were laughing at this imitation of
them and were not insulted. They were laughing, so she stuck with this
theme for a few minutes, all the while enjoying cuddling with them both.
She then let them have a tug-of-war over her. She shouted at them, “You
love Sparky [the dog] more than you love me. Boo-hoo-hoo” (reversing the

 roles—making herself the one who is unloved). That didn't work so well, so
she grabbed the toy they had been fighting over and said, “Aha! I have it
now. Finally I get to play with this!” Then she ran out of the room. Dave
and Alice chased her, a team now, united against a common enemy.
By this time, the children had recovered from their shock at seeing their
mom act this way, and they were contributing ideas to the game, which
made her job much easier. “Let's pretend we ran away from home, and
you're the mom.” So she pleaded with them, “Please don't run away; I'll let
you fight with each other as much as you want. I'll even let you beat each
other up. I won't complain, oh my little darlings….” She chased after them
as they ran away squealing.
After an hour or so of great fun, Mom said she had to go make dinner,
and things immediately fell apart. Alice screamed, “You never play with
us!” Dave told his sister to shut up and shoved her. She shrieked. Mom
made a humorous scream of her own. “Aah! Now I have to jump into the
fish tank and sing.” Everyone laughed, and this time they let her leave
without a fuss, and they went off to play happily together, for the first time
in weeks.
During the play, whenever she felt she was wasting her time or was too
tired for this nonsense, Mom reminded herself that she was doing the
tremendously important work of building her relationship with each child
and their closeness with each other. Later that evening, after the children
were in bed, she called her brother and ranted awhile about how obnoxious
they were being, then laughed long and hard over how embarrassed she
would have been if anyone had seen her on the floor acting so goofy.
Finally she cried a little about how much she loves them, and how scared
she is that they won't be close to each other when they grow up. Her brother
appreciated her for being so honest about her struggles, and he admitted that
he had been having trouble with one of his children. She offered to listen,
even though she was worn out, as a way of repaying her brother for
listening to her. His problem was that his wife tells him that he favors their
older son, but he doesn't think so. He thinks the younger one is just more
difficult to handle. They talked awhile longer, and after listening to each
other, these grown-up siblings were able to remember some funny stories
from their own sibling rivalries. They hung up feeling relieved and
recharged.

 OceanofPDF.com

 CHAPTER 15

OceanofPDF.com

 RECHARGE YOUR
OWN BATTERIES
Nothing makes us as lonely as our secrets.
—PAUL TOURNIER

A friend called me the other day and asked for some advice about her
children. I made some suggestions, and she said, mildly offended, “That's
what you told me to do the last time I talked to you!”
“Well, did you try it?”
“No, I didn't, but—”
“Wait a minute,” I interrupted her. “I'm not going to use up my limited
brainpower trying to think of some new idea if you haven't bothered to try
my last one!”
We laughed, and she promised to try it, but I wasn't so sure she would.
Though most parents are eager for good advice, I've noticed that many of
us have a hard time putting into practice what we learn, or even what we
already know. In other words, I understand that many parents, even if they
love the idea of Playful Parenting, will still find it difficult. I wish it were
enough to simply say, “Try it!” But there seems to be a missing ingredient.
We need something above and beyond more information about children and
parenting. I hope this chapter will supply that missing ingredient.
OceanofPDF.com

 —HAVING OUR OWN TURN—

Before we can really use any parenting advice, I think we need to
recharge ourselves, refill our own empty cups, listen to each other, and
come out of our own towers of isolation and powerlessness. In other words,
take those same ideas I have been returning to again and again in the
description of Playful Parenting, and apply them to ourselves.
The first step to recharging our own batteries is to acknowledge the
emotions we feel when we start to play—feelings like boredom, frustration,
resentment, anger, annoyance, anxiety, fatigue, distraction, and a sense of
being overwhelmed. Here are what parents have told me about playing with
their children: They already get way more attention than I ever got as a
child…. I keep slipping back into the old routines, the old power
struggles…. No one ever played like that with me…. I'm too exhausted
after working and taking care of the children to play…. I try to play, but I
get really sleepy…. This game is so boring…. How can I play with all the
work piling up on my desk…. I get so angry when he starts acting like a
brat.
Not surprisingly, these feelings make us want to give up, or lash out, or
take a nap, anything instead of continuing to play. When we are swamped
by our own feelings, it's hard to have fun and hard to pay close attention to
children and see what they need. Playing with children challenges our adult
tendency to keep our feelings well buried. Like our children, in order to
play we have to release those unshed tears, relax those tense muscles, and
unload our fears and worries. It's our turn. It's time for us to take a turn
being listened to—a turn having our own cup filled—so that we can offer
refills to our children and play with them the way they want to play.
OceanofPDF.com

 —GETTING OUR OWN CUPS FILLED—

I have described Playful Parenting as a way of filling children's needs
for attachment, affection, love, security, confidence, and closeness. When
their cup is emptied, we provide the refills. But who gives us the refills that
we need? When parenting is a joy, our cup is refilled just by spending time
together with our children. But parenting is also hard work. The time we
spend with our children (or even thinking about them) can leave our cup
empty.
The basic method of getting our own cup filled is pretty simple: Find
someone who will listen to you. It might be a spouse, another parent, a
friend, or a therapist. Choose someone who will listen respectfully and
interestedly, but who won't tell you what to do. Someone who will keep
listening even if you start to cry or laugh or shake with fear and rage. We
may need to train our listeners to listen without interrupting, and to listen
without telling us what we should do and how we should feel. If it isn't a
paid listener, we also need to take a turn listening to them.
Most of us have not been listened to enough. Right when we want
someone to listen to us, they have the nerve to want us to listen to them!
Therapists, meanwhile, charge a lot of money to listen. The result is that
many people think listening time is a scarce commodity. But here's a little
secret: There is plenty of good listening available if people take turns. A
turn might be five minutes each on the phone, or a couple of hours of deep
heart-to-heart talking. Talking (and all the emotions we release when we
honestly share our thoughts and feelings) is the adult equivalent of play. It's
how we show what's really going on inside of us, and how we get back to
ourselves.
We can especially use someone to listen to us after we make an extra
effort to be a Playful Parent. We have exposed our vulnerabilities by trying
hard to connect, by encouraging children's confidence in the face of their
frustration, or by wrestling to the limits of our endurance. Now it's our turn,
and we need to tell someone about it. We also need to reveal those painful

 secrets about being a parent, the ones we keep even from our closest
friends. Most parents are shocked to learn that they are not the only ones
who ever have fantasies of clobbering a kid who was driving them crazy, or
who get painfully bored during playtimes, or who resent how much
attention they give out every day (while getting very little back).
The quote at the beginning of this chapter captures the importance of
sharing these secrets. By telling someone else, especially someone who is
sympathetic and understanding, we relieve the burden. I think part of why
parents seem so tired all the time is that we carry around a hidden pile of
worries, embarrassments, secret feelings of being a bad parent,
helplessness, and other painful emotions. Sometimes we even keep our
deepest joys secret, for fear that other adults will make fun of us for caring
so deeply about our children, for being so heartbreakingly in love with
them.
Many parents, especially mothers, talk to each other informally. You
may, however, have a desire for a deeper kind of listening and talking than
you can get from acquaintances, or even from friends and family. I won't
give a whole course on listening here, but I will touch on the key points.1
Good listening means taking turns, respecting confidentiality, and allowing
the other person to say anything at all without fear of being judged or
rejected. Don't interrupt, and don't say, “Me, too,” then launch into your
own story.
When people talk honestly and openly, they often cry or get scared or
have a grown-up version of a temper tantrum. The good listener will just let
those emotions flow, without trying to get the person to shove them back
inside. So don't say, “Cheer up, have a drink, forget about it; there's nothing
to be upset about.” After being listened to well, people feel lighter, more
confident, more enthusiastic. Remember also that listening to others helps
us just as much as when someone is listening to us.
Even two parents who are both running on empty can refill their own
cups by taking turns listening to each other. Maybe at first one listener will
interrupt every five seconds, or will tune out and think about the grocery
list. But every little bit helps, and after a few minutes of this second-rate
listening, we are usually able to listen to each other better. So get together

 with another parent or a group of parents and talk. Here is a list of questions
to get you started:
What do you remember from when you were the ages your
children are now?
Do those memories help you understand where things get hard now
as a parent?
What are your hopes and dreams for your children? Are these
realistic? Have you left room for your child to figure out his or her
own hopes and dreams?
We all know from TV and magazines what parenting is supposed
to be like, but what is parenting really like for you?
What is great about being a parent? What is great about you as a
parent? What are some of your shining moments as a parent?
What's hard about being a parent? What are you too embarrassed
about or ashamed of ever to tell anyone?
The answers to these questions, especially the ones that are hard to think
about and hard to share with anyone, are very important. Keeping these
things buried inside of us just makes it more likely that we will make the
same mistakes over and over again. For example, many parents have never
admitted that they sometimes feel like hitting their children, or wish they
could walk out the door and never come back, or that they like one of their
children better than another, or that they have an embarrassing wish inside
to be taken care of themselves instead of having to care for children. Our
lives and our parenting will go much better—and more playfully—if we can
admit these secrets to someone who will listen with compassion instead of
horror.
We may even find that we aren't the only ones who feel that way. For
example, if you feel as if you're the only one of your friends who ever loses
it with your children, it's probably just that you haven't shared these painful
moments with one another. My friend Helen wanted me to teach a class on
alternatives to blowing up at your kids. She was sure that none of her
“perfect parent” friends would be interested, but once she got over her fear
of asking them about it, she filled a whole class in no time. The typical

 response was, “Are you kidding? I thought you were the one who always
had it all together!”
If you have a caring and thoughtful listener, you might be surprised by
how moving and emotional it can be to answer these questions. Even asking
them of yourself and answering them silently—with some compassion and
understanding for your own struggles—can be a powerful experience. I
think you'll notice that afterward you approach playing and parenting with
more energy and enthusiasm. Some people feel more comfortable talking to
a professional therapist than to a friend about these things. That helps with
the sharing part, but if you tend to be very critical of yourself as a parent, it
will help for you to hear how other people struggle as well.
OceanofPDF.com

 —HELPING OUT OTHER PARENTS—

I mentioned parents being highly critical of themselves, but we can also
be critical of other people's parenting. Let's look at some common scenes.
We are standing in line at the bank or the coffee shop and a young child
is behind us. Things fall apart. The child has a huge temper tantrum about
“nothing.” The child is fidgeting a little, and the parent yells and threatens.
The child pinches the baby brother in the stroller, and the parent whacks the
kid, who starts screaming. The child kicks you in the shin, and the parent
then smiles sweetly. What do you do? If you are like me, your first impulse
is to turn away and shake your head at what bad parents some people are.
Perhaps you will glare at the parent, teaching them a lesson by your
disapproval. Perhaps you've been glared at yourself—I know I have.
Here's a radical alternative: Offer help to the parent. Reach out. Think
about what a hard day they must have had, or what a hard life. Think about
the times you have been in the same boat, even if maybe you handled things
better. What kind of friendly hand would you have wanted then, instead of a
dirty look or a public scolding or a cold shoulder? Forget about your
disapproval and lend a hand to a fellow parent in distress. If you're like me,
you probably have fantasies of rescuing the child from these awful parents,
or at least taking the child and giving them some proper discipline. Those
fantasies don't help children much, I'm afraid. What really helps children is
making a connection with the struggling parent.
My friend A.J. was at a beach, and he saw a father trying to force his
four-year-old son to go into the water. The boy didn't want to, and the father
was getting more and more angry. A.J. was sure that something bad was
going to happen, either a beating for the kid or a burst blood vessel for the
dad. He said, very calmly, “I don't think he wants to go in.” The man turned
to him angrily and said, “What did you say?” A.J. said, “I might be wrong,
but I don't think he wants to go in. My name is A.J.,” he added, and put out
his hand. The father shook A.J.'s hand and said, “You know, I think you're

 right,” and looked at his son, as if for the first time. He started to laugh.
They became great friends.
After I heard A.J.'s story, I started acting differently at the store. Now,
when I see parents and children having an awful time of it, I don't turn away
in disgust. I go over and say, “Wow, looks like you've had a long day.” Or,
“You've got your hands full with those kids; let me help you carry your bags
out.” “Wow, he's really going at it.” Sometimes I just go stand nearby, with
a warm smile, to counteract everyone turning the other way or giving dirty
looks. Usually, if we are just the tiniest bit kind and understanding, things
go much better. The child may even stop her tantrum long enough to notice
who this odd person is, and that helps the situation, too. While I am making
a connection with the parent, I usually give the child a wink or a smile, to
let him know that I know he's had a rough day, too.
Does this approach sound familiar? It should. It is exactly the same as
Playful Parenting, except this time we offer our attention and respect and
help to parents and families, not just to children. Look for what's needed
and provide it. No one needs more criticism or disapproval, even if they
may need to get a better grip on parenting or discipline. Stay engaged with
people, instead of turning away, even if you don't approve of what they are
doing. Things will immediately go smoother. That's not what most of us—
me included—want to do when we see “bad parents” or “bad kids.” We
want to punish them, or leave them alone in their miserable isolation. But,
of course, that doesn't help anyone.
I have a friend who is more forceful, but still respectful, in her approach
to parents when she sees them hitting their children or yelling at them. She
saw a father screaming at a little girl for dripping ice cream from her cone
onto her dress. She stepped over and said, very calmly, “You can't talk to
her that way.” “Why the hell not?” “Because you're scaring her. Look at
her.” He looked, and maybe even saw the way his daughter was trembling
in fear from his yelling. So he asked the woman who she was. “Just a
person who likes kids. I like yours.” This is tricky business, of course. We
don't want the parent to go home and beat the child worse for embarrassing
him in public. And we don't want another parent to turn an aggressive
impulse toward us. But if we feel strongly about how children are treated,
we need to take a stand.

 I had a friend whose son was blind. When the boy was little, around two
or three, shopping with him was a nightmare. He would reach out, knock
things off the shelves, and laugh. He would whine for candy in the checkout
line like any other child. The worst part was when my friend tried to
discipline him. No matter how gentle he was, people gave him dirty looks
for being mean to that poor blind child. Not one person ever came up to him
and said, “That looks awfully challenging, would you like a hand?” Sure,
we are all busy, but I don't think that's why we avoid helping other parents.
I think we have an unspoken agreement: I won't mess with your isolation,
and you don't mess with mine. Stepping out of our tower of isolation and
helping other people out of theirs is just too messy.
It's no surprise that we end up short on support from other adults. To
make up for it, we may make the mistake of expecting our children to
provide it for us. I think that's why we end up more and more frustrated
when we try to scold or lecture them. Since they aren't the best listeners,
particularly when we are telling them what we can't stand about their
behavior, they tune out. Then we get furious, which often escalates into our
dishing out more severe punishments. Try taking a break to talk things over
with another parent first, then go back to your child. You'll feel better, and
the interaction will definitely go better. We may wish our children would
hang on our every word, but, in fact, we get better listening from other
adults.
For example, I will never forget an exchange I had with my daughter
when she was just beginning to talk. As with most children in that situation,
she was easily frustrated by not being able to say everything that she could
think. I can't remember what we were fighting about, but I was getting as
close as I ever came to losing it completely. I kept trying to leave the room,
to give myself a time-out, and she kept screaming at me not to leave. If I
stayed, she screamed at me anyway. Finally I told her I was going to call
my friend Tina, and she could scream all she wanted. Tina and I would
often call each other when parenting got tough. Emma stopped screaming,
took me by the hand, walked me over to the phone, and said, “Go call
Tina.” She knew what we needed: for me to have someone listen to me vent
for a few minutes. When I came back from the phone call, which by the
way I spent laughing about Emma's comment instead of complaining about
her obnoxious behavior, we reconnected and went back to fun playing.

 The biggest resistance parents have to this crucial part of Playful
Parenting is lack of time. “I already don't have enough time in the day, and
now you're saying I should play more, and then when I'm done playing, I
should meet with other parents and talk about it?” Yes! It turns out that
getting support actually adds time to your life. It's like an Amish barnraising: you can do things a lot more efficiently and effectively as a
community instead of having each family build its own barn. If I had not
left Emma's room to call Tina, I might still be in there fighting with her.
Taking five minutes out to call a friend actually gave us more time.
Bringing more playfulness into your life adds time as well. If things are
chaotic in your home in the mornings, the last thing you want to do is
devote ten minutes to a fun game about getting dressed and ready. But, if
you do, you will save much more than ten minutes in aggravation time,
nagging time, and being constantly late. When I first became a teacher, an
older professor gave me some invaluable advice: “When you want to get a
student out of your office, don't try to rush them out,” he said. “They'll just
resist, and you'll be pushing them for an hour. Act as if you have all the
time in the world, warmly welcome them, and they'll be gone in five
minutes.”
It often feels as though playing will not only eat up our precious time, but
will deplete our cups, which are already running mighty low. Actually, fun
play refills cups, ours as well as our children's. The play itself is
rejuvenating, but the real refill comes from the connection that grows out of
the play. We may have to push ourselves at first, especially to play whatever
children want to play, but the payoff is worth it.
OceanofPDF.com

 —WHEN ADULTS ARE LOCKED IN THE
TOWERS OF ISOLATION AND POWERLESSNESS—

Have you ever noticed the kind of language parents use to describe
children when things are not going smoothly? The child is “having a
meltdown,” “bouncing off the walls,” “falling apart,” or “out of control.”
Meanwhile, we describe ourselves as being “at the end of our rope.” We are
about to blow up, explode, or lose it. We give up, surrender, or wash our
hands of the whole mess. I have tried in the earlier chapters of this book to
offer a different approach that can help us keep our sense of humor and be
more effective parents. One important element of this new approach is the
metaphor of the towers of isolation and powerlessness. In the words of this
language, when children are having a hard time, or giving us a hard time,
they are locked in those towers, and our role is to help them out.
Too bad we spend so much time in towers of our own—that makes it
hard to encourage children to come out of theirs. We are exhausted and
irritable after our workdays, so we set up an electrified fence around our
tower, making it hard for children to be close to us. I know that I feel
terrible when I look back at how many times I have said, “I'm too tired to
play; my back hurts; not now, leave me alone; stop bugging me; keep it
quiet, I have a headache.” We turn our backs on our children out of fatigue
or because we don't know how to help them. We fuss at them for being kids,
for being curious, for being full of energy when we're not, for needing love
and attention.
Fortunately, while disconnections are inevitable, reconnections are
possible. Unfortunately, I have seen parents and children miss chance after
chance to reconnect. I think we each want the other one to take the initiative
to apologize and ask for forgiveness. But if we wait for them, it might never
happen. I think it's up to us, the adults, the parents, to take the initiative.
Make eye contact. Cuddle. Always make up after a fight. Offer forgiveness
without being asked. Apologize when you've been wrong. When things are

 rough between you, spend more time together instead of less. As a way to
resolve a conflict, offer a hug instead of the usual punishment. Tell
everyone in the family something you appreciate about him or her.
Often children will try to take the initiative to reconnect, and adults will
completely misunderstand. Your daughter won't go to bed, for example, but
perhaps she isn't just trying to make your life difficult. Maybe there is
unfinished emotional business between you, and she wants some late-night
time to work it out. Or your son keeps bugging you while you're making
lunch. You're already annoyed, so you send him away. But these children
are just doing their best to find a way back to connection, because
disconnection is painful for them. In other words, they are trying to step out
of their tower of isolation, but we are too locked away in ours to notice.
Through the foggy windows of our tower, we don't see their attempt to
reconnect, just their obnoxious behavior.
Forget about what you see on the surface; underneath is a basic human
drive to connect.
Children turn away from connection when they are feeling bad about
themselves, and we do the same thing. Or instead of turning away, we may
be too clingy and grabby with our children, wanting them to love us enough
to make up for other people—like spouses and bosses—who have been
mean to us. We also turn away from our children when they express
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors we don't like. We punish or ignore them
when they enthusiastically explore their dolls' private parts, or make
everything long and skinny into a toy gun, or spend all day in front of the
computer screen, or spend hours primping and dressing their Barbies or
themselves. They need us at these times as much as when they are doing
things we think are fun and healthy. Maybe more.
Sometimes adult difficulty with closeness is less complicated. We're just
plain bored and tired. Legos don't hold our interest very long. We'd like to
play something new instead of the same game again and again and again
and again. We want to talk with other adults for a change, or take a rest
from our stressed-out lives. We don't want to retreat permanently to the
tower of isolation, but we would like a break from all this child-oriented
play. By all means, get your own cup refilled. You can't refuel children if
your own cup is empty. But our job as parents requires us to push those
feelings aside sometimes and play anyway. With enthusiasm, if we can

 muster it. At best, play is just as much fun for us as for our children. But
when it isn't, when our batteries are dead, we just have to kick-start our
engines and get back in the race. We do it at work all the time, so why not
do it for our children?
Speaking of work, the transition from work to home, or from housework
to play, requires a major shifting of gears. I call this the reentry problem. It
is easy for adults and children to get off on the wrong foot, since everyone
is full of leftover feelings from their time apart. Everyone also has different
expectations about the reunion. The parent may be looking forward to some
peace and quiet, while the children have been waiting patiently all day for
some wild wrestling. Playing is hard enough for most adults at any time. If
we have to shake off our work mode and instantly jump into play mode, it
can seem impossible.
The way children handle reunions does not make reentry any easier.
Though many children greet their parent joyfully after a separation, that
isn't always the case. Alicia Lieberman describes this very well: “Some
children may burst into tears on first seeing the parent as a way of relieving
built-up tension. Others may ‘pick a fight' by becoming provocative or
defiant. Ambivalence may be expressed by simultaneously clambering up
on the parent and pushing away from her or giving little kicks against
her…. Some toddlers continue to play as if nothing had happened, totally
ignoring the parent's greeting…. Feeling unneeded and unappreciated, the
parent may withdraw emotionally in return.”2 It's no wonder parents,
especially fathers, feel superfluous and expendable, and often end up
spending more and more time away from the family. Other parents try to
use alcohol, TV, or working even more at home as a way to blunt the pain
of reentry. But that's not at all what children want or need. They expect us
to put down our work worries at the door and make an effort to connect
with them, even if they start out ignoring or even avoiding us. Hold them if
they cry; set a firm but loving limit if you need to; go after them playfully if
they hide or pretend you haven't come home. Transform reentry tension into
warm family connection.
When we combine children's feelings about being apart from us with our
own difficulties reentering the family scene after a stressful day, you can
easily see why nerves are often frayed. Play may be the last thing on our

 mind, but, in fact, playtime—especially wrestling and pillow fights and
clowning around—is the best way to manage reentry. Wrestling around on
the floor with an eight-year-old, or cuddling up and sharing secret feelings
with a twelve-year-old, however, can just seem too raw, too intimate, for us.
We are particularly closed off after a long day in the office, where we're
trained to keep our guard up. It's no wonder that many parents' idea of
Playful Parenting is to buy more toys for their children.
One last reason we turn away from children's play is that the intense
emotions they display make us so uncomfortable. But in order for children
to develop emotionally, they need to be able to express themselves fully. So
we have to actively encourage these emotional expressions, not just allow
them. That's hard for most of us, because we avoid strong feelings like the
plague, especially men.
A college student named Mel came to see me for difficulties he was
having in relation to a horrible history of childhood sexual abuse. Like most
men, he hardly ever cried, and, in fact, he described feeling numb and
empty inside whenever I asked him about feelings. Then one day, he came
into my office brimming with excitement. “I had the greatest week,” he
said. “The greatest thing happened!” “What?” “I stayed up all night shaking
and crying and sweating and thinking I was going to die.” “And that was
great?” “Yes, don't you see? I finally feel something. I'm a real human
being, with feelings! I kept those feelings away so long. Sure, they were
scary and terrible, but not nearly as awful as I've always been afraid they'd
be.” That was the beginning of a remarkable recovery for Mel, and I have
told his story to many men in therapy to reassure them about the “danger”
that talking will stir up overwhelming feelings. I also like to tell this story to
parents who are in such a frenzy to get babies and young children to stop
crying.
OceanofPDF.com

 —BECOMING A GREAT PLAYMATE—

As parents, we can't just be our child's playmate and friend. We also
have to think about safety, about limits and guidance, and about getting
dinner on the table. But still, we do need to play, and we can become better
and better at it. That means learning how to have more fun and learning
how to use play to assist in our children's healthy development. It's pretty
easy to learn, but it does take some effort. First, and often the hardest part,
is choosing to play instead of avoiding it. We also need to choose play that
goes beyond our comfortable routines.
For many parents, the obvious place to start is to spend more time
together with your children, especially time spent with the TV off. Expect
rejection of your company initially. They may not be used to your wanting
to play; and they may not trust that you are really interested in playing the
way they want to. Don't plan major outings; just hang out together. Think
about having a playful moment at least once a day. If you aren't sure where
to start, keep it simple. Make funny faces and fall down a lot. Be silly. Do a
play-by-play commentary. Thumb-wrestle. Shout, “And now we dance!”
and get up and do a little dance. This helps recharge us, as well as helping
their play get going. If you already spend all day every day with your
children, then take a break to recharge yourself. Get more child care, go out
regularly, and spend time with other adults so that you don't burn out. Even
five minutes on the phone each morning with another stay-at-home parent
can be a great recharg9er.
When we make an effort to be more playful, we may run into a spot
where children want to do something we find horribly boring. When that
happens, we usually quit playing, or space out, or take over the game. That
just widens the gulf between us and our children. We think their favorite
game is boring; they think we are fuddy-duddies who don't know how to
play. We need to do two things. First, find a way to insert a little more
connection into the play. Boredom is a sure sign that you and your child are
not really connected. Have a hug, or shake hands, or wrestle, or tell each

 child what you love about him or her. Then go back to playing. I bet you'll
be less bored. Second, even if you are bored, play anyway. We make
children go to school even though they are often bored there. The least we
can do is go along with some games that we find less than thrilling. One
day, tired of hearing from children that they were “so bored,” I made up a
game called the yawn-a-thon. Everybody pretends to yawn, and because
yawns are so suggestible, soon everyone is really yawning. This brings
giggles, plus the yawns themselves relieve tension and boredom. Soon
everybody is ready to play again.
Some parents don't feel boredom or fatigue when they play, but anger and
irritability. Take a break from the play to cool off, and then take the time to
reconnect before getting back to play. In fantasy play, be a character who
gets to be angry or nasty. That's a good way to release some of that
irritability without aiming it at your child. Still, make sure to sit down later
and talk with another adult about those feelings. Usually the playing was
just the last straw for an old pile of buried emotions.
I have seen many parents end playtimes abruptly because the child
introduces a theme that makes the adult uncomfortable. But they introduce
those themes because they need to play them out if they are going to be able
to understand their emotions and the world. That's especially true for
fantasy play, which often features those emotions that are so unsettling to
us: love, sex, death, loss, rescue, danger, hate. If we break off play in order
to protect our own comfort level, we give children the message that their
feelings are unacceptable, their play ideas are terrible, and they might as
well stay locked in their towers of isolation and powerlessness. They need
us to keep playing, even if we don't really like chopping the heads off of
action figures, or kicking the doll down the cellar stairs, or arranging yet
another wedding between the Little Mermaid and the Prince.
As adults we are expected to keep our fantasy life private. We rarely
share these daydreams with even our most intimate friends or lovers.
Children, on the other hand, can be very open about their fantasies. They
aren't embarrassed to introduce characters into their fantasy play who kill or
lie or steal or die agonizing deaths. So a five-year-old's suggestion to a
parent that “I'll be Cinderella and you be the wicked stepmother—and
pretend to be really mean to me” can send an adult into a panic of confused

 emotions. Go ahead, though; be mean, or scared, or play whatever role your
child assigns you, and have fun with it.
One of the basic rules for becoming a great player is to be physically
close. I know this makes many people nervous. Before I started working
with children and parents, I spent most of my time as a therapist for adults
who had been sexually abused as children. That work has made me very
cautious about recommending close physical contact between parents and
children. On the one hand, children need this contact. In fact, infants die
without it, and older children develop severe emotional problems without it.
But it has to be safe, respectful contact that does not exploit or abuse the
child. We have not done nearly enough to protect children from physical
and sexual abuse. In fact, some adults don't know how to have physical
contact that isn't either aggressive or sexual. But in our fear, we have
deprived children of the human warmth that they need.
Over and over I hear from caring teachers that they are afraid to pat a
child on the back or give a friendly squeeze to a shoulder. Indeed, this fear
of perceived abuse can certainly be taken to extremes. I was in a long line
in the men's room at the movies once, a line that overflowed out the door. A
mother outside shouted in to her young son, who was standing in line ahead
of me, “If anyone touches you, scream!” Not exactly a way to foster his
confidence or independence, but I could understand her fear.
We must not touch children in ways that harm them, but we can't be
Playful Parents without emotional and physical closeness.
Another source of parental discomfort is our embarrassment. Our
children might want to take all their clothes off at the park, or dye their hair
blue (depending on their age!). They may tease us or make us sing goofy
songs or play follow the leader in public. But if you're just embarrassed,
don't let it stop you from playing and having fun. Later on, when they are
teenagers, they will be the ones embarrassed to be seen with you, so you
end up getting even after all!
The next step to Playful Parenthood is to break out of our old play habits.
Some of us are too competitive, whether our child wants to compete or not.
Others are too timid, not giving enough resistance when children want to
wrestle or play hard. Playing with blocks or Legos, I will sometimes catch
myself ignoring the children I am supposed to be playing with, and building
something bigger and better than what they are building. Some parents need

 practice being more involved in play; others need practice encouraging
children's independence.
In short, we need to be responsive to children's needs. Fathers are
especially known for something called swooping in. Mothers of infants
complain about this all the time. Dad comes home, excited to see the baby,
and swoops her up. She has been playing happily and quietly, and now she
either starts screaming or gets too jazzed up to sit still for dinner. Dad is
frustrated; Mom is frustrated; Baby is dizzy. That kind of rough-and-tumble
play can be wonderful for children, but only when it is done with them,
rather than to them. Try swooping in a little slower, maintaining eye
contact, and following the baby's cues about how fast and high to throw her
in the air. Otherwise, we aren't playing at her pace, but insisting on our own
pace.
Variations on this scene happen with older children, too, like when Uncle
Louie takes the kids out for ice cream right before bedtime. And the
opposite happens as well. The children are enjoying some wild play, until
Mom steps in anxiously or angrily to stop it. That time, she is the one who
is not tuned in to their pace, and tries to impose her own preferred style of
play onto the children (and the father).
Children differ in their sensitivity to touch, sound, smell, taste,
movement, distraction, and so on. Some like speed, some hate it; some
scream, others whisper; some can play seventeen different games in five
minutes, others can focus on one game for days; some need our undivided
attention, others just want to be in the same room as us while we're
working. These differences have a big impact on how children like to play.
We need to recognize these preferences, and match our approach to them.
Instead, we often just play according to our own preferences without
thinking about it. As the famous saying goes: “Put on your jacket; I'm
cold!”
Another example is when we want our children to talk to us, because
talking is our way of communicating. But talking is not how they express
themselves; play is. So if we refuse to play their way, and then insist on
their talking to us our way, we are not going to get much communication
from them. If we do play, especially if we play on their terms, then they will
surprise us by showing us their thoughts and feelings. If we wait patiently
and don't push, they may even tell us in words.

 Don't ask your poor children those automatic questions—“Did you
wash your hands, dear?”… (almost the only conversation that most
parents have to offer). Note the look of dreadful… boredom that comes
into their otherwise quite happy faces…. Years ago when my child was
four years old, I suddenly learned not to do this…. No, I would myself
tell her something interesting and arresting: “I saw Pat Greaves next
door running and bawling because he was being chased by a strange
yellow cat.” My child's eyes would sparkle with interest, and there we
were, in the liveliest conversation, and behold! she was soon telling me
the most interesting extraordinary things, her own ideas.3
In some families, one parent is in charge of fun and games while the
other one is responsible and serious. Try switching once in a while, for
everyone's sake. Make sure Mom gets to wrestle with the children, not just
do caretaking chores. If Dad plays only catch, let him take a turn on the
floor dressing up the dolls. If you haven't spent an hour in play with your
child, you are missing out on something very fun and creative.
Above all, have fun, and keep reaching for a connection with your
children. They do not need us to be perfect—but they do notice when we
try.
OceanofPDF.com

 —BUILDING A PLAYFUL PARENTING COMMUNITY—

Building a community of support may be as simple as having a few
parents with whom you can talk on the phone or who will drop over for a
cup of tea. The conversations may be informal, or they may be structured
sessions where each person takes a turn to answer the questions I listed at
the beginning of the chapter (page 278), or just to talk about their life as a
parent. For those parents who are overwhelmed and need more support than
that, offer to take their children for a while so they can get a break. If a
parent you know is really struggling, get together two or three friends to go
over to her house, like an emotional-support SWAT team. One person plays
with the children, one listens to the parent, one cleans the house. Obviously,
we have to overcome our resistance to butting into one another's business,
which often is just a disguise for wanting to stay isolated.
Even if you feel overwhelmed by your own parenting duties, it is helpful
to spend time with other people's children. It's a great way to practice
Playful Parenting, because we aren't as emotionally invested. A student in
my parenting class, Ralph, told me the story of a recent rock-climbing
outing with several families. The leader's daughter, a three-year-old just
getting over a cold, was very clingy with her mom. She would not share the
harness, which other children needed, and she would not let her mother
handle the ropes. The mother was at a loss. Ralph's first reaction was,
“What horrible whining.” But then he remembered some of the Playful
Parenting ideas from our class. He retranslated the girl's whining and
clinging in terms of an empty cup that needed to be filled. He went over to
her, and in a cheerful voice said, “Oh, Madeleine, I have missed you so
much, I was hoping we could have some special time together today. I
could tell you a story, or we could play tictactoe—whatever you want.”
Madeleine was delighted. She let go of her mother, took off the harness, sat
in Ralph's lap, and they had a great time together. Two boys watched them
awhile; then, when Madeleine climbed off to play on her own, they both

 climbed onto Ralph's lap. He said later, “Knowing what to do was so much
easier with somebody else's child.”
I am a big believer in support groups, especially for parents, because we
tend to be so isolated from one another. And especially for fathers, who
usually don't get much of that informal playground support from other
fathers. I started a fathers' group when my daughter was a baby, and we met
for three years as our babies grew up. Even though I never felt as if I could
afford the time as a new parent to go to the group, the recharging and
refilling I got there more than made up for my time away. Maybe it's just
me, but I actually think men today are talking more. The other day I heard
two men in the video store talking earnestly about parenting. Naturally, I
hovered nearby to eavesdrop a little. It turns out they were talking about
how frustrating it is to be a parent of highly energetic boys, and they were
swapping tips for how to avoid spanking and other harsh punishments.
They were talking about not wanting to raise their sons the way they were
raised, but they weren't sure how to do it differently. As I peeked around the
shelves and saw those two men standing under the Action/Adventure
section, I thought, Things have come a long way in just a few years.
Patty Wipfler and her colleagues have developed some great activities for
family support, such as playdays and family workshops.4 A play-day is a
few hours when some children, their parents, and other adults get together
to play. Generally there are at least two adults per child. That allows some
of the adults to go off and take turns listening to each other, while the rest
play with the children. The adults make a special effort to be playful and
enthusiastic, and to follow the children's lead, so the play can get pretty
raucous. In a family workshop, that same basic format goes on for a whole
weekend. Part of that time, children have special one-on-one time with a
parent or another adult to do whatever they want, as I described in chapter
nine. Another innovation is the idea of adult play groups, where adults can
get together to reclaim playfulness as a valuable part of life. At these
events, it usually takes the adults a while to loosen up and actually play.
There is also time for talking about the joys and difficulties of parenting,
and for expressing the frustrations, fears, and anger that parents don't want
to express directly to children.

 When my daughter was three and was obsessed with playing with her
doll Ariel, the Little Mermaid, I went to one of these adult playdays. It was
good timing, because I was sick of that helpless heroine being saved by the
strong hero. If I ever tried to insert any spontaneity, creativity, or feminist
theory into the game, I was blasted with, “You're playing wrong! I'm never
going to play with you again.” I just barely restrained myself from saying
“Fine, I hate that game anyway.” I wanted to play with her, but I wasn't able
to play with my usual enthusiasm and cheer when that was all she wanted to
play. My compromise was to be bored and dull when we did play. Not
surprisingly, that made her even more insistent on my playing it “just right,”
which made me more tired and cranky, and so on.
At the playday, as a way of getting help with this problem, I had two
other adults ask me to play that game. I got to have a huge half-pretend
temper tantrum myself: ”No! No! I hate that game,” I screamed. While they
begged and pleaded, I got to storm and stomp around, saying the mean
nasty things I had not wanted to say out loud in front of my daughter. I
ended up laughing my head off. After nearly twenty minutes of letting off
steam this way, with great gales of laughter in between, I realized, with a
shock, that I had been telling her over and over that her most cherished
possession was boring, stupid, and sexist. Not a great way to build
confidence or nourish connection.
Getting all that out of my system, I was able to go home and be
enthusiastic about the game. My enthusiasm—which surprised the heck out
of Emma—allowed her to be more creative and spontaneous, which made
the game more fun for both of us. Soon she was playing all kinds of games,
not just that same one over and over. In the months following, whenever she
did want to play that game, I tried to remember my enthusiasm. When I
could, the game went well, and our connection went well.
–
While writing this book, I came across a quote by Maria Montessori, the
great educator: “In the life of the child, play is perhaps something of little
importance which he undertakes for the lack of something better to do.”5
She was right about a lot of things, but I have to disagree with her about
play. I can't think of anything more important than play, for us or for them.

 In fact, I am more inclined to agree with Kurt Vonnegut, who said, “We are
here on Earth to fart around. Don't let anybody tell you any different!”6
I hope you and your children have fun through Playful Parenting.
OceanofPDF.com

 NOTES

Chapter 1: The Value of Being a Playful Parent
1. Cosby Rogers and Janet Sawyers, Play in the Lives of Children
(Washington, D.C.: NAEYC, 1988).
2. Virginia Axline, Play Therapy (New York: Ballantine, 1969).
3. Greta Fein and Nancy Wiltz, “Play as Children See It,” in Play from
Birth to Twelve and Beyond, ed. Doris P. Fromberg and Doris Bergen (New
York: Garland Publishing, 1998), p. 43.
4. Frans de Waal, Peacemaking Among Primates (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1989).
5. Greta Fein and Nancy Wiltz, “Play as Children See It.”
6. Many hospitals have developed play programs to help children cope
with life-threatening or chronic illnesses or to prepare them for scary
procedures. See, for example, Elizabeth Kampe, “Children in Health Care:
When the Prescription Is Play,” in Children's Play and Learning, ed. Edgar
Klugman and Sara Smilansky (New York: Teachers College Press, 1990).

Chapter 2: Join Children in Their World
1. Brian Sutton-Smith and Shirley Sutton-Smith, How to Play with Your
Child (New York: Hawthorne Press, 1974).
2. Leston Havens, Approaches to the Mind (Boston: Little, Brown,
1973).
3. The at-home-dad network is a great resource for fathers
(www.athomedad.com).
4. Arlie Hochschild, The Second Shift (New York: Avon Books, 1997).
5. Joe Frost and Irma Woods, “Perspective on Play in Playgrounds,” in
Play from Birth to Twelve and Beyond, ed. Doris P. Fromberg and Doris
Bergen (New York: Garland Publishing, 1998), p. 237.
6 J. G. Bernhard, Primates in the Classroom (Amherst: University of
Massachusetts Press, 1988).

 7 The Singing Creek Where the Willows Grow: The Mystical Nature
Diary of Opal Whiteley, ed. Benjamin Huff (New York: Penguin, 1986).

Chapter 3: Establish a Connection
1. Brian Sutton-Smith and Shirley Sutton-Smith, How to Play with Your
Child (New York: Hawthorne Press, 1974).
2. For a more complete picture of attachment theory, see John Bowlby,
A Secure Base (New York: Basic Books, 1990), or Alicia Lieberman, The
Emotional Life of the Toddler (New York: Free Press, 1993).
3. Stanley Greenspan, The Growth of the Mind (Reading, Mass.:
Addison-Wesley, 1997).
4. Stanley Greenspan with Robin Simons, The Child with Special Needs
(Reading, Mass.: Perseus Books, 1998).
5. For an excellent description of the difference between a casual
connection and a deep connection, see Martha Welch, Holding Time (New
York: Simon and Schuster, 1998).

Chapter 4: Encourage Their Confidence
1. Bill Harley, Lunchroom Tales, Round River Records, 1996.
2. Cosby Rogers and Janet Sawyers, Play in the Lives of Children
(Washington, D.C.: NAEYC, 1988), p. 81.
3. Ibid., pp. 4–5.
4. Brian Sutton-Smith and Shirley Sutton-Smith, How to Play with Your
Child (New York: Hawthorne Press, 1974).
5. Barbara Brooks and Paula Siegel, The Scared Child: Helping Kids
Overcome Traumatic Events (New York: Wiley, 1996), pp. 28, 75.
6. Alicia Lieberman, The Emotional Life of the Toddler (New York:
Free Press, 1993), p. 136.

Chapter 5: Follow the Giggles
1. Cosby Rogers and Janet Sawyers, Play in the Lives of Children
(Washington, D.C.: NAEYC, 1988), p. 81.
2. Ibid., p. 119.

 Chapter 6: Learn to Roughhouse
1. Shirley C. Strum, Almost Human: A Journey into the World of
Baboons (New York: Random House, 1987).
2. Ibid.
3. A Voice for the Child: The Inspirational Words of Janusz Korczak, ed.
Sandra Joseph (London: HarperCollins, 1999), p. 69.
4. Elena Bodrova and Deborah Leong, “Adult Influences on Play,” in
Play from Birth to Twelve and Beyond, ed. Doris P. Fromberg and Doris
Bergen (New York: Garland Publishing, 1998), p. 278. Italics added. This
article is based on the work of Lev Vygotsky, the great Russian
psychologist.

Chapter 7: Suspend Reality: Reverse the Roles
1. Barbara Brooks and Paula Siegel, The Scared Child: Helping Kids
Overcome Traumatic Events (New York: Wiley, 1996), p. 29.
2. Thomas Maeder, Children of Psychiatrists and Other
Psychotherapists (New York: Harper & Row, 1989).
3. Stanley Greenspan with Robin Simons, The Child with Special Needs
(Reading, Mass.: Perseus Books, 1998), p. 192.
4. David Elkind, “Academic Pressures—Too Much Too Soon: The
Demise of Play,” in Children's Play and Learning, ed. Edgar Klugman and
Sara Smilan-sky (New York: Teachers College Press, 1990), p. 11.

Chapter 8: Empower Girls and Connect with Boys
1. S. Condry, J. Condry, and L. Pogatshnik, “Sex Differences: A Study
of the Ear of the Beholder,” Sex Roles 9 (1983), 697–704. N. Bell and W.
Carver, “A Reevaluation of Gender Label Effects: Expectant Mothers'
Responses to Infants,” Child Development 51 (1980), 925–27. R. Culp, A.
Cook, and P. Hous-ley, “A Comparison of Observed and Reported AdultInfant Interactions: Effects of Perceived Sex,” Sex Roles 9 (1983), 475–79.
2. J. Condry and S. Condry, “Sex Differences: A Study of the Eye of the
Beholder,” Child Development 47 (1976), 812–19.

 3. Myra and David Sadker, Failing at Fairness: How Our Schools
Cheat Girls (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1994).
4. Deborah Blum, Sex on the Brain: The Biological Differences Between
Men and Women (New York: Viking, 1994).
5. Beverly Fagot and Leslie Leve, “Gender Identity and Play,” in Play
from Birth to Twelve and Beyond, ed. Doris P. Fromberg and Doris Bergen
(New York: Garland Publishing, 1998), p. 190.
6. Mary Pipher, Reviving Ophelia (New York: Ballantine, 1994). For a
girl's magazine that is a refreshing antidote to this problem, see New Moon,
and its companion parenting newsletter, New Moon Network.
7. Stanley Greenspan, The Growth of the Mind (Reading, Mass.:
Addison-Wesley, 1997), p. 62.
8. Jean Phinney, et al., “Preschool Children's Response to Peer Crying,”
ERIC Abstract #ED267927.
9. Myra Sadker and David Sadker, Failing at Fairness: How Our
Schools Cheat Girls (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1994), p. 206.
10. Nancy Carlsson-Paige and Diane Levin, Who's Calling the Shots?
How to Respond Effectively to Children's Fascination with War Play and
War Toys (Philadelphia: New Society Publishers, 1990).
11. Quoted by Tim Beneke in Proving Manhood: Reflections on Men
and Sexism (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997), p. 38.

Chapter 9: Follow Your Child's Lead
1. A Voice for the Child: The Inspirational Words of Janusz Korczak, ed.
Sandra Joseph (Northampton, England: Thorsons, 1999), p. 54.
2. Patty Wipfler, Listening Effectively to Children (Seattle: Rational
Island Press, 1999).
3. Emmy Rainwalker, “An Unusual Lesson in Listening,” Our Children
Ourselves, no. 23 (Summer/Fall 1998).

Chapter 10: Take Charge (When Necessary)
1. Patty Wipfler et al., Family Work (Seattle: Rational Island Press,
1999), p. 41.

 2. Stanley Greenspan with Robin Simons, The Child with Special Needs
(Reading, Mass.: Perseus Books, 1998), p. 106.
3. Pamela Haines, “Reaching from Heart to Heart,” Our Children
Ourselves, no. 19 (Summer/Fall 1996).
4. Martha Welch, Holding Time (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1998).
See also her Web site at www.marthawelch.com.
5. Patty Wipfler, Listening Effectively to Children (Seattle: Rational
Island Press, 1999). See also the Web site of her organization, Parents
Leadership Institute, at parentleaders.com.
6. Stanley Greenspan with Robin Simons, The Child with Special Needs
(Reading, Mass.: Perseus Books, 1998).
7. Vivian Paley has written two wonderful books on this topic: You
Can't Say You Can't Play (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1992), and
The Kindness of Children (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1999).
8. Patch Adams with Maureen Mylander, Gesundheit (Rochester, Vt.:
Healing Arts Press, 1993), pp. 8–9.
9. See Alfie Kohn, Punished by Rewards: The Trouble with Gold Stars,
Incentive Plans, A's, Praise, and Other Bribes (Boston: Houghton Mifflin,
1993).

Chapter 11: Learn to Love the Games You Hate
1. Frans de Waal, Peacemaking Among Primates (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1989), p. 195.
2. Anthony Pellegrini, “Rough-and-Tumble Play from Childhood
through Adolescense,” in Play from Birth to Twelve and Beyond, ed. Doris
P. Fromberg and Doris Bergen (New York: Garland Publishing, 1998).
3. See Best Friends, Worst Enemies, by Michael Thompson, Catherine
O'Neill Grace, and Lawrence J. Cohen, published by Ballantine Books in
fall 2001, for a full discussion of this concept of social cruelty and its
relationship to childhood friendships, group dynamics, and popularity.
4 This is a card game in which three or more people get all the cards
and take turns putting the cards down. For example, one person puts down
two aces, the next one puts down a two, the next says he has three threes,
and so forth. If you don't have the right cards as you proceed up the deck
numerically, you fake it, and others can try to call your bluff.

 Chapter 12: Accept Strong Feelings (Theirs and Yours)
1. Paul Stasiewicz and Stephen Lisman, “Effects of Infant Cries on
Alcohol Consumption in College Males,” Child Abuse and Neglect: The
International Journal 13 (1989), 463–70.
2. Alicia Lieberman, The Emotional Life of the Toddler (New York:
Free Press, 1993), pp. 38–39.
3. Ibid.
4. Stanley Greenspan with Robin Simons, The Child with Special Needs
(Reading, Mass.: Perseus Books, 1998), p. 151.
5. Patty Wipfler, Listening Effectively to Children (Seattle: Rational
Island Press, 1999), p. 81.
6. Garry Landreth and Linda Homeyer, “Play as the Language of
Children's Feelings,” in Play from Birth to Twelve and Beyond, ed. Doris P.
Fromberg and Doris Bergen (New York: Garland Publishing, 1998), pp.
193–97.

Chapter 13: Rethink the Way We Discipline
1. A Voice for the Child: The Inspirational Words of Janusz Korczak,
ed. Sandra Joseph (Northampton, England: Thorsons, 1999).
2. Edward Hallowell, When You Worry About the Child You Love
(New York: Simon and Schuster, 1996), pp. 149–52. See also Murray A.
Strauss, Beating the Devil Out of Them: Corporal Punishment in American
Families (Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books, 1994).
3. See Dan Kindlon and Michael Thompson, Raising Cain (New York:
Ballantine, 1999).
4. Idries Shah, Knowing How to Know (London: Octagon Press, 1998),
p. 11.
5. See, for example, Carole Stock Kranowitz, The Out-of-Sync Child:
Recognizing and Coping with Sensory Integration Dysfunction (New York:
Skylight Press, 1998).
6. A Voice for the Child: The Inspirational Words of Janusz Korczak,
ed. Sandra Joseph (Northampton, England: Thorsons, 1999).

 7. Patty Wipfler, Setting Limits with Children (Palo Alto, Calif.: Parents
Leadership Institute, 1995).

Chapter 14: Play Your Way Through Sibling Rivalry
1. From Joan Bel Geddes, Childhood and Children (Phoenix, Ariz.:
Oryx Press, 1997).
2 Jeffrey Trawick-Smith, “School-Based Play and Social Interactions,”
in Play from Birth to Twelve and Beyond, ed. Doris P. Fromberg and Doris
Bergen (New York: Garland Publishing, 1998).
3 Patricia Ramsey, “Diversity and Play,” in Play from Birth to Twelve
and Beyond, ed. Doris P. Fromberg and Doris Bergen (New York: Garland
Publishing, 1998), p. 29.
4 Peg Flandreau West, The Basic Essentials (Madison, Wis.: Protective
Behaviors, Inc., 1989).

Chapter 15: Recharge Your Own Batteries
1. The best source I know for more information about listening skills is
from an organization called Re-evaluation Counseling. See especially their
Web site at ircc.org, or Fundamentals of Co-Counseling Manual (Seattle:
Rational Island Publishers, 1982).
2. Alicia Lieberman, The Emotional Life of the Toddler (New York:
Free Press, 1993), pp. 17–18.
3. Brenda Ueland, “Parents Should Be More Fun,” in Strength to Your
Sword Arm (Duluth, Minn.: Holy Cross Press, 1993), pp. 92–93.
4. Patty Wipfler et al., Family Work (Seattle: Rational Island Publishers,
1999).
5. Quoted by Patricia Monighan-Nourot, “The Legacy of Play in
America in Early Childhood Education,” in Children's Play and Learning,
ed. Edgar Klug-man and Sara Smilansky (New York: Teachers College
Press, 1990), p. 71.
6. Kurt Vonnegut, Timequake (London: Jonathan Cape, 1997).
OceanofPDF.com

 OceanofPDF.com

 ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Lawrence J. Cohen, Ph.D., is a psychologist specializing in children's
play, play therapy, and parenting. He is the coauthor, with Michael
Thompson and Catherine O'Neill Grace, of Best Friends, Worst Enemies, a
book about children's friendships and peer relations, and of Mom, They're
Teasing Me. He is also a columnist for The Boston Globe. Dr. Cohen leads
Playful Parenting workshops for parents, teachers, and child-care
professionals. He lives in Brookline, Massachusetts, with his wife, Anne,
and their daughter, Emma. Visit the author on-line at
www.playfulparenting.com.
OceanofPDF.com

 Most of the personal stories presented in this book are either composite
portraits or identifying characteristics have been changed or eliminated in
order to protect the privacy of individuals. Any resemblance to living
persons is unintended and coincidental.
A Ballantine Book
Published by The Random House Publishing Group
Copyright © 2001 by Lawrence J. Cohen, Ph.D.
All rights reserved.
Ballantine and colophon are registered trademarks of Random House,
Inc.
www.ballantinebooks.com
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 2002090324
eISBN: 978-0-307-48960-9
v3.0
OceanofPDF.com

 