 OceanofPDF.com

 Begin Reading
Table of Contents
Newsletters
Copyright Page

In accordance with the U.S. Copyright Act of 1976, the scanning,
uploading, and electronic sharing of any part of this book without the
permission of the publisher constitute unlawful piracy and theft of the
author’s intellectual property. If you would like to use material from the
book (other than for review purposes), prior written permission must be
obtained by contacting the publisher at permissions@hbgusa.com. Thank
you for your support of the author’s rights.

OceanofPDF.com

 To our “babies”

James
Robert
Peter
Hayden
Erin
Matthew
Stephen
Lauren
and
To our grandbabies

Andrew
Lea
Alex
Jonathan

 Joshua
Ashton
Morgan
Thomas
Landon

—W.S. and M.S.

OceanofPDF.com

 A Word from Dr. Bill, Martha, Dr. Bob,
and Dr. Jim

We have not only written this book—we have lived it. In The Baby Book
we, Bill and Martha, share with you our experience in parenting eight
children and caring for thousands of others during forty years in pediatric
practice. As Dr. Bob and Dr. Jim have joined our practice, raised their own
families, and contributed to our writing, we have expanded our collective
experience and ideas. As we have all learned to become keen baby and
parent watchers, we kept track of what works for most parents most of the
time. This book was written on the job. Each day in our office we gleaned
from successful parents practical advice on baby care. You will find these
tips scattered throughout the book. We realize that love for your baby and
the desire to be a good parent makes you susceptible to any baby-rearing
advice. But children are too valuable and parents too vulnerable for any
author to offer unresearched information. We take responsibility for our
teachings seriously. Every statement has been thoroughly researched and
has stood the test of time.

 We also make allowances for the busy lifestyles of today’s parents. We
too juggle the spontaneous needs of our children and the duties of our
professional lives. In our book we present basic tools to help you become a
sensitive nurturer as you arrive at a parenting approach that meets the needs
of your baby and fits with your lifestyle. We advise a high-touch style of
parenting to balance the high-tech life of the new millennium. In The Baby
Book you will find a way of caring that brings out the best in you and your
baby.
Since its first edition in 1993, The Baby Book has been dubbed the
“baby bible” by millions of parents. We are so pleased that our advice has
made baby care more enjoyable for new parents throughout the world. In
this new edition, we add many new topics based on reader feedback and
also include updates that have occurred over the past twenty years in the
fields of parenting and pediatrics.
The thousands of thank-you notes, fifty thousand Facebook fans, five
thousand Twitter followers, and millions of website users have given us a
“helper’s high”—that priceless feeling that, because of this book, many
children and parents are happier, healthier, and more connected. It gives us
great joy to know that by our family advice in this book we have become in
some small way part of your family.
Bill, Bob, Jim, and Martha Sears
San Clemente, California
January 2013

VISIT DR. SEARS ONLINE

 AskDrSears.com
Now you can access thousands of pages of pediatric medical and parenting
information. Our comprehensive online resource, personally written by the
Doctors Sears, expands on many of the topics discussed in The Baby Book.
We continuously update the health information on our website to provide
you with the latest in parenting and health care issues. AskDrSears.com
offers valuable insights on such topics as Pregnancy and Childbirth, Infant
Feeding, Family Nutrition, Discipline and Behavior, Fussy Babies, Sleep
Problems, and Vaccines.
Our website also includes these unique features:
Dr. Sears’s Medicine Cabinet, a comprehensive guide to over-thecounter medications, including specific dose information
Childhood Illnesses, with detailed medical information on many
common, and not-so-common, child and family illnesses
Monthly Pediatric Health News Updates
Seasonal Pediatric Health Alerts
Frequently Asked Questions answered
Personal words of encouragement and humor from the daily lives of
the Doctors Sears
The Baby Book updates. We will post any significant changes to The
Baby Book (and all our books) to provide you with the most accurate
and up-to-date medical information.

You can also follow us on Twitter @AskDoctorSears and @DrBobSears
and on our Ask Dr. Sears and Dr. Bob Sears Facebook pages.

OceanofPDF.com

 Getting Started: Baby-Care Basics
There is really no such thing as one best way to parent a baby, just as there
are no perfect babies and, would you believe, no perfect parents—only
people who have studied babies and people who have more experience than
you. Being a parent requires on-the-job training. Too much advice from
“experts” can actually interfere with the beginning parents’ intuition and
block their ability to learn as they grow. We are going to show you how to
become your own baby experts. Our goal for this book is to help you and
your baby fit. This tiny word economically describes what parenting is all
about.
Let’s get started!

OceanofPDF.com

 Getting Attached: What It Means

Parenting, in a nutshell, is giving your children the tools to succeed in life.
Every other baby book is missing a chapter that would be entitled
“Parenting Your Baby.” Now, together with you, the expectant couple or
new parents, we are going to construct this chapter.
From our mutual experience as parents and pediatricians, and Martha’s
as a nurse, we believe that the best way to achieve the proper fit between
parents and child is to practice a parenting style we call attachment
parenting. This style is a way of caring that brings out the best in parents
and their babies. Attachment parenting has been around as long as there
have been mothers and babies. It is, in fact, only recently that this style of
parenting has needed a name at all, for it is basically the commonsense
parenting we all would do if left to our own healthy resources.

OceanofPDF.com

 PARENTING YOUR BABY
Forty years ago, when I began pediatric practice,* I had already trained in
the two top pediatric hospitals in the world, and I thought I knew everything
about babies. In fact, our friends used to tell Martha how fortunate she was
to be married to a pediatrician, to which she would reply, “He only knows
about sick babies.” My first week in practice was really a shock. Mothers
kept asking me all sorts of nonmedical questions: “Should I let my baby
cry?” “Are we going to spoil her if we pick her up too much?” “Is it all
right to sleep with our baby?” I didn’t know the answers to any of these
questions, but parents were relying on me to be the expert. These were not
medical questions, but questions about parenting style. I knew what we did
with our own two babies, but I didn’t think this made me an expert. So I
read baby books, just as you are doing now. The books were confusing.
They seemed to be based on the authors’ opinions rather than on actual
research. Most authors either lacked common sense, refused to take a stand,
or preached only what was popular at the time—whether or not it worked.
I decided to consult the true experts—experienced parents in my
practice who appeared to have a handle on parenting: parents who seemed
to be in harmony with their children, who were able to read their babies’
cues, and who responded intuitively and appropriately; parents who enjoyed
parenting and whose children seemed to be turning out well. These parents

 and their children became my teachers, and I became an astute listener and
a keen baby watcher, keeping careful notes about which parenting styles
they practiced. I accumulated a “what works” list. Martha worked with me
in those early years (until our fourth child, Hayden, came along), and she is
still active as a parenting adviser and breastfeeding consultant. My practice
was our field research, and we had our own growing “laboratory” at home.
After many years of listening and learning and eight children of our
own, we began to draw some conclusions about parenting. From an array of
parenting styles we selected what worked for most parents most of the time.
We taught these concepts to the parents in my practice and have used them
in parenting our own children. Over the years, Martha and I have modified
our approach to fit our changing lifestyle and to meet the individual needs
of our children (and we’re still learning). In this short chapter you are
hearing the essence of what took us forty years of practicing pediatrics,
parenting eight children, and counseling thousands of parents to learn.
Don’t expect to learn everything at once. Parenting is a learn-as-you-go
profession. It takes hands-on experience. Our suggestions are just starter
tips. From these basics you will grow and develop your own style, one that
best fits your baby’s temperament and your personality. Also, there is no
way you can completely decide on a parenting style before you have a baby.
You have no idea what a baby will do to you and how drastically a baby
will change your outlook. Determining how much to hold your baby, what
you will do when your baby wakes up at 3:00 A.M., and how long you will
breastfeed requires on-the-job training. Reserve these decisions until you

 see what your baby is like. But there are some parenting-style ideas to
consider before the job begins.
Before we plunge into Parenting 101, let’s make a deal. A few of the
ideas we will share with you may initially sound different from advice you
have heard elsewhere. But please do not close your mind. Enter your
parenting career with an open mind, or you may set yourselves up for a lot
of frustration. The easy baby you are expecting may not be the baby you
get. Stay open to new ideas, and then select what best fits your family. In
return, be assured that everything we discuss has been well researched and
well practiced.

OceanofPDF.com

 THE SEVEN BABY B’S OF ATTACHMENT
PARENTING
There are three goals that we see as important for beginning parents:
• to know your child
• to help your child feel right
• to enjoy parenting
The style of parenting we discuss helps you achieve these goals. Here are
the seven concepts that make up attachment parenting.

OceanofPDF.com

 1. Birth Bonding—Connect with Your Baby Early

The way baby and parents get started with one another often sets the tone of
how this early attachment unfolds. Take an active role in orchestrating the
birth you want. Take responsibility for your birth, educate yourself, and
work out a birthing philosophy with your obstetrician or birth attendant. A
traumatic birth or an unnecessary surgical birth resulting in the separation of
mother and baby is not the ideal way to begin parenting. In this case, part of
the energy that would be directed toward getting to know your baby is
temporarily diverted toward healing yourself. Feeling good about your
baby’s birth carries over into feeling good about your baby. (Read Chapter
2, “Ten Tips for Having a Safe and Satisfying Birth,” to understand the
connection between birthing and bonding and how to lower your chances of
having a difficult, traumatic birth or even an unnecessary surgical birth.
Also see here for tips on catch-up attachment, in case a medical
complication does result in temporary mother-baby separation. For an
explanation of why having your baby with you in your hospital room is
important, see here.)
The early weeks and months are a sensitive period when mother and
baby need to be together. Early closeness allows the natural attachmentpromoting behaviors of a baby and the intuitive, biological caregiving of a
mother to unfold. Early closeness gets the pair off to the right start at a time

 when the baby is most needy and the mother is most eager to nurture. Of
course, the process of falling in love with your baby, feeling attached or
bonded, begins long before the day of birth and continues long afterward.
(For practical suggestions on birth bonding and getting attached with your
baby in the postpartum period, see Chapter 4, “Getting the Right Start with
Your Newborn,” and Chapter 5, “Postpartum Family Adjustments.”)

Attachment parenting is all about helping you and your baby fit.

OceanofPDF.com

 2. Belief in Your Baby’s Cries—Read and Respond to Your
Baby’s Cues

One of your earliest challenges is to figure out what your baby wants and
needs from moment to moment. This can be very frustrating and lead to
“I’m not a good parent” attacks.
Relax! Your baby will help you learn to be a good cue reader.
Researchers used to believe that babies were only passive players in the
caretaking game. Now we know that babies actively shape their parents’
responses. Here’s how: Babies come wired with attachment-promoting
behaviors (APBs), magnetlike behaviors so irresistible they draw the parent
to the baby, in language so penetrating it must be heard. Some APBs are
hard to miss—for example, your baby’s cries, smiles, and clinging gestures;
others are subtle cues, like eye contact and body language. All parents,
especially mothers, have a built-in intuitive system with which they listen
and respond to the cues of their baby. Like a transmitter-receiver network,
mother and baby, through practice, fine-tune their communication until the
reception is clear. How quickly this communication network develops
varies among mother-baby pairs. Some babies give clearer cues; some
parents are more intuitive cue readers. But good connections will happen.
They will happen more easily if you remember to be open and responsive.
Even an occasional “incorrect” response (for example, offering to feed a

 baby who wants only to be held) is better than no response, because it
encourages your baby to keep working with you.
Pick up your baby when he cries. As simple as this sounds, there are
many parents who have been told to let their babies cry it out, for the reason
that they must not reward “bad” behavior. But newborns don’t misbehave;
they just communicate the only way nature allows them to. Imagine how
you would feel if you were completely uncoordinated—unable to do
anything for yourself—and your cries for help went unheeded. A baby
whose cries are not answered does not become a “good” baby (though he
may become quiet); he does become a discouraged baby. He learns the one
thing you don’t want him to: that he can’t communicate or trust his needs
will be met.
It’s easy for someone else to advise you to let your baby cry. Unless he
or she is a very sensitive person, nothing happens to his or her body
chemistry when your baby cries. Let’s get a bit technical for a minute. Your
baby’s cry will bother you; it’s supposed to. This is especially true for
mothers. If we were to put a mother and baby together in a laboratory and
attach blood-flow-measuring instruments to the mother, here’s what would
happen: When the mother heard her baby cry, the blood flow to the area of
her brain that controls nurturing behavior would increase, as would blood
flow to her breasts. This would result in an overwhelming urge to pick up
and comfort her baby. Your baby’s cry is powerful language designed for
the survival and development of the baby and the responsiveness of the
parents. Respond to it. (See here and here for more detailed information
about the crying-communication network.)

 Meeting your baby’s needs in the early months means solid
communication patterns will develop. With time you can gradually delay
your response and gradually your baby will learn to accept waiting a little
bit as she learns noncrying language and develops self-help mechanisms. If
nothing else, consider responding to your baby’s needs an investment in the
future; you’ll be glad for good communication when she gets older and her
problems are bigger than being fed or getting off to sleep.

THE SEVEN BABY B’S OF ATTACHMENT
PARENTING
1. birth bonding
2. belief in the signal value of your baby’s cries
3. breastfeeding
4. babywearing
5. bedding close to baby
6. balance and boundaries
7. beware of baby trainers

OceanofPDF.com

 3. Breastfeed Your Baby

Fathers often say, “We’re going to breastfeed.” Breastfeeding is indeed a
family affair. The most successful breastfeeding mothers and babies we
have seen are those that have a supportive husband and father. The benefits
of breastfeeding in enhancing baby’s health and development are enormous,
but what is not fully appreciated are the magnificent effects of breastfeeding
on the mother. Here’s what’s in it for you: Every time your baby feeds,
hormones (prolactin and oxytocin) enter your system. These “mothering
hormones” help form the chemical basis for what is called mother’s
intuition. As you will learn in greater detail in later chapters, the same
hormones that help make milk make mothering easier. And, as you will
learn in Chapter 8, new studies show that breastfed babies turn out to be
smarter children.

 Breastfeeding offers great benefits for babies and mothers.

OceanofPDF.com

 4. Babywearing—Carry Your Baby a Lot

This is the most exciting parenting concept to hit the Western world in
years. As we were doing our parenting-style research, we attended an
international parenting conference where we noticed that mothers in other
cultures wear their babies in slinglike carriers as part of their native dress.
Impressed by how content the babies were and how attentive their mothers
were, we asked these mothers why they carried their babies. They
volunteered two simple but profound reasons: It’s good for the baby, and it
makes life easier for the mother. That’s it! That’s what all parents want: to
do something good for their babies and make life easier for themselves.
A baby carrier will be one of your most indispensable infant-care items.
You won’t want to leave home without it. This is not to say you must carry
your baby all the time, but it may mean changing your mind-set about
babies. Most people imagine babies lying quietly in their cribs, gazing at
dangling mobiles and being picked up only long enough to be fed, changed,
played with briefly, and then put down again “where they belong”; that
holding periods are just dutiful intervals to calm and cuddle babies so they
can be put down again. Babywearing reverses this view. Young babies are
carried, or worn, much of the day by parents or substitute caregivers and put
down when sound asleep, for some fun playtime on the floor, or when
caregivers must attend to their own needs.

 Babywearing makes caring for two babies easier.
Good things happen to carried babies and their parents. Most noticeably,
carried babies cry less, as if they forget to fuss. Besides being happier,
carried babies develop better, possibly because the energy they would have
wasted on crying is diverted into growth. Also, a baby learns much in the
arms of a busy parent. Babywearing benefits you because it fits in nicely
with busy lifestyles. It allows you to take your baby with you wherever you
go. You don’t have to feel house-bound; home to your baby is where you
are. (For your personal course on babywearing and how it does good things
for babies and makes life easier for parents, see Chapter 14, “Babywearing:
The Art and Science of Carrying Your Baby.”)

 OceanofPDF.com

 5. Bedding Close to Baby

Very early in your parenting career you will learn that the only babies who
always sleep through the night are in books or belong to other people. Be
prepared for some nighttime juggling until you find where baby and you
sleep best. Some babies sleep best in their own room, some in the parents’
room, and some sleep best snuggled right next to mother. Wherever you and
your baby sleep best is the right arrangement for you, and it’s a very
personal decision. Be open to trying various sleeping arrangements,
including welcoming your baby into your bed—a nighttime parenting style
we call sharing sleep.
Sharing sleep seems to evoke more controversy than any other feature of
attachment parenting, and we don’t understand why. We are amazed that
such a beautiful custom, so natural for ages, is suddenly “wrong” for
modern society. Most babies the world over sleep with their parents. Even
in our own culture more and more parents enjoy this sleeping arrangement
—they just don’t tell their doctors or their relatives about it. Try this
experiment: Next time you’re around a lot of new parents, mention one-onone that you are considering sleeping with your baby. You’ll be surprised
how many of these people are doing just that, at least some of the time.
Don’t worry about your child never leaving your bed. He will. For the child
who needs nighttime closeness, the time in your bed is relatively short—and

 the benefits last a lifetime. (For a detailed explanation of how sleeping with
your baby makes nighttime parenting easier and enhances the development
of your baby, as well as the latest research on this controversial topic, see
Chapter 15, “Nighttime Parenting: How to Get Your Baby to Sleep.”)

Try sharing sleep with your baby.

Dr. Bob notes: My wife and I intended to have our first baby sleep next to
our bed in his own cradle. My wife wasn’t yet sold on the whole idea of bed
sharing. But after the fifth waking during that first night at home together, I
asked her, “Why don’t you just keep the baby next to you? Maybe he’ll stay
asleep.” She did, and he did. And so did I. We grew to love having him there
next to us; we all slept so well that we wouldn’t have had it any other way.

 OceanofPDF.com

 6. Balance and Boundaries

In your zeal to give your baby everything she needs it’s tempting to try to
give baby everything she wants. This can result in mother burnout. Since a
new baby in your home can absolutely turn previously predictable
schedules and couple time upside down, it’s easy to neglect your own needs
and those of your marriage while meeting the needs of your baby.
Throughout this book we will show you how to be appropriately responsive
to your baby, which means knowing when to say yes and when to say no,
and also having the wisdom to say yes to your own needs. When mom and
dad are doing well, baby will also do well. One day Martha, in
exasperation, said to me, “I don’t have time to take a shower, my baby
needs me so much!” I lovingly reminded her, “What our baby needs is a
happy, rested mother.” Remember, while attachment parenting is not the
easiest style of parenting, if practiced properly it should be the most joyful
one.

OceanofPDF.com

 7. Beware of Baby Trainers

Because you love your baby so much and want to do the best, you are
vulnerable to all kinds of advice. Be prepared to be the target of wellmeaning advisers who will shower you with detachment advice, such as:
“Let her cry it out,” “Get her on a schedule,” “You shouldn’t still be nursing
her,” and “Don’t pick her up so much, you’re spoiling her!” If carried to the
extreme, baby training is a lose-lose situation: Baby loses trust in the signal
value of her cues, and parents lose trust in their ability to read and respond
to baby’s cues. As a result, a distance can develop between baby and parent,
which is just the opposite of the closeness that develops with attachment
parenting. Whereas attachment parenting is based on sensitivity, baby
training requires insensitivity. Attachment parenting helps you get to know
and read your baby better. Baby training interferes with this. The basis of
baby training is to help babies become more “convenient.” It is based upon
the misguided assumption that babies cry to manipulate, not to
communicate. Baby-training books and classes teach mothers to go against
their basic drive to respond to the cues of their baby. Eventually they will
lose sensitivity and their trust in their own intuition. Before trying any of
these baby-training methods, compare them with your intuitive feelings.
Attachment parenting is an ideal. Because of medical situations, lifestyle
differences, or just plain rough times, you may not be able to practice all of

 these attachment tips all the time. Parenting is too individual and baby is too
complex for there to be only one way. But these seven attachment concepts
provide the basic tools from which you can develop a parenting style that
works best for you. Some of the Baby B’s, especially babywearing and
belief in your baby’s cries, can be practiced not only by parents but by
substitute caregivers. Teaching your subs these two important Baby B’s
increases the likelihood that your baby will get attachment–cared for during
your absence.
The important point is to get connected to your baby. Take advantage of
all the valuable things that attachment parenting does for parents and
babies. Once connected, stick with what is working and modify what is not.
You will ultimately arrive at your own style. This is how you and your baby
bring out the best in one another.

OceanofPDF.com

 ATTACHMENT

PARENTING

INCLUDES

FATHERS
The seven Baby B’s work best with an involved and nurturing dad. While a
preference for mother is natural for babies in the early years, fathers are
indispensable. Father creates a supportive environment that allows mother
to devote her energy to the baby. Attachment mothers are prone to the “My
baby needs me so much, I don’t have time to take a shower” mind-set. It’s
the father’s job to nurture the mother so that she can nurture the baby. A
mother of a particularly energy-draining baby once confided to me, “I
couldn’t have survived without the help of my husband.” Take
breastfeeding, for example, which is the only infant care fathers can’t do.
Fathers can indirectly feed their babies by supporting and encouraging the
mother. As one involved husband boasted, “I can’t breastfeed, but I can
create an environment that helps my wife breastfeed better.” A happier mom
makes for a happier baby.

 Fathers are nurturers too.
Fathers have more than a supporting role in baby tending. They are more
than substitute mothers, pinch-hitting while mom is away. Dads make their
own unique contribution to the development of their baby. Your baby will
not love you less than he does his mother, or more. He or she will love you
differently. Nothing matures a man like becoming an involved father. (See
here and here for unique father-infant relationships and special nurturing
tips for dad.)

OceanofPDF.com

 SOME QUESTIONS YOU MAY HAVE
When we tell parents-to-be about attachment parenting, they react pretty
strongly—often with relief. Attachment parenting is, after all, commonsense
parenting. But some parents who are enthusiastic about attachment
parenting are often also a bit leery, probably because this style of parenting
is rather foreign to the fear-of-spoiling mind-set we’ve all been exposed to.
Here are our answers to some of the questions we’re asked most often.
Attachment parenting sounds exhausting. Is it one big give-a-thon?
Attachment parenting may sound difficult, but in the long run it’s actually
the easiest parenting style. Initially, there is a lot of giving. This is a fact of
new parent life. Babies are takers, and parents are givers. But a concept we
want you to appreciate, and one we emphasize throughout this entire book,
is mutual giving—the more you give to your baby, the more baby gives back
to you. This is how you grow to enjoy your child and feel more competent
as a parent. Remember, your baby is not just a passive player in the
parenting game. Your infant takes an active part in shaping your attitudes,
helping you make wise decisions as you become an astute baby reader.
There is a biological angle to mutual giving, as well. When a mother
breastfeeds her baby, she gives nourishment and comfort. The baby’s

 sucking, in turn, stimulates the release of hormones that further enhance
mothering behavior, as mentioned previously. The reason that you can
breastfeed your baby to sleep is that your milk contains a sleep-inducing
substance. Meanwhile, as you suckle your baby, you produce more of the
hormone prolactin, which has a tranquilizing effect on you. It’s as if the
mommy puts the baby to sleep, and the baby puts the mommy to sleep.

EARLY ATTACHMENT—LIFELONG MEMORIES
There may be occasions when you wonder if your baby’s high-need stage
will ever end. It will! The time in your arms, at your breasts, and in your
bed is such a relatively short while, but your message of love and
availability lasts a lifetime.
What is “hard” about parenting is the feeling “I don’t know what he
wants” or “I just can’t seem to get through to her.” If you feel you really
know your baby and have a handle on the relationship, parenting is easier
and more relaxed. There is great comfort in feeling connected to your baby.
Attachment parenting is the best way we know to get connected. True, this
style of parenting takes tremendous amounts of patience and stamina, but
it’s worth it! Attachment parenting early on makes later parenting easier, not
only in infancy but in childhood and in your child’s teenage years. The
ability to read and respond to your baby carries over to the ability to get
inside your growing child and see things from his or her point of view.
When you truly know your child, parenting is easier at all ages.
Won’t holding our baby a lot, responding to cries, breastfeeding on cue,
and even sleeping with baby create a spoiled and overly dependent child?

 No! Both experience and research have shown the opposite to be true.
Attachment fosters independence. Attachment parenting implies responding
appropriately to your baby; spoiling suggests responding inappropriately.
The spoiling theory began in the 1920s when experts invaded the realm of
child rearing. They scoffed at parental intuition and advocated restraint and
detachment. They felt that holding a baby a lot, feeding on cue, and
responding to cries would create a clingy, dependent child. There was no
scientific basis for this spoiling theory, just unwarranted fears and opinions.
We would like to put the spoiling theory on the shelf—to spoil. Studies
have proved it wrong. In one study, researchers observed two sets of parents
and their children. Group A was securely attached, the product of
responsive parenting. Group B babies were parented in a more restrained
way: put on schedules and given less intuitive and nurturant responses to
their cues. These babies were followed for at least a year. Which group do
you think eventually turned out to be more independent? Answer: group A,
the securely attached babies. Researchers who have studied the effects of
parenting styles on behavior in older children have all concluded that the
spoiling theory is utter nonsense. A child must go through a stage of healthy
dependence in order to become securely independent later.
How does attachment foster independence?
Studies have shown that infants who develop a secure attachment with their
mothers during the first year are better able to tolerate separation from them
when they are older. When going from oneness with the mother (which

 started in the womb) to separateness (an independent child), a growing baby
has both a desire to explore and encounter new situations and a continued
need for the safety and contentment provided by a parent. In an unfamiliar
situation, the securely attached baby looks to mother for a go-ahead
message, which provides the confidence to explore and handle the strange
situation. The next time the toddler encounters a similar situation, he will
have that much more confidence to handle it by himself without enlisting
the mother. The consistent availability of the mother or an attached
caregiver provides confidence and helps the child learn to trust himself,
culminating in the child’s developing independence. In essence, the
attachment-parented baby learns to trust, and trust fosters healthy
independence. (See here for a more detailed discussion of this.)
Doesn’t attachment parenting put the baby in the driver’s seat?
The issue is that of parents’ being responsive, not of baby’s being in control.
When a hungry or an upset baby cries, he cries to be fed or comforted, not
to control. This concern is a carryover from the old spoiling and fear-ofmanipulation mind-sets that didn’t understand what babies are like. For
example, the feeding practice of rigid scheduling (which we now know can
be harmful to a baby’s nutrition and self-esteem) resulted from this
misunderstanding. The baby who has a need signals to the person he trusts
will meet that need. The person responds. That’s communication, not
control. By responding, the parents are teaching their baby to trust them,
which ultimately makes it easier for the parents to be in charge. When your

 baby cries, respond from your heart. Forget the mental gymnastics: Should I
pick her up? Will I spoil her? Has she manipulated me? Just pick her up!
With time you will better perceive why your baby is crying and how
immediate your response should be.
This style should not develop into “martyr mothering”: Baby pulls
mommy’s string, and she jumps. Because of the mutual sensitivity that
develops between attached parents and their attached children, parents’
response time can gradually lengthen as mother enables the older baby to
discover that he does not need instant gratification. Nor does attachment
parenting mean overindulgence or possessiveness. The possessive parent or
“hover mother” keeps the child from doing what he needs to do because of
her own insecurities. Attachment differs from dependency. Attachment
enhances development; inappropriate dependency hinders it. There is a
beautiful balance to attachment parenting.
What does attachment parenting do for my relationship with my child?
Attachment mothers speak of a flow between themselves and their babies, a
flow of thought and feelings that helps them pull from their many options
the right choice at the right time when confronted with the daily “What do I
do now?” baby-care decisions. The flexibility of this style helps you adjust
your parenting to the changing moods and maturity of your baby. It’s
important to make gradual adjustments. For example, the eight-month-old
doesn’t need the quick cry response that the eight-day-old baby does
(unless, of course, he has hurt himself or is frightened). The connected pair

 mirrors each other’s feelings. Baby learns about himself through mother’s
eyes. The mother reflects the baby’s value to her, and therefore to himself.
The flow of attachment parenting helps you read your child’s feelings.

Martha notes: One day I was scolding four-year-old Matthew. I was angry.
I noticed the forlorn look on his face and suddenly I knew that he felt I was
angry at him as a person rather than at what he did. I knew I had to
reassure him, so I said, “I am angry, but I still love you.” He said, “Oh!
Really?” and his face brightened.

MARTHA AND DR. BILL’S TOP EARLY
PARENTING TIP
As you are working out the parenting style that’s right for you and your
baby, you will notice that parenting is a series of reactions and decisions:
My child does this, how do I react? Here’s a foolproof response: Whenever
your baby or child does something nice or not so nice, before you give a
knee-jerk reaction, ask yourself, “If I were my child, how would I want my
mother/father to respond?” You’ll nearly always get it right.
The other dividend to expect is mutual sensitivity. As you become more
sensitive to your baby, your baby becomes more sensitive to you. As an
example of mutual sensitivity that occurred in our family during the writing
of this book, here’s Martha again:

 Martha notes: In the middle of a particularly busy day I discovered that my
kitchen was overrun with ants. This was the last straw and I lost it, verbally
and emotionally. But as I continued to rant and rave, I became aware of
what was going on between Stephen (then twenty-two months) and me. He
watched me, sensing my needs. He looked into my eyes, embraced my knees,
not in a frightened way, but as though to say, “It’s okay, I love you. I would
help you if I could.” As Stephen got hold of me, I got hold of myself—a
mother calmed by her baby’s touch.

Okay, so the attachment style helps the parent-infant relationship. What
specifically does it do for the baby?
Attachment parenting improves behavior, development, and intelligence.
Here is why.
Attachment parenting improves behavior. Attached babies cry less. They
are less bored, colicky, fussy, whiny, and clingy. A very simple reason lies at
the root of this observation: A baby who feels right, acts right. An attached
baby whose cues are read and responded to feels connected. She feels
valued. She trusts. Because of this inner feeling of rightness, baby has less
need to fuss.
Attachment parenting improves development. If attached babies cry less,
they have more time to grow and learn. For the last forty years I have

 watched thousands of mother-infant pairs in action and interaction. I am
constantly impressed with how content babies are who are worn in a sling,
breastfed on cue, and responded to sensitively. They seem to feel better,
behave better, and grow better. I believe this is because attachment
parenting promotes a state of quiet alertness (also called interactive quiet or
attentive stillness). A baby in the quiet alert stage is more receptive to
interaction with and learning from his environment. He is not bored. The
quiet alert state also promotes an inner organization that allows the
physiological systems of the body to work better. Baby diverts the energy
that he would have spent on fussing into growing, developing, and
interacting with his environment.
In essence, attached babies thrive, meaning that your baby grows to her
full potential. Researchers have long realized the association between good
growth and good parenting.
Attachment parenting improves intelligence. Attachment parenting is
good food for the brain. Many studies now show that the most powerful
enhancers of brain development are the quality of the parent-infant
attachment and the response of the caregiving environment to the cues of
the infant. I believe that attachment parenting promotes brain development
by feeding the brain the right kind of information at a time in the child’s life
when the brain needs the most nourishment. By encouraging the behavior
state of quiet alertness, attachment parenting creates the conditions that help
baby learn.

BENEFITS OF ATTACHMENT PARENTING

 Baby
is more trusting
feels more competent
grows better
feels right, acts right
is better organized
learns language more easily
establishes healthy independence
learns intimacy
learns to give and receive love
Parents
become more confident
are more sensitive
can read baby’s cues
respond intuitively
flow with baby’s temperament
find discipline easier
become keen observers
know baby’s competencies and preferences
know which advice to take and which to disregard
Relationship
Parents and baby experience:
mutual sensitivity
mutual giving
mutual shaping of behavior
mutual trust
feelings of connectedness
more flexibility
more lively interactions
bringing out the best in one another

 If you are beginning to feel very important, you are! What parents do
with babies makes them smarter. In the keynote address at the 1986 annual
meeting of the American Academy of Pediatrics, infant development
specialist Dr. Michael Lewis reviewed studies of factors that enhance infant
development. This presentation was in response to the overselling of the
superbaby phenomenon that emphasized the use of programs and kits rather
than the parents’ being playful companions and sensitive nurturers. Lewis
concluded that the single most important influence on a child’s intellectual
development was the responsiveness of the mother to the cues of her baby.
In caring for your baby, keep in mind that relationships, not things, make
better babies. (For a discussion of how babywearing aids development, see
here; for an in-depth discussion of how attachment parenting influences
growth and development, see here.)
Help! How are we ever going to get our baby on a schedule this way?
I would like to replace the rigid idea of a schedule with the more flexible
concept of a routine or even with the more flowing experience described by
the word “harmony.” The more you listen and respond to your baby, the
simpler it will be to ease him into a routine that suits both of you.
Won’t a mother feel tied down by constant baby tending?
Mothers do need baby breaks. This is why shared parenting by the father
and other trusted caregivers is important. But with attachment parenting,

 instead of feeling tied down, mothers feel tied together with their babies.
Attachment mothers we interviewed described their feelings:
“I feel so connected with my baby.”
“I feel right when with her, and not right when we’re apart.”
“I feel fulfilled.”
Remember, too, that attachment parenting, by mellowing a child’s
behavior, makes it easier to go places with your child. You don’t have to
feel tied down to your house or apartment and a lifestyle that includes only
babies.
Attachment parenting sets high standards. What if I mess up? Am I
setting myself up for a real guilt trip?
We all mess up, but when attachment parents mess up, the effect is minimal
because their basic relationship with their child is solid. Also, attached
children are resilient, and this helps take the pressure off parents. The
attachment style of parenting is not a list of things you must do to have a
bright and well-behaved child. The seven attachment concepts are like
foundation blocks, the first steps in building your own parenting style. They
are very basic, intuitive, commonsense ways of caring for a baby. Using
these starter blocks of attachment parenting, you can create your own
parenting style according to your individual lifestyle and the need level of
your baby. Also, there may be medical, social, or economic reasons that you
may not wish to or be able to practice all of the attachment concepts all the
time with each child. Do as much as you can, when you can.

 Yes, you will feel guilty at times. Parenting is a guilt-ridden profession.
Love for your baby makes you vulnerable to feeling you are not doing
enough. But take note. The feeling of guilt can be healthy; guilt is an inner
warning system, a sort of alarm that goes off when we behave in ways we
are not supposed to. Part of maturing as a person and as a parent is
recognizing healthy guilt and using it to make good decisions. Attachment
parenting develops your sensitivity, an inner signal that helps you make
important baby-care decisions.
Does it mean I’m not a good mother if I don’t breastfeed or sleep with my
baby?
No, it does not! Becoming attached to your child is a process. There are
many interactions that lead to a strong parent-child bond. The seven
attachment tips we advise simply give your relationship a head start. There
may be medical or domestic circumstances making breastfeeding difficult.
And for some parents and babies, sharing sleep is neither desirable nor
necessary.
Does attachment parenting require a full-time at-home mother? What
about the mother who chooses to or has to return to work?
Attachment parenting is easier for a full-time mother, but a full-time athome mother is not a requirement for attachment parenting. In fact, this
style of parenting is especially helpful for mothers who are separated from
their babies for part of the day. Attachment parenting makes the most of

 your time with your baby and helps you reconnect with your baby after
separation. It prevents a distance from developing between you and your
baby as you learn to combine employment and parenting. (See Chapter 17,
“Working and Parenting,” for an in-depth discussion of how to keep
attached while working.)
I believe that attachment parenting will be right for our family, but my
confidence gets shaky when I read books or talk to people who feel
differently.
As new parents you will be bombarded with advice. Attachment parenting
is a real confidence builder, enabling you to listen to advice, learn from
some of it, and discount the rest. You will check what the “experts” and
casual advisers have to say against your own instincts and wisdom. Learn to
confide in people who can be supportive. Nothing divides people like
different opinions about child rearing, so you will naturally gravitate toward
like-minded friends. You don’t have to defend your style to others. Just say,
“It works for us.”
Are there special family situations in which attachment parenting is most
needed?
This style of infant and child care gives a boost to any parent who has a
special-needs child or a family situation that requires an extra bit of parental
intuition. By being able to read their child’s behavior, single parents
especially profit from any style of parenting that makes discipline easier.

 The real payoff occurs with the high-need baby, the one who, as it were,
at birth says: “Hi, mom and dad! You’ve been blessed with an aboveaverage baby and I need above-average parenting. If you give it to me,
we’re going to get along; if not, we’re going to have a bit of trouble down
the road.” This style of parenting helps you match the giving level of the
parent with the need level of the baby. The result is that you bring out the
best in each other. Matching a high-need child with unconnected parents
often brings out the worst. See Chapter 16 for more on high-need babies.
How do attachment-parented children turn out? What type of people do
they become?
Parents should not be too quick to take all the blame or the credit for the
person their child becomes. There are many factors that contribute to the
eventual person. Attachment parenting during the early formative years just
increases the chances of a good outcome.
Early in my years of practice I studied the long-term effects of parenting
styles. Parents who were into restraint parenting (scheduling, letting their
baby cry it out, fear of spoiling, and so on) got a red dot on their baby’s
chart. Parents who practiced attachment parenting got a blue dot. Blue dot
parents who practiced all seven of the Baby B’s (see here) plus father
involvement got an extra dot. This simple system was not meant to judge
parenting styles or the degree of “goodness” of the parents. It was simply to
gather information from which I could draw conclusions. It was not very
scientific, nor was there a perfect correlation between what parents did and

 how their children turned out, but I was able to draw some general
conclusions.
Not only did attachment-parented children show long-term benefits,
good things were happening to the parents too. First, the attachment parents
developed confidence sooner. They used the basic tools of attachment
parenting, but felt confident and free enough to branch out into their own
style until they found what worked for them, their baby, and their lifestyle.
During well-baby checkups I often asked, “Is it working?” I advised parents
to periodically take inventory of what worked and discard what didn’t.
What works at one stage of development may not work at another. For
example, some babies initially sleep better in bed with their parents but
become restless later on, necessitating a change of sleeping arrangements.
Other babies initially sleep better alone but need to share sleep with their
parents in later months. These parents used themselves and their baby as the
barometer of their parenting style, not the norms of the neighborhood.

THE LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF ATTACHMENT
PARENTING
In our experience of caring for families over the past forty years in pediatric
practice and in our review of scientific studies, we have found that
attachment-parented children are likely to be:
smarter
healthier
more sensitive
more empathetic
easier to discipline
more bonded to people than to things

 Attachment parents also seemed to enjoy parenting more; they got closer
to their babies sooner. As a result they orchestrated their lifestyles and
working schedules to incorporate their baby. Parenting, work, travel,
recreation, and social life all revolved around and included baby—because
they wanted it that way.
As the years went on I noticed one quality that distinguished attachment
parents and their children—sensitivity. This sensitivity carried over into
other aspects of life: marriage, job, social relationships, and play. In my
experience, sensitivity (in parent and child) is the most outstanding effect of
attachment parenting.
One of the joys of being in pediatric practice so long is now I am seeing
“grandchildren”—moms and dads whom I looked after when they were
babies are now coming into the office as parents themselves. Not
surprisingly, these parents tend to carry on the attachment style of parenting
they got from their own parents. I call this the “carryover effect.”
An attachment-parenting grandmother once confided to me, “I just
received this compliment from our daughter-in-law: ‘Thank you for raising
such a sensitive man.’ ”
As they got older, these connected children were deeply bothered by
situations that weren’t right. They were compassionate when other children
cried and were quickly there to comfort. As teenagers they were bothered
by social injustices and did something to correct them. These kids cared!
Because they were so firmly rooted in their inner sensitivity, they were

 willing to swim upstream against the current. These children will become
the movers and shakers and leaders and shapers of a better world to come.

YOU ARE YOUR BABY’S BEST EXPERT
Whenever we are asked advice on any topic, a favorite question of ours is
“What do you think?” For example, if parents ask us if they should co-sleep
with their baby, instead of simply saying yes (because that’s what felt best
for ourselves and our babies), we like to first hear what the parents’
intuition is telling them to do. We may then share our personal thoughts on
the matter, which may or may not be in line with how the parents feel. We
would rather help parents build on their own intuition than try to shape their
ideas to fit ours. And the same goes for you, our readers.
A capacity for intimacy is another quality I noticed in attachmentparented children. These children learn to bond to people, not things. They
become high-touch persons even in a high-tech world. The infant who
grows up “in arms” is accustomed to relating to and being fulfilled from
interpersonal relationships. This infant is more likely to become a child who
forms meaningful attachments with peers, and in adulthood is more likely to
develop deep intimacy with a mate. The attached child had learned to give
and receive love.
Attachment parenting is contemporary. Today’s children are being
bombarded with more and more electronic influences, especially from video
and computer games. Because this high-tech trend is likely to continue, the
best parents can hope for is to provide speed bumps along the way.
Attachment parenting gives children a high-touch start to help them be
better prepared to survive the high-tech world. These kids are more likely to
grow up to prefer bonding to people rather than to things.

 Are attachment-parented children easier to discipline?
Discipline—that magic word you’ve been waiting for—is easier for
attachment parents and their children. The sensitivity that attachment-style
parents develop enables them intuitively to get behind the eyes of their child
to see situations from his or her viewpoint. For example, one of the most
common problems that parents dread in the toddler years is the tantrum that
can develop when a child is asked to stop a play activity because “it’s time
to go.” So many times I have heard parents say, “He just won’t listen to
me.” Over the years I have watched how Martha handles this problem with
our toddlers. Because her sensitivity prompts her to see things from her
child’s perspective, she understands why separation hassles occur and why
a child throws a tantrum when asked to stop playing before he is ready. She
handles this by a routine she calls closure: A few minutes before it is time to
leave a play activity, Martha gets down to the toddler’s level and asks him
to say “Bye-bye” to each one of the toys and the children in the play group.
This sensitive understanding gives him the ability to close out his own play
activity. Attachment parenting makes life with a toddler easier.
Discipline is not something you do to a child. It is something you do
with a child. In a nutshell, discipline begins with knowing your child and
helping your child feel right. A child who feels right is more likely to act
right and eventually operates from a set of inner controls rather than from
an external force. Parents who can read their child are able to pick up on the
real meaning of a child’s actions and channel these into desirable behavior.
The connected child desires to please. Discipline is a relationship between

 parent and child that can be summed up in one word—trust. The child who
trusts his authority figure is easier to discipline. The authority person who
can read the child gives better discipline. Attachment parents are better able
to convey what behavior they expect of their children, and attached children
are better able to perceive what behavior is expected of them. Connected
kids are easier to discipline.
One day in my office, I observed a mother caring for her baby. She
sensitively nurtured her baby, breastfed him on cue, comforted him when he
was upset, and played with him when he was in a playful mood. Mother and
baby seemed to be in harmony. I couldn’t resist saying to her, “You’re a
good disciplinarian.”
Difficult discipline situations occur when a distance develops between
parent and child. The distant parent becomes frustrated by the “nothing’s
working” feeling and approaches discipline as a trial-and-error list of
somebody else’s methods—many of which promote an even greater
distance between them. Disconnected children are more difficult to
discipline because they operate from a basis of anger rather than trust.
The real payoff of this high-touch style of parenting is the ability to read
your child. Getting attached is how discipline begins.
One of the most important long-term effects of attachment parenting comes
from the concept of modeling. Keep in mind that you are bringing up
someone’s future husband or wife, father or mother. The parenting style that
the child learns from you is the one he or she is more likely to follow when
becoming a parent. Children pick up nurturing attitudes at a young age, and

 those early impressions stay with them. One day a mother brought her
newborn, Aaron, into my office for a checkup accompanied by her threeyear-old daughter, Tiffany, the product of attachment parenting. As soon as
Aaron started to fuss, Tiffany pulled at her mother’s skirt, saying with much
emotion, “Mommy, Aaron’s crying. Pick up, rock, rock, nurse!” What do
you imagine Tiffany will do when she becomes a parent and her own baby
cries? She won’t call her doctor, and she won’t look it up in a book. She
will intuitively pick up, rock, rock, and nurse.

Your parenting style is a model for your children to follow.
Even teenagers pick up on parenting styles. One day Martha and I were
sitting in our family room when we heard our daughter Erin, then nine

 months old, begin to cry in our bedroom, where she was napping. As we
approached the door, the cry stopped. Curious, we looked in to see why
Erin had stopped crying, and what we saw left a warm feeling in our hearts.
Jim, our sixteen-year-old son (now Dr. Jim, pediatrician and cohost of The
Doctors TV show), was lying next to Erin, stroking her and gentling her.
Why did Jim do this? Because he was following our model that when
babies cry, adults listen.

SEARS PARENTING LIBRARY ALERT
If you would like to read more on the new and exciting scientific studies
that support attachment parenting, especially those devoted to the long-term
effects of this style of parenting on older children and adults, consult our
two recent books, The Attachment Parenting Book (2001) and The
Successful Child (2002). See also attachmentparenting.org, the website of
Attachment Parenting International (API), which provides assistance to
individuals who are forming attachment-parenting support groups.

OceanofPDF.com

 Ten Tips for Having a Safe and
Satisfying Birth

Parenting begins before birth. Besides keeping yourself and your baby
healthy during pregnancy, preparing for birth is an important factor. Today’s
mothers-to-be find many birthing options available to them, but along with
the opportunity to choose comes the responsibility for making informed
decisions. A safe, relaxed birthing experience will go a long way toward
helping you get off to a good start with your baby.
We have been in and around the birth scene for a long time. Over the
past forty years we have attended around one thousand births. Martha has
been a childbirth educator and has functioned as a labor assistant at births of
friends. She has personally experienced birth seven times (our eighth child
is adopted).
We have selected from our gallery of birthing-room scenes an overall
impression of how birth is designed to happen. True, ideal births are as rare
as sleep-through-the-night babies, but there are many things you can do to
come close to the birth you desire. We want to share with expectant parents
the birth plans we have found to work for most mothers most of the time.

SEARS PARENTING LIBRARY ALERT

 For the most complete information on a safe and healthy pregnancy, check
out The Pregnancy Book in our Sears library.

OceanofPDF.com

 1. FIND “DR. RIGHT” FOR YOURSELF—
EXPLORE OPTIONS
Parents, take responsibility for your baby’s birth. Select a birth attendant
with a dual mind-set. Certainly you owe it to yourself and to your baby to
select a birth attendant who is medically competent and experienced enough
to deal with unanticipated obstetrical complications during birth. This is the
medical/surgical mind-set. But, realistically, only 10 percent of births
should fall into this category. The other mind-set that you should expect
from your birth attendant goes something like this: “Birth is a healthy
process—we will help you create a birthing environment that will allow
your baby’s birth to progress naturally.” In essence you and your attendant
enter into a partnership to work out a birthing philosophy. You are paying
for both the science of obstetrics and the art of midwifery. You deserve
both.

THE MIDWIVES ARE HERE
The art and science of midwifery is blending with the science and art of
obstetrics to give a higher standard of care to the laboring mother. A
midwife gives routine prenatal care and attends normal births, freeing the
doctor to do that for which he or she is trained—caring personally for those
mothers who have complications and overseeing the work of the midwives.
Certified nurse midwives who have hospital privileges can offer medical

 pain relief; however, their main goal is to give such good labor support that
medication can be avoided.

OceanofPDF.com

 2.

CHOOSE

THE

RIGHT

BIRTHING

ENVIRONMENT
The birthing option we recommend for most parents is an LDR facility,
meaning mother labors, delivers, and recovers in the same room. This
birthing room is more than just a physical facility. It is an atmosphere
conducive to giving birth and an attitude that birth is a normal process. This
type of birthing room portrays a homelike environment, conveying a “relax
while you’re here” message. The lighting is soft and adjustable. The
windows are large, the lounge chair inviting, and the medical and surgical
equipment is efficiently but unobtrusively placed. The bed is adjustable to
make birth easier. Visit the birthing room and spend a few moments
envisioning labor and birth. Interview the nursing staff, your supporting
cast. Does the room give you a nesting feeling? But don’t be oversold by
the designer showroom appearance of the room. The skills and mind-set of
your birth attendants are more important to the well-being of you and your
baby.
Birthing rooms are best for mother—best for baby. The LDR birthing
environment can minimize pain, help labor progress, and increase your
chances of having an uncomplicated birth. (Delivering in the traditional
surgical style promotes fear and tension, contributes to that dreaded malady

 of the laboring mother—failure to progress—and often results in agonizing
labors and surgical births.) As an added attraction, baby stays right where he
or she belongs—nesting in the room. If your local hospitals do not offer this
birthing option, ask for it. And research the other options, such as a
freestanding birth center, in your area.

OceanofPDF.com

 3. HIRE A LABOR COACH
Older studies by Dr. Kennell and Dr. Klaus (the same doctors who
pioneered the concept of bonding) showed that mothers whose births were
attended by a labor coach (aka professional labor assistant) had an 8 percent
cesarean-section rate versus 18 percent for the matched controls whose
births were not attended by one. New studies show that mothers who utilize
a professional labor assistant enjoy shorter labors and need less medical
intervention than mothers who do not avail themselves of professional labor
support. Even the babies do better. Babies whose mothers have good labor
support are much healthier and go home much sooner. Science is continuing
to prove what midwives have long known: Babies and mothers do better
when women help women give birth.

 A professional labor assistant, like a choreographer, can help the mother
channel her energies toward her goal.
The labor coach (also referred to as a doula—a Greek word meaning
“one who ministers”) can be a midwife, childbirth educator, or other
qualified person who is trained to support the laboring mother during
childbirth. Her role is to help the mother move through labor in harmony
with her body, recognizing and acting on her own body’s signals, so that
labor can progress more comfortably and efficiently.
This special member of the birthing team functions as a personal labor
assistant, attending to any and all physical, emotional, and mental needs
one-on-one. She also acts as a communication liaison between the laboring
couple and the medical and nursing staff so that interventions are avoided or
decided upon mutually. She is there to provide the experience needed to
make decisions wisely. Her fee for this service is worth every penny!

 Her role begins by forming a relationship of trust with the couple during
pregnancy; when the mother begins her labor, she comes to her home and
assists labor at home as long as the mother is comfortable there. Most
women go to the hospital way too soon, even before their labor has actually
begun. These false alarms result in either a frustrating trip back home or a
premature admission to the hospital, which opens the door for a long list of
procedures that would not have happened if the mother had labored at home
a while longer. Birth at home is not what most couples in this country
would choose, but labor at home is a wonderful option that many would
choose if it were offered to them. A labor coach is able to be with the couple
at home, monitoring the labor and helping the couple plan the right time to
leave for the hospital, neither leaving home too soon nor remaining home
too long.
The coach does not replace the father; rather, she frees him up to do
what a man does best—love his wife. Men seldom relate empathetically to
the emotional and physical challenges of the laboring woman. It is usually
better for the father to leave the technical matters to a professional while he
embraces his wife, rubs her back, walks with her, gives her food and drink,
and guards against commotion.
We had a midwife for the birth of our last four babies. She and Martha
spoke a woman-to-woman, mother-to-mother language of labor that I did
not understand but have grown to respect.
How do you find one of these gems? Ask for one! A list of women
available as labor support can be obtained from your doctor, midwife,
hospital, childbirth class, local midwife association, or friends who have

 used their services. Mothers in our practice who have had previous
traumatic births and those who are attempting a vaginal birth after cesarean
(VBAC) have found labor coaches to be indispensable the second time
around. For a list of professional labor assistants in your area, see dona.org,
the website for the Doulas of North America.

OceanofPDF.com

 4. GET MOVING
Move with the urges of your body. Move when your body says move, and
be still when your body says be still. Freely roam around your birthing
environment, retreating into a quiet corner when you feel like being alone,
embracing your husband when you need a supporting set of arms during
labor, and walking around the room or around the halls if this eases your
discomfort and helps labor progress. It is important to feel that the
environment you are in and the attendants you are with allow you to move
with the urges of your body, uninhibited by others’ expectations and
stereotyped laboring positions.

 A timely embrace or some well-placed pillows—small things make a big
difference during labor.

TEN TIPS FOR HAVING A SAFE AND
SATISFYING BIRTH
1. Find Dr. Right—explore options.
2. Choose the right birthing environment.
3. Use a professional labor coach.
4. Get moving.
5. Get off your back.
6. Experiment with labor positions.
7. Use technology wisely.
8. Use medical pain relief wisely.
9. Avoid an episiotomy.
10. Formulate your birth plan.

OceanofPDF.com

 5. GET OFF YOUR BACK
Back birthing makes no medical sense. It is not good for the baby, since
lying on your back allows the heavy uterus to press on the blood vessels,
diminishing blood supply to the uterus and to the baby. And it is not good
for you, since back birthing narrows your pelvic outlet and you are required
to push the baby “uphill.” (Squatting widens the pelvic outlet for pushing,
while vertical birthing allows gravity to aid delivery.) The back position is
also more painful and slows the progress of labor. The pelvic muscles,
which need to relax during baby’s passage through the birth canal, are
tensed in the back-lying, feet-up position. Also, this position predisposes the
mother to tears of the birth canal and unnecessary episiotomies.

OceanofPDF.com

 6. EXPERIMENT WITH LABOR POSITIONS
Choose to labor in the arms of your husband, sitting on a birthing ball,
squatting, leaning over the side of the bed, or lying on your side on the bed.
Assuming these positions, and going with the urges of your body during
labor and delivery, allows gravity to help your baby come down and relaxes
tense muscles. Whatever position works for you, use it, and be ready to
change if your body (or your labor coach) tells you you need a different
position.

OceanofPDF.com

 7. USE TECHNOLOGY WISELY
Enter a traditional labor room and you will likely see a mother lying on her
back with the electronic fetal monitoring (EFM) belt girding her abdomen
and attached to a video display terminal. All too often these mothers “fail to
progress” in their labor and “need” a cesarean section. Most mothers should
not be lying on their backs during labor.
Routine continuous EFM for every mother is no longer considered
necessary or advisable. Instead, in laboring mothers without any known
complications, the birth attendant can choose to periodically monitor the
mother for twenty to thirty minutes to obtain information about the wellbeing of the baby. (Studies have shown that routine continuous EFM has
not improved the outcome of babies when compared with intermittent
monitoring by a nurse, but EFM mothers have a higher chance of having a
cesarean birth.) If continuous fetal monitoring is medically necessary, it
should not restrict the mother’s ability to move and change positions during
labor. EFM can be done by telemetry, currently available technology that
allows the mother to wear the EFM while walking around. The monitor
tracings are displayed at a nearby monitor setup. If an intravenous is
required, request a heparin lock (a device connected to the needle that
allows the IV tubing to be disconnected so that you can move around
without being attached to an IV pole).

 OceanofPDF.com

 8. USE MEDICAL PAIN RELIEF WISELY
The more informed you are about your options for pain relief, the safer and
more satisfying your birth is likely to be. In your childbirth class, you will
learn about the many options (both natural and medical) that are available to
you. Medical pain relief can be a welcome addition to—but not a substitute
for—the natural pain-relieving techniques you will learn about in your
childbirth classes. No medication can deliver complete pain relief without
risks. Overuse of anesthetics, to the extent that you lose all birthing
sensations as well as movement, is a setup for a longer labor and possible
surgical birth. On the other hand, a drawn-out, agonizing labor is good for
neither mother nor baby. Discuss with your birth attendant the use of pain
relievers, should they become necessary, that allow you enough sensation
and freedom of movement to work with your body to help your labor
progress. Whatever it takes to deliver a healthy baby and help you feel good
about the process is the right pain package for you. The memories of this
birth will last a lifetime.

THE BIG SPLASH—WATER LABOR
Laboring and birthing in water has been practiced in Russia and France for
the past forty years. This natural labor-saving device has now made its way
to North America.

 Why does water work? Immersion in warm water is a very effective
relaxation tool that minimizes the pain and speeds the progress of labor. The
buoyancy of water encourages a mother to relax and assume her most
comfortable labor position. The weightless feeling buoys the mother so that
she can more easily support her body and deal with the contractions. Her
muscles are less tense because they do not have to support her entire
weight. As a mother relaxes (without medication), her stress hormones
decrease, allowing the natural birth-progressing hormones (oxytocin and
endorphins) to flow uninhibited. A study of nearly 1,400 mothers who
labored in Jacuzzi-type tubs (body-temperature water; no jets, please)
showed better progression of labor and a cesarean-section rate of 10
percent, versus 25–30 percent in traditional hospital births. Some women
wind up giving birth in water because of their reluctance to emerge from it
in spite of the impending delivery. (This procedure is perfectly safe as long
as the baby is brought out of the water right after he is born. The school of
water birthing that practices slow emergence, in which the baby is left
submerged for an indefinite time, can be dangerous and is not
recommended.)
Martha notes: I personally experienced the benefits of water labor with the
birth of our seventh baby, Stephen. I typically have had fast (one- or twohour) labors that only become intense a short time before pushing, and then
after two or three pushes the baby is born. With baby number seven,
however, this pattern changed. After four hours of mild, active labor, I
began to experience an intense pain low in front. This was a signal to my
body that something needed attention. If it had been pain in my back, the
all-fours position would have helped. I tried that position anyway, but it
only hurt more. Then my birth attendant suggested I get into the tub. As I
slipped into the warm water, I felt my limbs relax. I experimented with
different positions and finally found one that allowed me to just let go and
float from my shoulders down so that my whole torso and pelvis relaxed as
well. At that point of total relaxation, the pain literally melted away—better
than Demerol! The buoyancy did for me what I was not able to achieve on
my own.

 Immersion in warm water is a natural relaxation tool.
The experience of total release accompanied by total relief was amazing.
I stayed in the water for about an hour until I recognized signals of the
pushing stage. At that point I decided to get out of the water. I lay down on
the bed on my left side and gave birth after two pushes. As the baby
emerged we discovered the reason for the pain. The baby’s hand was
presented alongside his head—two parts coming through at once. My body
needed total relaxation to allow my muscles to give way to a larger-thanusual presenting part.

OceanofPDF.com

 9. AVOID AN EPISIOTOMY
The American Academy of Obstetrics and Gynecology recommends that
routine episiotomy is unsafe and unnecessary. Warm compresses, perineal
massage and support, avoiding the rush to push baby out, and correct
birthing positions can eliminate the need for episiotomy in nearly all births.
Discuss with your birth attendant ways to avoid this procedure. Spending
the first week or two healing a painful birth wound while trying to
concentrate on baby care is no way to begin life with a baby.

OceanofPDF.com

 10. BE FLEXIBLE IN FORMULATING YOUR
BIRTH PLAN
Birth, like life, is full of surprises, yet the more you plan for your birth, the
more likely you are to get what you want. A birth plan will alert your birth
attendants to your personal needs. Personalize your plan. Don’t copy it from
a class. This is your birth, so it must be your plan. Consult our Birth Book
(Little, Brown, 1994) for step-by-step guidelines on how to compose a
personal birth plan.

SPECIAL NOTE: Be flexible. Suppose birth does not progress the way you
have planned it—and some do not. Trust your birth attendant so that both of
you can depart from the birth you have planned if it is in the best interest of
your baby and yourself to have medical or surgical intervention. This is
when it is especially helpful to have a labor coach—she can help you make
decisions when it’s time to make a change.

We stress the importance of a good birthing experience so parents and baby
can get the best start. Too often in our practice we see what we term the
poor-start syndrome, which goes like this: The birth the mother expected is

 not the birth she gets. She spends the early days and weeks feeling she has
failed and winds up diverting most of her energy to healing her birth
wounds instead of using that energy to get to know her baby. Also, as a
result of a traumatic birth, mother and baby are often separated from each
other after birth, at a prime time in their lives when both need to be
together. As a result, breastfeeding problems occur, the infant-distress
syndrome (fussiness and colic) is more common, and the pair spends most
of the time during the early weeks solving problems, many of which could
have been avoided.

SEARS PARENTING LIBRARY ALERT
For more detailed information on pregnancy and childbirth, check out The
Pregnancy Book and The Birth Book by William and Martha Sears.
In the past, birth became a science but lost its art. We see our present
time as a blending of art and science toward more safe and satisfying births.

 A more relaxed and intimate environment is provided by the LDR (labor,
delivery, and recovery) room.

OceanofPDF.com

 Preparing for Baby

Expectant parents visiting our office often begin their prenatal interview,
“Doctor, this is a well-researched baby.” They have done their homework.
Preparing your mind, your body, and your nest helps you get off to the right
start. Because of the wide variety of lifestyles and parenting styles, today’s
expectant parents have many options.

OceanofPDF.com

 Choosing Dr. Right for Your Baby
Forty years ago when I began practice, I was told there were three qualities
a parent looks for in choosing a doctor for the baby: The doctor must be
able, affable, and available. These three A’s of doctor choosing haven’t
changed. Besides hospitals, other physicians, and medical societies, the best
references are given by parents themselves. If you are expecting your first
baby or are new to a community, ask friends and neighbors about the
qualifications of several doctors and interview them prenatally. Here’s how
to get the most out of your prenatal interview with the doctor:

  • Take a written list of your most important concerns and parenting issues
to determine whether your needs are in harmony with your doctor’s
philosophies.
• If you have a special need, such as “I want to continue breastfeeding
even though I’m returning to work,” ask if the doctor can help you with
this.
• Stay positive. Avoid negative openers. Nothing is more nonproductive
than opening the interview with an “I don’t want” list—for example, “I
don’t want my baby to have any bottles in the hospital.” It is more
productive to ask, “What is your policy about giving bottles to
breastfeeding babies in the hospital?” Remember, your purpose for the
interview is to determine if you and the prospective pediatrician are on
the same wavelength. Negative openers close your mind to the possibility
that you may learn something from the doctor’s response.
• Keep your interview brief and to the point. Most doctors do not charge
for prenatal interviews, and five minutes is usually enough to make a
doctor assessment. If you honestly feel you need more time, offer to
make a regular appointment so you can pay for the time. Rambling about
future behavior worries or trying to cover the whole field of pediatrics,
from bed-wetting to vitamins, is not the purpose of your visit.
• Are you and the doctor of a similar mind-set? For example, if you are
committed to breastfeeding and your doctor is a charter member of the
bottlefeeding set, he or she may be Dr. Wrong for you.
• Ask about the availability of special services in your doctor’s practice.
For example, if you are planning to breastfeed, does your doctor employ
the services of a lactation consultant, and how does he or she use the
consultant?
• Browse around the office. Either before or after your time with the
doctor, here are some observations to consider as you make your
reconnaissance. Sit in the waiting room awhile and observe the spirit of
the office. Is there a child-considered atmosphere, orderly but friendly
and flexible? Is there child-considered furniture that is practical and safe?
Is the staff approachable over what may seem to you the silliest of
questions?
• Observe the provision for separating sick, possibly contagious children

 Observe the provision for separating sick, possibly contagious children
from those who are well. Separate “sick” and “well” waiting rooms, a
favorite
question
on printed sheets
handed
out at childbirth
classes, are
Choosing
Dr. Right—either
a family
practitioner
or pediatrician—is
an
impractical. Nobody wants to use the sick waiting room. A more practical
investment.
Your
baby’s doctor
becomes
like another
of the shuttle
family,
method for
separating
sick and
well patients
is tomember
immediately
contagious
children
into
an examining
room,
leavingin the
anpotentially
Uncle Harry
or Aunt Nancy,
who,
as your
child grows,
also grows
the
waiting room for children who are there for checkups and children who
knowledge of your child and family. This is the doctor who examines your
are not contagious.
newborn
freshforafter
getsinsurance
you through
those hours,
early medical
feeding
• Ask the staff
otherdelivery,
information:
plans, office
fees, hospital
affiliations,
coverage
off call, and
problems,
turns off
the runnyavailability
nose, eases and
the pain
of the when
middle-of-the-night
credentials of medical training. Ask how emergencies are handled, how
ear infection, counsels the bed wetter, helps with school problems, and
the office handles phone calls, approximate waiting time, and who does
clears
whatthe
in the
teenage
officeacne.
when
Choose
you have
thisalong-term
question. partner wisely.

OceanofPDF.com

 CHOOSING OTHER VIPs
In addition to choosing among childbirth options, a birth attendant, a
childbirth class, and a baby doctor, there are other choices you will be
called upon to make.

OceanofPDF.com

 Support Groups

Other important members of your extended family before and after birth are
support groups of like-minded and experienced parents. The information
you receive and the friends you make often carry over into helpful parenting
support during your first year as parents. Of the many parenting
organizations, the oldest, largest, and the one we most recommend is La
Leche League International. You may also find valuable support groups and
parent-education classes at your local hospital, YMCA, or church or
synagogue. Attend as many of these group meetings as time and energy
allow. From each group select the information that best fits your own
lifestyle and the style of parenting you are most comfortable with. Most
cities have online-based moms’ or dads’ groups that get new parents
connected online, with fun events to bring new parents together in person.

OceanofPDF.com

 Lactation Consultants

Another very important person for the beginning parent, a lactation
consultant is a specialist trained to help the new mother get the right start in
her breastfeeding career. Years ago we tried an experiment with
breastfeeding mothers in our practice. Each mother received a one-hour
consultation from one of our lactation consultants within forty-eight hours
after birth. Results: a 50 percent decline in breastfeeding problems such as
sore nipples and insufficient milk. More important, mothers better enjoyed
the interaction in which they would be spending the most time—feeding
their baby. Obtain the name of a lactation consultant from your birth
attendant, hospital, pediatrician’s office, or local La Leche League. Look for
the credentials IBCLC (International Board of Certified Lactation
Consultants). Arrange to have a consultation with her a day or two after
birth. Even better, if you are apprehensive about breastfeeding or have
nipples inconducive to proper latch-on (see here), consult a lactation
specialist before birth.

OceanofPDF.com

 CHOOSING WHETHER TO BREASTFEED OR
BOTTLEFEED
By now you probably have decided how to feed your baby. But if you are
still on the fence about feeding, consider the following decision-helping
tips:

 • Remember this is a very personal decision involving individual
preferences and lifestyles. Don’t be discouraged by well-meaning friends
who confess, “Breastfeeding didn’t work for me.” In most of these cases
it didn’t work because they breastfed in a nonsupportive atmosphere and
without early professional help.
• Attend a series of La Leche League meetings before the birth of your
baby. Ask other breastfeeding mothers what breastfeeding has done for
them and their baby. Breastfeeding is a lifestyle, not just a method of
feeding. Surround yourself with like-minded, supportive mothers. Many
women are intellectually convinced that breastfeeding is best but are not
prepared for the energy commitments of this style of feeding, and here is
where the need for support comes in.
• Read Chapter 8, “Breastfeeding: Why and How,” and the section
“Formula Facts” (here) to learn not only why your milk is best for your
baby, but also what’s in it for you.
• If you are still undecided by birth time, give breastfeeding a thirty-day
trial, using all the right-start tips discussed here. It is easy to go from
breast to bottle, but the reverse is very difficult. Many breastfeeding
mothers find that after they get over the hump of the first few weeks of
learning latch-on and establish a routine, they settle down into a
comfortable and lasting breastfeeding relationship. If after the trial period
you do not joyfully anticipate most feedings, or if you feel pressured to
breast-feed but really do not wish to, consider an alternative method of
feeding or a combination. It’s important to feed your baby in a way that
works for both of you.

OceanofPDF.com

 CIRCUMCISED OR INTACT?
No part of an infant’s body has stirred so much international debate as this
tiny half inch of skin. Whole cultures and religious groups circumcise as a
ritual and as a right; national organizations, even international conventions,
come together to protect the foreskin—and they have appropriate protective
titles: Intact, No Circ, and Peaceful Beginnings. Some parents definitely
want their son circumcised for religious or cultural reasons, or they just
prefer circumcision. A new father once told us, “I want my son to have a
maintenance-free penis.” Others are adamant, nearly militant, about leaving
the penis intact. Some agonize about this decision, feeling, “I’m going to
great lengths to bring my baby into the world as gently as possible.
Circumcision just doesn’t seem to fit the scene.” If you are undecided about
your son’s foreskin, read on.
Circumcision was once considered routine procedure for most newborn
males in the United States, but, as with most routine procedures, many
parents question if circumcision is really necessary for their babies. The
following are the most common questions we are asked about circumcision.
The answers are intended to help you make an informed choice.
How is circumcision performed?

 Baby is placed on a restraining board, and his hands and feet are secured by
straps. A local anesthetic is usually injected into the foreskin of the penis.
The tight adhesions between the foreskin and the glans (or head) of the
penis are separated with a medical instrument. The foreskin is held in place
by metal clamps while a vertical cut is made into the foreskin to about onethird of its length. A metal or plastic bell is placed over the head of the penis
to protect the glans, and the foreskin is pulled up over the bell and
circumferentially cut. Between one-third and one-half of the skin of the
penis (which is what the foreskin is) is removed. A protective lubricant is
put on to cover the incision area for a few weeks. The healing of the
circumcised area takes approximately one week, during which time you can
expect the circumcision, like most cuts, to go through the usual stages of
healing. (See “Care of the Circumcision Site,” here.)
Is circumcision a safe procedure?
Circumcision is usually a very safe surgical procedure. There are rarely any
complications. As with any surgical procedure, however, there are
occasional problems such as bleeding, infection, or injury to the penis. If
there is a family history of bleeding tendencies or one of your previous
newborns bled a lot during circumcision, be sure to inform your doctor of
this fact.
Does it hurt?

 Yes, it hurts. The skin of the penis of a newborn baby has pain receptors
completely sensitive to clamping and cutting. The myth that newborns do
not feel pain came from the observation that newborns sometimes withdraw
into a deep sleep toward the end of the operation. This does not mean that
they do not feel pain. Falling into a deep sleep is a retreat mechanism, a
withdrawal reaction as a consequence of overwhelming pain. Not only does
circumcision cause pain in the penis, the rest of the newborn’s overall
physiology is upset. During unanesthetized circumcision, stress hormones
rise, the heart rate speeds, and valuable blood oxygen diminishes. Sick
babies and premature babies should never be subjected to this shock.
A local anesthetic should always be used. Painless circumcision should
be a birthright. It is a safe procedure and it works. Sometimes the anesthetic
will not remove all the pain, but it certainly helps. Within a few hours, after
the anesthetic wears off, some babies exhibit no discomfort; others will fuss
for the next twenty-four hours.
Does circumcision make the penis easier to keep clean?
Making adult hygiene easier is often a reason given for performing
circumcision. In the adolescent and the adult male the glands of the foreskin
secrete a fluid called smegma. These secretions may accumulate beneath the
foreskin. Sometimes, though rarely, the penis becomes infected. Removing
the foreskin removes the secretions, makes the care of the adult penis easier,
and lessens the risk of infection.

 In the first year, however, the circumcised penis actually requires more
care and cleaning. Vaseline must be applied with every diaper change for a
few weeks. The foreskin will try to restick to the head of the penis and must
be periodically retracted, which can be painful. Some foreskins will become
firmly reattached and won’t be easily retracted. A pediatrician or pediatric
urologist must loosen it with prescription creams or, in some cases, minor
surgery. After the first year or two, such problems are left behind and the
penis becomes “maintenance-free.” An intact penis, on the other hand,
doesn’t require any special care in the early years other than bathing it like
any other body part.
What happens if the foreskin is left intact?
Leaving the foreskin intact protects the penis from irritation caused by
rubbing on wet and soiled diapers. At birth it is impossible to make a
judgment about how tight the foreskin will remain, since almost all boys
have tight foreskins for the first year. In about 50 percent of boys the
foreskin loosens from the head of the penis and retracts by two years. By
five years of age, 90 percent of intact boys have fully retractable foreskins.
It is considered normal for some kids to not be able to fully retract the
foreskin right up until puberty begins. Once the foreskin retracts easily, it
becomes a part of normal male hygiene to pull back the foreskin and
cleanse beneath it during a bath. While it is true that infections from the
secretions beneath the foreskin can more often be a problem in intact males,
simple hygiene can prevent this problem.

 If the foreskin doesn’t retract naturally, will the boy need a circumcision
later on?
Circumcision is very rarely necessary for medical reasons, but occasionally
the foreskin does not retract, becomes tight and infected, and obstructs the
flow of urine. This unusual condition, called phimosis, requires
circumcision. If circumcision for phimosis is necessary later on in
childhood or adulthood, anesthesia is given, and the boy is involved in the
decision.
How do we care for the foreskin if left intact?
Above all, do not forcibly retract the foreskin, but allow it to retract
naturally over a number of years. Retracting the foreskin before it is time
loosens the protective seal between the foreskin and glans and increases the
chance of infection. If you choose to leave your baby’s foreskin intact,
follow these suggestions for its care. In most babies the foreskin is tightly
adhered to the underlying head of the penis during the first year. As your
baby begins having normal erections, the foreskin gradually loosens itself,
but may not begin to retract until the second or third year. Leave the
foreskin alone until it retracts easily, which occurs between ages one and
ten. The age at which the foreskin begins to retract varies considerably from
baby to baby. Respect this difference and do not allow anyone to
prematurely break the seal between the foreskin and the head of the penis,
which may allow secretions to accumulate beneath the foreskin and cause

 infection. As the foreskin naturally retracts, gently clean out the secretions
that may have accumulated between the foreskin and the glans of the penis.
This should be done as part of the child’s normal bath routine. Usually by
three years of age, when most foreskins are fully retracted, your child can
be taught to clean beneath his foreskin as part of his normal bath routine.
If he isn’t circumcised, won’t he feel different from his friends?
You cannot predict how different your son will feel if he is circumcised or
intact. Boys generally have a wider acceptance of these individual
differences than adults do. Locker-room comparisons are a bit of a myth. It
is difficult to know whether the majority of the boys will be circumcised or
intact in the future. The number of circumcisions has been steadily
declining in recent years as more parents begin to question routine
circumcision. In the United States around 63 percent of the infant males are
being left intact, up from 50 percent in the early 1980s. Current research
shows that circumcision rates continue to decline.
My husband is circumcised. Shouldn’t my son be the same as his father?
Some fathers have strong feelings that if they are circumcised, their sons
should be, and this feeling is only natural. But the “like father, like son”
complex alone is not a good reason to choose circumcision, as few fathers
and sons compare foreskins. It will be many years before the boy looks like
the father anyway. Even some of these fathers (usually because of pressure

 from their wives) are beginning to question the necessity of routine
circumcision.
We have a son who is already circumcised. Should brothers be the same?
Since little boys do sometimes compare the styles of their penis, many
parents feel that sameness is important among brothers. Just as you learn a
lot from your first birth and may choose a different style for the next, not
every male in the family must be circumcised. If you choose to leave your
next child intact, your problem will most likely be not in explaining to your
intact child why he is intact but rather in explaining to your circumcised
child why his foreskin is missing.
Does circumcision prevent any disease?
While some research shows a very small decrease in cancer and sexually
transmitted infections, this benefit is negligible and not a valid reason for
circumcision.
The decision is yours. As you can see from the previous discussion, there is
no compelling reason for circumcision. If you are looking to your doctor to
be your son’s foreskin attorney, you may still be left undecided. In 2012 the
American Academy of Pediatrics issued the opinion that current data are
“not sufficient to recommend routine circumcision,” adding “circumcision
is not essential to the child’s well-being.”

 OceanofPDF.com

 CORD BLOOD STEM CELL BANKING
When a baby is born, stem cells can be collected from the umbilical cord.
Stem cells are immature white blood cells that are abundant within the
bloodstream of a fetus and newborn. As a baby gets older, these stem cells
mature and differentiate into a variety of white blood cell types, which
protect the body from infection. Here are some questions you may have
about stem cell banking.
What is the purpose of banking, or storing, stem cells?
If a person is diagnosed with leukemia or one of a variety of other cancers
of the bloodstream, chemotherapy or radiation is used to kill the cancerous
blood cells. Unfortunately, this treatment also kills most of the normal
blood cells in the bloodstream and bone marrow, leaving the person
extremely vulnerable to infection until the bone marrow regenerates enough
white blood cells. Certain people in this situation receive a bone marrow
transplant, which is an infusion of a large supply of stem cells from a donor.
These cells repopulate the bone marrow. Complications can arise if the
donated stem cells are not a perfect match with the patient’s own immune
system and therefore are rejected. Cord blood stem cell banking provides a

 perfectly matched supply of stem cells that won’t be rejected. They can also
be used by another family member whose immune system matches.
There are other potential uses for cord blood stem cells that continue to
evolve, including treating and repairing heart tissue after heart attacks and
other forms of cardiovascular disease; nerve and brain injury after strokes
or trauma; and various neurodegenerative diseases, as well as rare
metabolic and genetic disorders that children may be born with. Autism
research is also under way.
How are the stem cells collected?
The long portion of umbilical cord that is still attached to the placenta
inside the uterus contains a large amount of the baby’s blood that was
circulating through the umbilical cord and placenta at the time the cord was
cut. The labor attendant drains this blood out of the cord (thus the term
“cord blood”) by either squeezing the blood into a tube or using a needle to
withdraw the blood into a syringe. It is painless and only takes five extra
minutes. The blood is not taken from the mom or the baby. If it is not
collected for banking, it is thrown away.
How are the stem cells stored?
The cells are filtered out of the whole cord blood and frozen in liquid
nitrogen or by another deep-freeze method.
Are there any drawbacks to this procedure?

 The only negative aspect is what it does to your bank account. At this
writing, cord blood stem cell banking costs approximately $1,500. There is
also a yearly storage fee of around $150. You can find advertisements in
pregnancy and childbirth magazines for various cord blood stem cell banks.
It’s necessary to make arrangements for collecting the blood sample well in
advance of your due date.
What about storing umbilical cord tissue?
Some cord blood banks now also offer to store a small portion of the
umbilical cord to take advantage of the specific type of stem cells present in
the cord. While this technology is too new for us to know all the possible
advantages, if families do choose to bank cord blood, it may be a good idea
for them to also store the cord tissue.

Dr. Bob notes: There is no right or wrong decision about whether or not
you should store your baby’s cord blood stem cells. The hope is that you will
never need the stem cells. Leukemia and other blood cancers are extremely
rare. Out of tens of thousands of units of stem cells that have been stored,
only several dozen have been used by donors so far. On the other hand, if
the cost is not a hardship, then you may want to consider it. Other medical
conditions may be treated with stem cells in the future. I chose to bank my
third child’s cord blood because I felt good about being prepared in case of
a future need.

 For more information, visit cordblood.com.

OceanofPDF.com

 EXPANDED NEWBORN SCREENING BLOOD
TEST
Every newborn gets a blood test twenty-four hours after birth to check for a
variety of inherited conditions that could have a significant impact on an
infant’s health. In past years these included only phenylketonuria, or PKU,
hypothyroidism, galactosemia, and certain blood disorders. Most states now
do expanded screening tests for dozens of metabolic and genetic disorders.
If these conditions are detected and treated early, in many cases their
harmful effects can be prevented or minimized. If your state does not offer
this expanded screening, you can arrange to pay for it through various
private companies that can be found online or in advertisements in
pregnancy and childbirth magazines. The cost is usually between $50 and
$100. Many of the cord blood stem cell banks also offer expanded newborn
screening.

OceanofPDF.com

 PREPARING YOUR NEST
You’ve glanced wishfully through those baby magazines for months,
admiring the dazzling colors of designer nurseries, the animal-appliquéd
bedding and matching ensembles. Now, with birth only weeks away, you
too can design your nest and outfit your baby as plain or as fancy as your
imagination and budget allow. Just the thought of your baby-to-be brings
back the doll-dressing instinct and the spendthrift in you. Pocket your credit
cards. You will be amazed how few items you absolutely have to buy.

OceanofPDF.com

 Clothing Tips

Buy the basics. Purchase only what you will need for the first couple of
weeks. As soon as baby arrives, so do the gifts. Grandparents splurge and
gifts come pouring in from baby showers.
Plan now—buy later. Make a list of items you need and items you want.
Check off the items that you are given or able to borrow, and purchase the
rest as the need arises. Periodically update your list according to baby’s
developmental needs and your strength to resist the tempting delights in the
baby-product catalogs.
Buy large. Plan at least one size ahead. Buy a few three-month-sized
outfits, but most of baby’s early wardrobe should be size six to nine months.
Letting baby live with the baggy look is not only more comfortable but gets
more mileage from the clothing.
Buy few. Buy only a few of the clothing basics at each stage of
development, as the steady stream of gifts will likely continue. Babies
outgrow their clothes long before they outwear them, leaving a closet filled
with rows of hanging mementos of a stage that passed too soon.

 Buy safe and comfortable. The beads and buttons on a tight knit outfit
may look irresistible in the catalog, but will it be safe and comfortable on
baby? Buttons are out; snaps are in. Baby can choke on buttons—and
besides, who has time for them anymore? Also watch out for loose threads
and fringes that could catch and strangle baby’s fingers and toes, and avoid
strings and ribbons longer than 8 inches (20 centimeters)—they are
strangulation hazards.
Choose easy-access clothing. When examining an irresistible outfit,
imagine dressing your baby. Does it have easy access to the diaper area? Is
the head opening roomy enough, and does it contain neck snaps to make it
easy to slip on?
Think cotton. The most comfortable fabric is 100 percent cotton, as many
babies find synthetic clothing irritating. In order for sleepwear to comply
with federal fire codes, it must be flame-retardant; such chemicals may not
be good for babies. The good news is that flame-retardant sleepwear is
becoming available in 100 percent cotton.

CO-SLEEPERS
A wonderful innovation to join the crib and cradle selection is a co-sleeper,
a bedside bassinette that attaches safely and securely to the side of the
parents’ bed. A co-sleeper allows you and your baby to have separate
sleeping space, yet it keeps baby within arm’s reach for easy nursing and
comforting. See armsreach.com, the website of the Arm’s Reach Co-sleeper,
or call (800) 954–9353.

OceanofPDF.com

 Designing Your Baby’s Nursery

The patterns are endless—so is the fun. Hold on to your credit cards as you
journey through nursery fantasyland. There is the heirloom look with a
four-poster crib that may have housed decades of family babies. You have
the country look—a collection of wicker and patchwork quilts. For the
delicate, there is the marshmallow motif, the elegance of white with the soft
and puffy feel. And in your vision of the perfect nursery, there is mother,
sitting peacefully cribside in her padded rocking chair reading Mother
Goose. As you take your fantasy walk down nursery lane, dad may throw in
a few plain and simple hints, “I can fix up…, I can repaint…, and remember
the garage sales.”
Undaunted by your quest for the perfect nest, you continue leafing
through baby-furniture magazines imagining how your precious babe will
look in each setting. You’re not only feeling soft, you’re thinking pretty.
Then along comes a friend of yours, an infant stimulator (alias a mother, hip
on things baby) who puts a new twist in your soft designs. “Pastels are out,
black and white is in,” she informs. Ms. Stimulator extols the mind-building
virtues of contrasting stripes and dots (which have been shown to hold
baby’s attention longer than pastels). She subscribes to all the right baby
magazines. You’ve become confused as to whether a nursery should help

 baby think or sleep. The zebra or Dalmation look is not what you
envisioned.
By the time you’ve been through the nursery mill, your mind is filled
with visions of every dazzling color and imaginable motif. Just as you are
about to reach the end of your designer rope, you meet a group of
experienced parents who know the nursery scene. There is your
pediatrician, who admonishes you to, above all, think safety. Dad runs into a
seasoned survivor of the shopping scene who suggests you buy the basics
and spend the extra money on the mother. Your psychologist friend warns
about the terminal dependency that occurs in babies that sleep with their
parents, and your mother reminds you that you were one of those high-need
babies who wanted to sleep snuggled next to your mom and dad and who
was unwilling to join the crib-and-cradle set. It begins to dawn on you:
“What’s wrong with these nursery pictures? My baby may not be in any of
them. Perhaps we should wait to see what the sleep temperament of our
baby is.”
By now you’re still thinking pretty, but practical. “Perhaps we can
borrow a crib and splurge on a king-size bed for us.” Finally along comes
the fairy godmother to add a happy ending to the nursery tale. She advises,
“Have fun with your nursery—that’s what it’s for.”
The bottom line on acquiring expensive baby furniture is that it may be
more cost-effective to get a few essentials before the baby is born, such as a
changing table and a bassinet (or co-sleeper) and an inexpensive cradle for
naps or nighttime; but wait on all the major purchases until after you get to
know your new baby’s needs.

 PREPARING FOR BABY
The following checklists should help you get organized as you prepare to
welcome a new member into your family. Don’t be overwhelmed by a long
shopping list of “things” for baby. Most of what your baby really needs you
already have—warm milk, warm hearts, strong arms, and endless patience
—and these don’t cost any money. (For further information about specific
items in the list, consult the index.)

OceanofPDF.com

 OUTFITTING BABY’S LAYETTE AND
NURSERY

First Wardrobe

Four terry-cloth sleepers
Three pairs of bootees or socks
Two receiving blankets
Three undershirts
Three lightweight tops (kimonos, sacques, and/or gowns)
Burp cloths (cloth diapers work well)
As Baby Grows

Four rompers (snap-at-the-crotch outfits)
Two washable bibs
Outing clothes, according to age and occasion
Seasonal Clothes

 Two hats: sun hat, lightweight with brim; heavier-weight ear-covering
hat for cold weather
Two sweaters, weight according to season
One bunting with attached mitts for cold weather
Two blankets, weight according to season
Diapering Needs

Package of disposable diapers
Three-dozen cloth diapers (we suggest diaper service; also consider allin-one diapers)
Diaper pail
Cotton balls
Unscented baby wipes/washcloths
Diaper-rash cream (zinc-oxide type)
Black-and-white mobile to hang above changing area
Feeding Supplies
Breastfeeding Helpers
Three nursing bras
Breast pads, no plastic lining
Nursing blouses and dresses
Baby sling
Footstool to prop feet while feeding
Extra pillows, or a nursing pillow
Lanolin nipple ointment

 Bottlefeeding Items

Four bottles, 4-ounce (120-milliliter)
Four nipples (see nipple suggestions, here)
Utensils: tongs, measuring pitchers, bottle brush, sterilizing pot
Bedding Supplies

Two rubber-backed waterproof pads
Three crib or bassinet sheets
Bassinet blankets, weight according to season
Bathing Supplies

Two soft washcloths
Two terry-cloth towels with hoods
Baby soap and shampoo
Baby bathtub
Baby brush and comb
Baby nail scissors or clippers
Toiletries and Medical Supplies for First Couple of Months
(See “Stocking Your Home First Aid Kit,” here, for a more extensive list.)

 Mild laundry soap
Petroleum jelly
Rectal thermometer
Nasal aspirator
Antibacterial ointment
Cotton balls
Infant acetaminophen
Vaporizer, type to be recommended by doctor
Penlight, tongue depressors for checking mouth (sores, thrush, and so
on)
Nursery Equipment and Furnishings

Bassinet or cradle, or
Crib and accessories, or
Co-sleeper
Changing table or padded work area
Changing-table covers
Rocking chair
Storage chest for clothing
On-the-Go Accessories

Baby sling for carrying baby
Car seat
Car-seat cover
Car-seat head support
Diaper bag

 OceanofPDF.com

 PACKING FOR BIRTH

Clothing for Mother

Two old bathrobes (count on stains)
Two nightgowns
Loose-fitting clothes for going home
Slippers or scuffs, washable
Two pairs of warm socks
Two nursing bras
Nursing gown
Labor-Saving Devices

Your favorite pillow
Watch for timing contractions
CD player or iPod with favorite music
Massage lotion
Rubber ball for back rubs
Snacks, your favorite: healthy lollipops, honey, dried and fresh fruit,
juices, granola, sandwiches for father
Toiletries

 Soap, deodorant, shampoo, conditioner (avoid perfumes; may upset
baby)
Hairbrush, hairdryer
Toothbrush, toothpaste
Sanitary napkins (supplied by hospital)
Cosmetics
Glasses or contact lenses
Homecoming Clothes for Baby

One undershirt
Socks or bootees
Receiving blanket
One sacque or gown
Cap
Bunting and heavy blanket if cold weather
Infant car seat
Diapers for going home
Other Items

 Video and regular camera
Insurance forms
Hospital preadmittance forms
Cell phone
Address book
Favorite book and magazines
“Birthday” gift for sibling(s)
This book
Written birth plan

OceanofPDF.com

 Getting the Right Start with Your
Newborn

Time seemed to crawl during your pregnancy. That elusive due date felt as
if it would never come. Now the long-awaited moment is here, and
everything happens so fast. Yesterday you were “still pregnant”; today
you’re a mother.

OceanofPDF.com

 BABY’S FIRST MINUTES
In making the transition from womb to air breathing, baby experiences a lot
of changes.

OceanofPDF.com

 First Events

The first business at hand is to make sure baby has a safe and healthy entry
into the world. Baby is born with his mouth and nose full of water (amniotic
fluid). Your birth attendant suctions this fluid to make way for air. Baby gets
his first “nose blow” within seconds after birth, sometimes even as his head
emerges and the rest of his body is still inside. After suctioning the fluid
from baby’s breathing passages, your birth attendant cuts and clamps the
cord, and baby begins life outside the womb. Most often these events can
take place with baby nestled on your abdomen, a soft cushion from which to
be initiated into the rites of extra-uterine life.

OceanofPDF.com

 First Touch

Birth is a hands-on affair. During the drama of birth, many mothers
instinctively reach down and touch baby’s head as it emerges from the birth
canal, as if needing to get their hands on their baby during the delivery. (If
the pushing stage is prolonged, the mother can be greatly encouraged if she
can touch the small amount of her baby’s head that is finally within reach.
This helps her to organize her bearing down by showing her how to direct
her efforts.) Some birth attendants encourage dad to touch baby’s head or
even to get his hands on the whole baby as she emerges from the birth
canal, giving him a sense of taking part in the delivery.
I vividly remember the feelings I had at the birth of our sixth baby,
Matthew. Because our birth attendant was late for the delivery, I had the
privilege of “catching” our baby. (When I boast to friends that I delivered
our baby, Martha is quick to correct me. She delivered Matthew; I caught.
Why should dad get all the credit when mom did all the work? Martha is
right.) I still remember the ecstasy I felt when my hands first held the head
of my son. That was a very special relationship we had at the moment of
birth; we still have a special relationship years later—any connection? That
first touch Matthew may never remember, but I will never forget.
Since then, I’ve become a veteran baby catcher dad, as I also ushered
babies number seven and eight (I was there for the birth of our adopted

 daughter as well) into the world. Many birth attendants are now offering
fathers an opportunity to connect with their babies in this special way. This
first touch isn’t for all dads (or moms)—but if it is important to you, ask for
it.

OceanofPDF.com

 First Transition

As soon as the cord is clamped and cut, baby makes the most important
switch of his or her life—the transition from womb breathing (via the
placenta and the umbilical cord) to air breathing. Some babies click in
immediately, or “pink up.” Others need a few puffs of oxygen and/or gentle
stimulation to initiate breathing.

OceanofPDF.com

 First Meeting

After “all systems are go”—meaning baby is pink and breathing well—the
birth attendant places baby on your abdomen (if he’s not there already) skin
to skin, tummy to tummy, his head nestling between your breasts, and
covers him with a warm absorbent towel to get him dry and keep him
warm. Encourage baby to nestle cheek to breast and lick or suck your
nipple. If he seems upset and continues to cry, realize he has just been
through a very harrowing experience. Your warm hand firmly on his back
can give him the feeling of being securely held. This safe, warm place,
together with your rhythmic breathing, is just what he needs to calm his
nerves from the stress of birth. Once he starts sucking at your breast, he will
calm even more.
This first snuggle is not just sound psychology, it’s good medicine.
Newborns easily get cold. Draping your baby tummy to tummy, cheek to
breast, allows a natural transfer of heat from mother to newborn. And
sucking from your nipple stimulates the hormone oxytocin, which helps
your uterus contract, minimizing postpartum bleeding.

THE GOLDEN HOUR
Skin-to-skin bonding immediately after birth is now recognized by the
American Academy of Pediatrics as extremely important to an infant’s
smooth transition into this world. Their policy states the following:

 Infants should be placed on their mother’s abdomen or chest
immediately after birth and should remain there until the first feeding
is finished.
Routine medical procedures, such as weighing the baby, performing a
thorough medical exam, and administering eye ointment, the vitamin
K shot, and the hepatitis B vaccines should wait until the first feeding
is finished.
The infant should room-in with the mother throughout the hospital
stay.
These recommendations, of course, assume that an infant is healthy and
stable and does not require any advanced medical care. You can find this
policy on AAP.org. Be sure your hospital and birth attendants are familiar
with, and are willing to abide by, this policy. Your baby’s transition into
your family will get off to a much better start.
This first meeting should be a private one. After the birth attendants are
sure that mother and baby are well, and the theatrics of birth are over,
request some family bonding time alone—just the three of you, mother,
father, and baby (and siblings if allowed and desired). This is a special time
of family intimacy that should not be interrupted by trivial routines.

OceanofPDF.com

 First Impressions

Immediately after birth, babies usually appear distressed—pained grimace,
wrinkled forehead, puffy eyes, tightly flexed limbs, and clenched fists.
Within minutes after birth most newborns enter a state of quiet alertness.
This is the prime state of receptivity in which a newborn can best relate
with his or her new environment. Baby’s eyes and body language reflect
this state. When quietly alert, baby’s eyes are wide open and searching for
another set of eyes—give him yours. During the prime time of this premiere
appearance, baby will look into your eyes, snuggle against your breasts,
relax his fists and limbs, and quietly melt into the contours of your body.
While in this intimate space, baby and mother share a mutual need: baby’s
need to be comforted and mother’s need to be in touch with her baby.
During this first interaction baby takes in the sound of your voice, your
scent, the feel of your warm skin, and the sweet taste of his first food. As
baby continues to suckle and you continue to soothe, you both feel right.
Within an hour after birth, baby may drift contentedly into a deep sleep.

OceanofPDF.com

 First Feelings

Imagine for a moment what your baby feels during this first meeting. By
giving your baby a smooth transition from the inside womb to the outside
womb of your skin, arms, and breasts, baby learns that distress is followed
by comfort; that the world outside the womb is a warm and comfortable
place. The connection continues, birth having changed only the way this
connection is expressed.
The baby you now see is the baby you have been feeling all along,
someone you have known and finally get to meet. We have noticed that in
this first meeting mothers and fathers look at their newborn with a sort of
wide-angle lens, getting an overall picture of the uniqueness of this little
person.

Then

they

gradually

focus

on

their

newborn’s

special

characteristics. One first feeling we have noticed new parents express is that
of immediately welcoming their newborn as a person, the newest member
in the family. “She has your ears,” mother may say to father. “She has her
grandmother’s nose,” parents may exclaim.

OceanofPDF.com

 BONDING—WHAT IT MEANS, HOW TO DO IT
Bonding—the term for the close emotional tie that develops between
parents and baby at birth—was the buzzword of the 1980s. The concept of
bonding was explored by Dr. Marshall H. Klaus and Dr. John H. Kennell in
their classic book Maternal-Infant Bonding. These researchers speculated
that for humans, just as for other types of animals, there is a “sensitive
period” at birth when mothers and newborns are uniquely programmed to
be in contact with each other and do good things to each other. By
comparing mother-infant pairs who bonded immediately after birth with
those who didn’t, they concluded that the early-contact mother-infant pairs
later developed a closer attachment.
When the concept hit the delivery room, it received mixed reviews.
Parents and pediatricians enthusiastically welcomed the idea, mostly
because it made sense. Behavior researchers were skeptical about whether
the way a mother and baby spent the first hour together could have any
lifelong effects.
We have carefully studied the concept of bonding. Based upon our
review of bonding research and our own observations, here is what we
believe is a balanced view of birth bonding.

OceanofPDF.com

 Mother-Newborn Bonding

Bonding is really a continuation of the relationship that began during
pregnancy, strengthened by the constant awareness of a growing life inside
you. The physical and chemical changes that were occurring in your body
reminded you of the presence of this person. Birth cements this bond and
gives it reality. Now you can see, feel, and talk to the little person whom
you knew only as the “bulge,” or from the movements and the heartbeat you
heard through medical instruments. Bonding allows you to transfer your
life-giving love for the infant inside to caregiving love for the one outside.
Inside, you gave your blood; outside, you give your milk, your eyes, your
hands, your voice—your entire self.
Bonding brings mothers and newborns back together. Bonding studies
provided the catalyst for family-oriented birthing policies in hospitals. It
brought babies out of nurseries to room-in with their mothers. Bonding
research reaffirmed the importance of the mother as the newborn’s primary
caregiver.
Bonding is not a now-or-never phenomenon. While there is little
scientific basis for concluding that missing the initial bonding permanently
weakens the parent-child relationship, we believe that bonding during this

 biologically sensitive period does give the parent-infant relationship a head
start. Yet immediate bonding after birth is not like instant glue that cements
a parent-child relationship forever.
What about the baby who for some reason, such as prematurity or
cesarean birth, is temporarily separated from his mother after birth? Is the
baby permanently affected by the loss of this early contact period? Catch-up
bonding is certainly possible, especially in the resilient human species. The
conception of bonding as an absolutely critical period or a now-or-never
relationship is not true. From birth through infancy and childhood, there are
many steps that lead to a strong mother-infant attachment. As soon as
mothers and babies are reunited, creating a strong mother-infant connection
by practicing the attachment style of parenting can compensate for the loss
of this early opportunity for bonding. We have seen adopting parents who,
upon first contact with their one-week-old newborn, release feelings as deep
and as caring as those of biological parents in the birth room.

OceanofPDF.com

 Father-Newborn Bonding

Most of the bonding research has focused on mother-infant bonding, with
the father given only honorable mention. In recent years fathers, too, have
been the subject of bonding research and have even merited a special term
for the father-infant relationship at birth—“engrossment.” We used to talk
about father involvement; now it’s father engrossment—meaning
involvement to a higher degree. Engrossment is not only what the father
does for the baby—holding and comforting—but what the baby does for the
father. Bonding with baby right after birth brings out sensitivity in dad.
Fathers are often portrayed as well meaning but bumbling when caring
for newborns. Fathers are sometimes considered secondhand nurturers,
nurturing the mother as she nurtures the baby. That’s only half the story.
Fathers have their own unique way of relating to babies, and babies need
this difference.
In fact, studies on father bonding show that fathers who are given the
opportunity and are encouraged to take an active part in caring for their
newborns can become just as nurturing as mothers. A father’s nurturant
responses may be a little less automatic and a little slower to unfold than a
mother’s, but fathers are capable of a strong bonding attachment to their
infants during the newborn period.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Bonding After Cesarean Births

A cesarean section is a surgical procedure, but it is primarily a birth, the
dignity of which needs to be respected. Bonding is not lost if a cesarean
birth is necessary; it’s just that the timing and the roles change a bit. Fathers
have long been welcome at cesarean births, and it is a beautiful sight to see
a father with his newborn during a surgical birth. Here are some ways to
foster birth bonding following cesarean delivery.
For the mother. Epidural anesthesia, with which you are anesthetized from
the level of the navel to the toes, is now routine for C-sections. Unlike
general anesthesia, which puts you to sleep during the birth, an epidural
anesthesia allows you to be awake and aware during the procedure, and you
are able to enjoy bonding with your baby despite the operation. Expect the
bonding time to be somewhat limited, since you may feel physically
overwhelmed, have only one arm free to hold your baby (there will be an
intravenous drip in your other arm), and your baby may be able to spend
just a few minutes cheek to cheek and eye to eye with you. The important
thing is that you connect with your baby immediately after birth, by either a
visual or a touch connection. Though bonding is different after a surgical
birth, an important connection is still made. (See the discussion of
breastfeeding after a cesarean, here.)

 For the father. You can sit at the head of the table holding your wife’s hand
during the operation. At the moment of birth, you are able to look over the
sterile drape and see baby being lifted up and out. After being surgically
removed from the uterus, baby is taken immediately to a nearby infant
warmer, suctioned, given oxygen if necessary, and attended until all systems
are go. As soon as the baby is stable (which usually takes a little longer than
a vaginal birth) you or a birth attendant bring baby over to have some
bonding time with mother. While the operation is being completed and your
wife moves to the recovery room, try to keep mom and baby together. If
baby needs to go to the nursery while the surgery is finished, go with your
baby and begin father-bonding time. Hold your baby in the nursery, rock
your baby, talk and sing and stroke your baby—father bonding at its best. If
your baby needs special care, you can still be there next to the isolette, and
when the nursery staff gives the green light, you can get your hands on your
baby and have your baby hear your voice. You’ll find that your baby will
respond to your voice because he’s heard it all along in utero. I have noticed
that fathers who get their hands on their babies and take an active part in
their baby’s care immediately after birth find it easier to get attached to their
babies later. It is also important to get baby back into mom’s arms as soon
as possible.
As the former director of a university hospital newborn nursery, I have
attended many cesarean births and personally escorted many fathers—some
willing, some reluctant—from the operating room into the nursery, where I
put them to work. Here’s a story about Tim and what his cesarean-birthed

 baby did to him. I had met Tim and his wife, Mary, prenatally, and Mary
shared with me that she had difficulty getting her husband involved in the
pregnancy and feared that he was not going to be involved in the birth. She
expected that he would probably be one of those dads who would become
involved as soon as the child was old enough to throw a football. Tim
thought this whole scene of delivering babies was strictly a woman’s thing
and that he would stay in the waiting room. As it turned out, Mary needed a
cesarean, and I persuaded Tim to accompany her into the operating room
and to be at her side during the delivery. After the baby was born and all her
vital systems were stable, I wrapped baby in two warm blankets and
orchestrated some bonding time among Mary, Tim, and baby Tiffany while
the operation was completed. I then asked Tim to come with me to the
nursery. It did not surprise me that his initial reluctance about getting
involved in the birth was already melting. Tim was still in awe of all the
theatrics surrounding the operation, but he willingly followed me.
While in the nursery, I said to Tim, “I need to attend another delivery.
It’s necessary that someone stay with your baby and stimulate her, because
babies breathe better when someone is stroking them and talking to them.” I
encouraged Tim to get his hands on his baby, sing to her, rub her back, and
just let himself be as loving and caring as he could. He looked around as
though to be sure none of his cronies was watching and agreed to do these
“motherly” things. I returned about a half hour later and saw big Tim
standing there singing to and stroking his baby as the pair were really
getting to know each other. I assured him that his initial investment was
going to pay long-term dividends. The next day, when I made my hospital

 rounds and went in to talk with Mary, she exclaimed, “What on earth
happened to my husband? I can’t get our baby away from him. He’s really
hooked. He would breastfeed if he could. I never thought I’d see that big
guy be so sensitive.”

OceanofPDF.com

 More Bonding Tips

Delay routine procedures. Oftentimes the attending nurse does routine
procedures, gives the vitamin K shot, and instills eye ointment in baby’s
eyes immediately after birth and then presents baby to mother for bonding.
Ask the nurse to delay these procedures for an hour or so, until your new
baby has enjoyed the initial bonding period. The eye ointment temporarily
blurs baby’s vision or causes her eyes to stay closed. She needs a clear first
impression of you, and you need to see those eyes.
Stay connected. Ask your birth attendant and nurses to put your baby on
your abdomen and chest immediately after birth, or after cutting the cord
and suctioning your baby, unless a medical complication requires temporary
separation.
Let your baby breastfeed right after birth. Most babies are content
simply to lick the nipple; others have a strong desire to suck at the breast
immediately after birth. As stated previously, this nipple stimulation
releases the hormone oxytocin, which increases the contractions of your
uterus and lessens postpartum bleeding. Early sucking also stimulates the
release of prolactin, the hormone that helps your mothering abilities click in
right from the start.

 Touch your baby. Besides enjoying the stimulation your baby receives
from the skin-to-skin contact of tummy to tummy and cheek to breast,
gently stroke your baby, caressing his whole body. We have noticed that
mothers and fathers often caress their babies differently. A new mother
usually strokes her baby’s entire body with a gentle caress of her fingertips;
the father, however, often places an entire hand on his baby’s head, as if
symbolizing his commitment to protect the life he has fathered. Besides
being enjoyable, stroking the skin is medically beneficial to the newborn.
The skin, the largest organ in the human body, is very rich with nerve
endings. At the time when baby is making the transition to air breathing,
and the initial breathing patterns are very irregular, stroking stimulates the
newborn to breathe more rhythmically—the therapeutic value of a parent’s
touch.
Gaze at your newborn. Your newborn can see you best with an eye-to-eye
distance of 8 to 10 inches (20 to 25 centimeters)—amazingly, about the
usual nipple-to-eye distance during breastfeeding. Place your baby in the en
face position, adjusting your head and your baby’s head in the same
position so that your eyes meet. Enjoy this visual connection during the
brief period of quiet alertness after birth, before baby falls into a deep sleep.
Staring into your baby’s eyes may trigger a rush of beautiful mothering
feelings.
Talk to your newborn. During the first hours and days after birth, a natural
baby-talk dialogue will develop between mother and infant. Voice-analysis

 studies have shown a unique rhythm and comforting cadence to mother’s
voice.

OceanofPDF.com

 GETTING TO KNOW YOUR NEWBORN
Of course, bonding does not end at the delivery bed—it is just the
beginning! Making visual, tactile, olfactory, auditory, and sucking
connection with your baby right after the birth may make you feel you don’t
want to release this little person that you have labored so hard to bring into
the world—and you don’t have to. Your wombmate will now become your
roommate. We advise healthy mothers and healthy babies to remain
together throughout their hospital stay.

 Visual connection is an important part of the bonding process; your
newborn sees you best at an eye-to-eye distance of around 10 inches (25
centimeters).
Most babies make a stable transition from womb to world without any
complications; some need a few hours in the nursery for extra warmth,
oxygen, suctioning, and other special attention until their vital systems
stabilize. Then they can return to the nursery of mother’s arms, “roomingin.”
Feelings after birth are unique to each mother. Many mothers show the
immediate glow of motherhood and the “birth high” excitement of a race
finished and won. It’s love at first sight, and they can’t wait to get their
hands on their baby and begin mothering within a millisecond after birth.
Others are relieved that the mammoth task of birth is over, that baby is
normal. Now they are more interested in sleeping and recovering than
bonding and mothering. As one mother said, following a lengthy and
arduous labor, “Let me sleep for a few hours, take a shower, comb my hair,
and then I’ll start mothering.” If these are your feelings, enjoy your rest—
you’ve earned it. There is no need to succumb to pressure bonding when
neither your body nor mind is willing or able. In this case, father bonds
while mother rests.

OceanofPDF.com

 ATTACHMENT-PROMOTING BEHAVIORS
Having your baby with you in your room is especially helpful for women
who have difficulty jumping right into mothering. One day while making
rounds I visited Jan, a new mother, only to find her sad. “What’s wrong?” I
inquired.
She confided, “All those gushy feelings I’m supposed to have about my
baby—well, I don’t! I’m nervous, tense, and don’t know what to do.”
I encouraged Jan. “Love at first sight doesn’t happen to every couple, in
courting or in parenting. For some mother-infant pairs it is a slow and
gradual process. Don’t worry, your baby will help you. But you have to set
the conditions that allow the mother-infant care system to click in.” And I
went on to explain.
All babies are born with a group of special qualities called attachmentpromoting behaviors—features and behaviors designed to alert the
caregiver to the baby’s presence and draw the caregiver, magnetlike, toward
the baby. These features are the roundness of baby’s eyes, cheeks, and body;
the softness of the skin; the relative bigness of baby’s eyes; the penetrating
gaze; the incredible newborn scent; and, perhaps most important of all,
baby’s early language—the cries and precrying noises.
Here’s how the early mother-infant communication system works. The
opening sounds of the baby’s cry activate a mother’s emotions. This is

 physical as well as psychological. As discussed in Chapter 1, upon hearing
her baby cry, a mother experiences an increased blood flow to the nurturing
areas of her brain as well as her breasts, resulting in the biological urge to
pick up and nurse her baby. This is one of the strongest examples of how
the biological signals of the baby trigger a biological response in the
mother. There is no other signal in the world that sets off such intense
responses in a mother as her baby’s cry. At no other time in the child’s life
will language so forcefully stimulate the mother to act.
Picture what happens when babies and mothers are together. Baby
begins to cry. Mother, because she is there and physically attuned to baby,
immediately picks up and feeds her infant. Baby stops crying. When baby
again awakens, squirms, grimaces, and then cries, mother responds in the
same manner. The next time mother notices her baby’s precrying cues.
When baby awakens, squirms, and grimaces, mother picks up and feeds
baby before he has to cry. She has learned to read her baby’s signals and to
respond appropriately. After rehearsing this dialogue many times during the
hospital stay, mother and baby are working as a team. Baby learns to cue
better; mother learns to respond better. As the attachment-promoting cries
elicit a hormonal response in the mother, her milk-ejection reflex functions
smoothly, and mother and infant are in biological harmony.
Now contrast this scene with the way an infant used to be cared for in
the hospital nursery. Picture this newborn infant lying in a plastic box. He
awakens, hungry, and cries along with twenty other hungry babies in plastic
boxes who have by now all managed to awaken one another. A kind and
caring nurse hears the cries and responds as soon as time permits. But she

 has no biological attachment to this baby, no inner programming tuned to
that particular newborn, nor do her hormones change when the baby cries.
The crying, hungry baby is taken to her mother in due time. The problem is
that the baby’s cry has two phases: The early sounds of the cry have an
attachment-promoting quality, whereas the later sounds of the unattended
cry are more disturbing to listen to and may actually promote avoidance.
The mother who has missed the opening scene in this biological drama
because she was not present when her baby started to cry is nonetheless
expected to give a nurturant response some minutes later. By the time the
nursery baby is presented to the mother, the infant has either given up
crying and gone back to sleep (withdrawal from pain) or greets the mother
with even more intense and upsetting wails. The mother, who possesses a
biological attachment to the baby, nevertheless hears only the cries that are
more likely to elicit agitated concern rather than tenderness. Even though
she has a comforting breast to offer the baby, she may be so tied up in knots
that her milk won’t flow, and the baby cries even harder. As she grows to
doubt her ability to comfort her baby, the infant may wind up spending
more time in the nursery, where, mom feels, the “experts” can better care
for him. This separation leads to more missed cues and breaks in the
attachment between mother and baby, and they go home from the hospital
without knowing each other.
Fortunately this scenario doesn’t happen much anymore. Today baby
awakens in his mother’s room, his precry signals are promptly attended to,
and he is put to the breast either before he needs to cry or at least before the
initial attachment-promoting cry develops into a disturbing cry. Thus, both

 mother and baby profit from being together. Infants cry less, mothers
exhibit more mature coping skills toward their baby’s crying, and the infantdistress syndrome (fussiness, colic, incessant crying) is less common than
when babies used to be in nurseries. We had a saying in the newborn unit:
“Nursery babies cry harder; rooming-in babies cry better.”
A better term for “rooming-in” would have been “fitting in.” By
spending time together and rehearsing the cue-response dialogue, baby and
mother learn to fit together well—and bring out the best in each other.

Martha notes: I get behind the eyes of my newborn and realize that hunger
is a new experience for him. He’s never felt it before and doesn’t know I will
solve it for him quickly. A hungry baby becomes anxious, then frantic,
quickly. I want to be there before this happens.

OceanofPDF.com

 BIRTHDAY “PICTURES”
Now come along with us as we take you through your first visual and tactile
exam of your newborn.
Head. The asymmetrical watermelonlike shape of the head is caused by the
movement of baby’s skull bones, which shift to allow an easier passage
through the birth canal. (The process is called molding.) As you run your
hands over the top of your baby’s head, you may feel ridges caused by the
skull bones overlapping during the tight squeeze of labor. Molding is more
noticeable in babies with larger heads and after long labors, giving evidence
that baby labored, too. Molding is less noticeable in breech babies and,
depending on whether or not labor occurred, may not be present at all in
cesarean births. The molded head assumes a rounded shape within a few
days.
Scalp. As your head caressing progresses, feel the relatively soft area
(called a fontanel) in the center of your baby’s head. Sometimes you can see
and feel a pulse beneath the soft spot. You may feel a smaller soft spot in
the center toward the back of baby’s head. It’s okay to touch and wash these
soft spots. Actually, there is a tough membrane underneath. Enjoy this feel
while you can; these soft spots gradually get smaller as your baby’s skull

 bones grow together. Baby’s scalp may range from bald to covered with a
full crop of hair, matted and disheveled. Photo capture this first hairstyle
quickly. As you feel baby’s scalp, you may notice a “goose egg”—a soft
swelling in one area due to the accumulation of fluid during birth. It may
appear bruised. This is caused by tiny blood vessels beneath the scalp
breaking during delivery. The lump may take several months to disappear
and may feel very hard as the underlying blood calcifies.

Eyes. Your first gaze into your baby’s eyes may be a quick one. Notice the
puffy eyelids and slitlike openings as baby squints to protect his sensitive

 eyes from bright lights. Appreciate your first quick glances at eye color,
usually dark blue or gray at birth. Your newborn’s eyes may wander a lot,
squint, and, due to the pressure of labor, be temporarily bloodshot. Eyelids
may droop for a few days or weeks, and baby may even open one eye at a
time. Tears seldom appear for the first few weeks, but newborn eyes may
occasionally have some mucus drainage that is easily wiped away. While
your baby’s eyes may be closed most of the time, there will be intermittent
periods of wide-eyed quiet alertness, during which baby’s eyes enjoy
connecting with another set of eyes—yours.
Face. Your baby’s features may show the results of a tight squeeze: swollen
blue eyelids, pudgy cheeks with bluish bruising and faint streaks of broken
blood vessels, flattened nose, receding chin, and a bit of asymmetry. During
the first day, baby takes off this birth mask and puts on a less puffy
appearance, the facial bones spring back into position, and the facial
features seem more in order. Photo capture this first face if you can. You
will never see it again.
Skin. With your first caress you will notice your newborn’s skin is covered
with a white, cheesy, slippery material. Called vernix, this protected the
skin during the time your preborn baby soaked in your amniotic fluid and
acted as a lubricant during delivery. Since this coating has natural protective
properties, let it soak in rather than rubbing it off. As you run your hand
along baby’s back, earlobes, cheeks, and shoulders, you will feel a fine fuzz
of furry hair called lanugo. Enjoy the fleecy feel of this silky-soft early baby

 hair; it too will disappear. Newborn skin looks, feels, and fits differently
from baby to baby. Some large term babies have smooth, well-fitting,
thicker skin with a pink, ruddy complexion. Others, especially postmature
and small-for-date babies, have loose-fitting, wrinkly skin. Some newborns
have thinner skin with patches of blood vessels shining through, most
noticeable on the bridge of the nose, the eyelids, and nape of the neck.

FIRST STATS
Approximately 95 percent of term newborns fit these statistics:
They weigh between 5.5 and 9 pounds (2.5–4.1 kilograms), the
average being 7.5 pounds (3.4 kilograms).
They measure 18–21.5 inches long (46–55 centimeters), the average
being 20 inches (51 centimeters).
Their head circumference ranges from 12.8 to 14.8 inches (32.5–37.5
centimeters), the average being 13.8 inches (35 centimeters).
A newborn’s breathing rate and heartbeat are twice as fast as an adult’s.
As if the blood in your newborns’ immature circulation is deciding
which way to go, newborn skin is various colors. Some areas may be a rosy
red, others a pale pink. Because the final destination of mature circulation is
the hands and feet, expect them to be cool and blue for the first few hours or
days. When the baby is crying, her skin takes on a flushed appearance, and
the patchy areas of extra blood vessels, especially in the middle of the
forehead, intensify (see also the discussion of normal skin marks, here). For
the first week or two baby’s skin may be dry, flaky, and cracked, especially
on hands and feet. No lotion is necessary.

 Body. Most newborns have a pudgy appearance due to large fatty areas,
called fat folds, along the back of the neck, the cheeks, the sides of the nose,
and underneath the arms. The fat folds along the shoulders make it very
hard to see baby’s short neck. Because of the transfer of maternal hormones
at birth, your baby’s breasts may be swollen and even leak a few drops of
milk. As you place your hand over baby’s heart, the heartbeat is almost too
fast to count. The plastic-clamped stump of the umbilical cord sits like a
centerpiece in the middle of a rotund abdomen. The combination of the
round abdomen and drawn-up legs nearly obscures the newborn’s groin.
The bowed legs and turned-in feet are pulled up beneath baby when he is
lying on his tummy.
Hands. The hands are tightly fisted and pulled up toward the face as baby
lies in a muscle-flexing position, and some newborns begin exploring their
faces with their hands within the first few hours after birth. She may even
scratch her delicate skin with paper-thin fingernails, which can be long. The
skin of the hands is usually blue, wrinkled, and loose fitting, showing deep
creases in the bracelet area of the wrists. Baby’s clenched fists will unfold
during states of quiet alertness and deep sleep.
Feet. Like the hands, the feet are blue and wrinkled. They are usually
turned in, and the toes are frequently overlapping. The tiny toenails look
ingrown but aren’t.

 Legs and arms. The legs are drawn up, frog-like, and bowed inward in the
squatting position baby assumed in the womb. As you play with your baby’s
limbs, you will notice that the arms and legs have a normal spring-back-tothe-body tightness, especially when baby is awake or upset, but they relax
and unfold when she is in a deep sleep.
Genitalia. The vulva of female and the scrotal sac and testes of male
newborns are swollen quite large due to the extra fluid accumulated at birth
and the rush of hormones just before birth. The swelling in the vulva
usually subsides within the first week, but the extra fluid in the scrotal sac
may last for weeks or months. Some vaginal mucus and blood is normal.

OceanofPDF.com

 ROUTINE HOSPITAL PROCEDURES
To assess the general health of your baby and begin a bit of preventive
medicine, the following procedures are done in all hospitals and even in
some out-of-hospital births.

OceanofPDF.com

 The Apgar Score

Immediately after birth your baby is given a “grade”—a reminder that your
newborn is entering a quantitative world where humans are compared and
scored from the moment of birth and throughout life. The Apgar score—
devised by Dr. Virginia Apgar in 1952—is a quick appraisal of the initial
health of your baby. This score, determined first at one minute and then five
minutes after birth, assesses your newborn’s heart rate, breathing effort, skin
color, muscle tone and activity, and response to stimulation.
Not a perfect ten. What does the Apgar score really mean? Is a 10 healthier
than an 8? Not necessarily! The Apgar score was devised primarily for
nursery personnel to determine which babies need more careful observation.
A baby who has a 5 needs more intense observation than a baby who
receives a 7 to 10. It is sort of a which-baby-to-worry-about score. A baby
who receives an Apgar of 5 to 6 at one minute but increases to 7 to 10 at
five minutes would be in the nonworry category. A baby who begins life
with a one-minute Apgar of 5 and remains 5 at five minutes would need
more careful observation, possibly in a transitional nursery, and then would
be allowed to room-in with mother when the vital systems become stable.
There is seldom a perfect 10. Even though there are infants who are pink
all over, breathe normally, have normal heart rates, show strong muscular

 movement, and cry lustily, most normal, healthy newborns do not achieve
perfect scores. Because it takes a few minutes for a newborn’s circulatory
system to adjust to life outside of the womb, it is quite normal for a
newborn to have blue hands and feet for the first few hours. Also, some
babies are naturally quiet immediately after birth. In fact, some of the
healthiest newborns I have seen are in a state of quiet alertness at five
minutes, but they would lose points on their Apgar for not “crying lustily.”
THE APGAR SCORE
Points
Signs Scored

0

1

2

Heart rate

Absent

Below 100

Over 100

Breathing effort

Absent

Slow,
irregular

weak, Strong, crying

Color

Blue, pale

Body and lips Completely
pink, hands and pink
feet blue

Muscle tone, activity

Limp,
weak Arms and legs Strong
movements
flexed
movement

Response to stimulation Absent
(e.g., suctioning mouth
and nose)

Grimace

Lusty
cry,
cough, protest

Not an infant IQ test. The Apgar score should have a “For medical use
only” label, but over the years this score has been given to parents who
have perceived the number as a sort of infant IQ test—an unnecessary
source of anxiety for parents of low-scoring babies. There is seldom a

 correlation between the Apgar score and the long-term development of
babies. If your baby has pink lips and is breathing normally, chances are he
or she is a healthy newborn.

OceanofPDF.com

 Vitamin K

Newborns can be temporarily deficient in vitamin K. Immediately after
birth an injection of vitamin K is given to your baby to promote normal
blood clotting and lessen the risk of abnormal bleeding into vital tissues. We
recommend this preventive treatment for all our patients, but you may
request that the nurse delay this injection for a few hours until you and your
baby have had bonding time.

OceanofPDF.com

 Eye Ointment

To protect against germs that may have entered your baby’s eyes during
passage through the birth canal, an antibiotic ointment, erythromycin, is put
into your baby’s eyes. This ointment in no way harms your baby’s eyes but
may temporarily blur the vision. Because it is important for your baby to
gaze into your eyes immediately after birth—one of the high points of
bonding—you may safely ask the nurse to delay administering this ointment
until after bonding time.
This procedure was originally designed to prevent transmission of
chlamydia and gonorrhea infections from mother to baby during the birth
process. We do generally recommend it but are understanding of our
patients who decline the ointment, as the risk of eye infections for babies
today is very small.

OceanofPDF.com

 Blood Tests

After birth a sample of your baby’s umbilical cord blood is taken to the lab
in case baby’s blood type and Rh factor are needed later. After twelve to
twenty-four hours, several drops of blood are taken from your baby’s heel
for screening tests for dozens of illnesses. Here are some of the disorders
that are screened for, listed in order of the diseases’ frequency:
Sickle cell disease. This condition can affect any ethnic group, but it is
most common in people of African descent, occurring in about one in four
hundred births. It also is not uncommon among people from India,
Mediterranean nations, the Middle East, and Latin America. It is a disease
that affects the red blood cells, causing them to change shape and not
function properly. This results in anemia, as well as numerous other
complications throughout the body. The newborn screening blood test also
looks for various other red blood cell defects.
Hypothyroidism. An inadequate thyroid gland is the cause of
hypothyroidism, a condition occurring in one out of every five thousand
infants. If undetected and untreated, hypothyroidism may cause mental
retardation. Treatment with thyroid hormone is more effective the earlier it
is started.

 Phenylketonuria (PKU). The early screening blood test also detects PKU,
an extremely rare disease occurring in approximately one out of fifteen
thousand infants. If left untreated, it can result in brain damage; if it is
detected early and treated with a special diet, the child can develop
normally.
Galactosemia. Among the diseases detected by this test, galactosemia is
one of the rarest, occurring in one out of every sixty thousand infants. It is
caused by an enzyme deficiency that allows harmful substances to build up
in a baby’s blood and damage vital tissues, resulting in death if not treated.
Like PKU, this disease is treatable by a special diet.
Other genetic and metabolic disorders. Most states now offer expanded
testing that checks for dozens of such conditions. Commercial labs also do
expanded testing for a fee. For those who live in a state that doesn’t offer it,
see here for more information.

OceanofPDF.com

 Newborn Hearing Screening Test

During the 1990s government-funded newborn hearing screening programs
began in selected hospitals throughout the United States. Research showed
that approximately one in 650 infants had some degree of hearing loss.
Affected infants who received early learning interventional stimulation
prior to six months of age scored significantly higher on developmental and
academic tests during childhood than those infants with hearing loss who
did not receive early intervention. The bottom line: Early detection results
in early intervention, which leads to a higher functioning hearing-impaired
child. Now, most hospitals perform free newborn hearing tests prior to
discharge.
Different methods are used to screen a newborn’s hearing. In one, an
earplug that emits a clicking sound is placed in baby’s ear. Sensors in the
earplug detect the inner ear’s response to the sounds. Another method uses
sensors attached to baby’s scalp to measure brain wave activity in response
to sounds. Both methods are painless and only take a few minutes. Some
babies with normal hearing fail the initial test and the hospital may test the
baby again the following day. If baby fails again, then a more detailed
hearing evaluation is performed by a hearing specialist during the first few
weeks of life.

 Dr. Jim notes: Don’t panic if your baby does not pass the first hearing test.
Most initial failures go on to pass the next test with flying colors.

OceanofPDF.com

 NEWBORN JAUNDICE
Browse through any postpartum ward, and you will notice that many of the
babies have a yellow tinge to their skin and eyeballs. They have newborn
jaundice, which, in most babies, is of no more concern than prickly heat.
Most newborns develop some degree of jaundice, which is caused by the
buildup in the blood of a yellow pigment called bilirubin and the deposit of
this excess bilirubin in the skin. The bilirubin level is measured by
obtaining a few drops of blood from your baby’s heel or by measuring the
pigment in the skin using a painless transdermal bilirubin detector.

OceanofPDF.com

 Normal and Abnormal Jaundice

Newborns may develop two types of jaundice: normal (physiologic) and
abnormal.
Babies are born with more red blood cells than they need. These excess
cells, resembling tiny wafers packed with a yellow pigment called bilirubin,
are broken down by the body’s disposal system. During this process the
yellow pigment is released. This happens every day in our bodies. We don’t
get yellow because our liver—the master filter—disposes of the excess
bilirubin.
A newborn’s immature liver can’t handle the extra bilirubin, resulting in
this yellow pigment’s settling in the skin and reflecting a yellow color by
the third or fourth day after birth. This is normal jaundice. As soon as your
baby’s bilirubin-disposal system matures and the excess blood cells
diminish, the jaundice disappears—usually within a week or two, and
without any harm.
Abnormal jaundice usually develops sooner, within the first twenty-four
hours after birth. This type of jaundice is caused by too many red blood
cells being broken down too fast. If too much bilirubin is released into the
system (in medical terms, “if the bilirubin level is too high”), the excess
bilirubin could cause brain damage (which, with modern prevention and
treatment, rarely occurs). Even the abnormal type of jaundice almost never

 harms a term healthy baby. It is much more worrisome in premature or sick
newborns.
This abnormal type of jaundice is usually caused by an incompatibility
between mother’s and baby’s blood types. This means mother may have Otype blood and baby may have either A or B type. The mother may be Rhnegative and baby Rh-positive (to prevent an Rh problem in subsequent
babies, mothers are given an injection of RhoGAM during pregnancy and
immediately after birth). Some of mother’s blood antibodies are circulating
through baby’s bloodstream, and if baby has a different blood type from
mother, a sort of war develops between two opposing forces: baby’s red
blood cells and the foreign antibodies of mother’s different blood type. As a
result many red blood cells are damaged during the battle, bilirubin is
released, and jaundice occurs quickly.
Your doctor will monitor the degree of jaundice by taking blood samples
to determine bilirubin levels. If these levels are low, no harm, no worry. If
these levels are too high and rapidly rising, your doctor may begin
treatment by giving your baby more fluids to wash out the excess bilirubin
and placing your baby under phototherapy lamps, which dissolve the extra
yellow pigment in the skin, allowing it to be excreted in the urine, and
reducing the bilirubin in the blood. Instead of placing the jaundiced baby
under phototherapy lamps, your doctor may choose to use a more babyfriendly jaundice reducer called a bili-blanket. Baby is wrapped in a blanket
containing jaundice-dissolving phototherapy lights. With a bili-blanket, you
can hold and breastfeed your baby while she is receiving phototherapy
instead of having her be separated from you in a Plexiglas isolette under

 phototherapy lamps. This blanket treatment can be continued at home,
allowing a jaundiced baby to be discharged earlier from the hospital.
If your baby develops jaundice—and most do—be sure your doctor
explains to you, and you understand, what type of jaundice your baby has
and whether you should worry. In our experience the anxiety level of the
parents is always higher than the bilirubin level of the baby. In caring for
newborn jaundice it is important that both the anxiety level in the parents
and the bilirubin level in the baby be correctly diagnosed and treated.

OceanofPDF.com

 Breastfeeding the Jaundiced Baby

Picture the following scenario. Baby has normal (physiologic) jaundice. He
is healthy, term, and there is no identifiable reason in his blood for the
jaundice. Baby is simply yellow. Upon seeing this “yellow flag,” the doctor
separates baby from mother and places him under phototherapy lamps. In
addition to the fact that phototherapy causes baby to be sleepy and
somewhat dehydrated, the separation makes baby disinterested in
breastfeeding. Baby is then given supplemental bottles. Consequently,
mother’s milk supply diminishes at a vulnerable time, when frequent
sucking and the continued presence of baby is needed to stimulate milk and
at a time when more calories and fluid are needed to help excrete the
bilirubin. (Studies have shown that breast milk is better than water or
formula for helping babies get rid of jaundice, perhaps because of its
laxative effect, producing more stools.)
This scenario should seldom happen. There is a general feeling in
medical circles that breastfeeding babies get more jaundice. In our
experience, newborns who are breastfed the way the feeding system was
designed to work are no more yellow than their bottlefeeding friends. It is
true, however, that scheduling breastfeeding and separating mother and
baby do result in more breastfeeding babies becoming jaundiced because
they wind up not getting enough calories due to the restricted feedings. This

 is appropriately termed breastfeeding jaundice (not breast-milk jaundice)—
a preventable condition caused, not by your milk, but by the poor
management of the breastfeeding. Here’s what you can do to manage
jaundice and get breastfeeding off to a good start.

Follow the right-start suggestions for successful
breastfeeding (here), specifically early frequent
feedings and breastfeeding consultation. This will
help reduce most causes of jaundice. A certain
amount of fluids and calories, preferably from
breast milk, are necessary to help the newborn
clear the excess bilirubin out of his system.
Consult your doctor and be sure you understand
the type of jaundice. If baby is healthy and this is
normal jaundice (which we call no-problem
jaundice), don’t worry; make milk. (Worry can
cause you to make less milk.)
Don’t ignore a sleepy baby. Jaundice sometimes
makes babies sleepy, and sleepy babies breastfeed
less vigorously, thus aggravating the cycle of
jaundice. (To circumvent this problem, see
suggestions on switch feeding, here.)
If your baby has the abnormal type of jaundice,
requiring
phototherapy
and
sometimes
intravenous fluids to wash out the excess

 bilirubin, continue to breastfeed your baby unless
the medical condition prevents it. (See “Breastmilk jaundice,” below.)
Breast-milk jaundice. A rare type of jaundice, termed breast-milk jaundice
(which is different from breastfeeding jaundice) accounts for less than 1
percent of significant jaundice in breastfeeding newborns. In this poorly
understood condition breast milk may either increase the degree of jaundice
or slow its normal resolution—for biochemical reasons that are still unclear.
This type of jaundice occurs later, around day seven to fourteen of life. If
your doctor suspects breast-milk jaundice, you may be asked to stop
breastfeeding for twelve to twenty-four hours. If your baby’s bilirubin level
quickly drops by 20 percent, this is probably the right diagnosis. If so, most
mothers can continue breastfeeding if the bilirubin isn’t too high. If your
doctor instructs you to delay breastfeeding for a few days, you will need to
pump your breasts every three hours until you can resume breastfeeding.
It is rarely necessary to stop breastfeeding a jaundiced baby.

OceanofPDF.com

 BABY’S FIRST CHECKUP
Within twenty-four hours after birth newborns get their first checkup. Ask
to be present. You will learn about your baby’s body and appreciate what
your doctor looks for. Let’s go head to toe through your baby’s first exam.
Your doctor forms his or her first impression about the general health of
your baby by just looking at her. Is she preterm, post-term, or done just
right? Is she lying in the frog position, which indicates good muscle tone? Is
she alert, active, pink, and healthy and breathing normally?
Next, your doctor examines baby’s head to see if there are any
abnormalities and may point out to you all the normal lumps and bumps on
a newborn’s head. Are the fontanels soft and flat? The head circumference
is measured and compared with norms to be sure it is proportional to baby’s
length and weight.
By shining a light into baby’s eyes, your doctor determines if there are
any cataracts or internal eye problems. Are the eyes of normal size? Your
doctor will reassure you that the few ruptured blood vessels in the whites of
baby’s eyes will clear up within a few weeks. (Sometimes a newborn’s
puffy eyelids prevent a thorough exam of the eyes, and your doctor may
wait a few days.)
After making sure that the nasal passages are open wide enough to
easily allow air through, your doctor checks the inside of baby’s mouth. Is

 the front of the tongue attached too tightly to the floor of the mouth (called
tongue-tie), which may prevent good latch-on during breastfeeding? (See
“Tongue-Tie,” here, for a full description.) Is the palate, the roof of baby’s
mouth, fully formed?
By shining a light into the ear canals your doctor can tell if they are
correctly formed. The appearance of the outer ear varies greatly among
babies. Some are pinned against the head; some fold over; some stick out.
As the cartilage in your baby’s ears develops, they will assume a more
attractive shape. Bruised earlobes are normal.
Watch your doctor run his or her hands around baby’s neck, checking for
abnormal bumps, and over the collarbone, which sometimes breaks during a
difficult delivery and seldom needs treatment. Your doctor then listens to
baby’s heart for any abnormal sounds and beats that may indicate structural
problems and at the same time moves the stethoscope around baby’s chest
to be sure that air is properly entering and leaving the lungs.
The abdomen gets the next hands-on exam. Your doctor feels for the
vital organs (liver, spleen, and kidneys) beneath the thin muscles of baby’s
abdomen and determines their size and if they are in the correct position; he
also checks for abnormal growths in the abdomen.
The genitalia are then checked. Is the vaginal opening normal? An eggwhite type of vaginal discharge, often blood-tinged, is normal. Are both
testicles descended? Are there any hernias (protrusion of the intestines)
beneath the skin of the groin?
The anus is checked to be sure that it is open and located properly. Your
doctor may also check with you or the nurses if baby has passed any stools

 yet.
While looking at the groin area, your doctor will hold baby’s thighs and
move them around the hip joints. He or she is checking for dislocatable hips
—a condition that is easy to diagnose and treat in the newborn period, but is
more difficult to diagnose and treat later. While his hands are on the hips,
notice your doctor placing a finger in the center of baby’s groin, checking
for the femoral pulse. The strength of the pulsation of these large arteries
gives a clue that the vessel coming out of the heart is large enough.
Now on to the legs, which are normally bowed, and down to the feet,
which normally curve in. However, if the front half of the foot is curved in
too much in relation to the back half (called a clubfoot), it may need cast
correction even in the newborn period. Toes are a familial curiosity.
Webbed, oversize, and overlapping toes are common inherited traits. Your
newborn’s reflexes may also be checked, but by the time this head-to-toe
exam is complete, the doctor has a general impression of your baby’s
neurological development.
Meanwhile back at the nurses’ station, your baby’s doctor reviews the
birth events to see if any problem occurred that may require special
attention. The mother’s history and nurses’ notes are looked at. The doctor
also checks the mother’s blood type to see if there is any potential
incompatibility between mother’s and baby’s blood that may lead to an
abnormal jaundice.

SEARS PARENTING LIBRARY ALERT
For a complete guide to your baby’s checkups, from birth through
adolescence, check out The Portable Pediatrician. This comprehensive

 guide includes a thorough review of what should take place at each of your
child’s checkups and provides detailed advice on growth, nutrition,
development, common illnesses, behavioral challenges, parenting questions,
vaccines, and other health issues that apply to every age and stage of
childhood.
This concludes the usual newborn exam. Depending on special birth
circumstances or physical findings, your doctor may perform other
examinations or tests. While you are in the hospital your baby’s doctor and
your attending nursing personnel will help you get used to caring for you
baby, especially feeding. In addition to the newborn exam, an important part
of routine newborn care is what I call the discharge-from-the-hospital talk.
Make a list of all your questions and concerns to ask your doctor before you
leave the hospital. On the day you leave, your doctor will answer these
questions, discuss your concerns, and go over what to expect when you get
home. Also, be sure you know how to reach your doctor and when your first
office appointment should be.
The first newborn checkup also has a special meaning to your doctor. He
or she has made a new acquaintance; you have begun a lengthy friendship.
It is the first in a long series of checkups as parents, doctor, and baby begin
to grow together as a team.

OceanofPDF.com

 Postpartum Family Adjustments

It’s time to descend from the birthing highs and settle down to life with a
new baby. During our prenatal counseling we try to prepare expectant
couples for how physically and emotionally draining the early weeks may
be. But their minds are so filled with images of perfect babyhood that our
forewarnings of what life with a new baby is like seem to go right over their
heads.

OceanofPDF.com

 NESTING-IN
The opening weeks at home are a period we call nesting-in—a time to learn
to fit together as a family. While life with a new baby may not be all rosy,
here are some ways for feeling at home with your newborn.
Take maternity (and paternity) leave. What does most mothers in is not
only attending to the incessant demands of the newborn but trying to do too
many other things too soon. Consider what maternity and paternity leaves
really mean—leave everything else to someone else and concentrate on
your newborn. Baby will only be a newborn for one month. Almost
anything can wait four weeks.
Dress for the occasion. Don’t take your nightgown off for two weeks; sit in
your rocking chair and let yourself be pampered. As a busy mother of eight
Martha has learned to dress for the occasion. Wearing her nightgown gives
the rest of the family the message that mom is off call. Develop a language
and mind-set—“Go ask daddy”—that directs the traffic of the other children
from draining on mom. A phrase that works for Martha is “That is
disturbing my peace.” Teach siblings to respect the peace and quiet of the
nest.

 Get a doula. At no time in history have new mothers been expected to do
so much for so many with so little help. Cultures around the world have
always recognized the importance of mothers and babies nesting-in. In
many places a mother is presented with a doula (from the Greek word for
“one who ministers”), a servant who specializes in mothering the mother
(not the baby), relieving her of household chores and interferences that
drain her energy away from her baby. Tired mothers, perk up. The doulas
are now in North America. Postpartum-care services are springing up all
over the land. Try to find one in your community. These gems are well
worth the price. If you are unable to hire a doula, husbands, relatives, and
friends can become “servant for a day.” If a friend asks, “What do you
need?” reply, “Vacuuming and laundering” or, “Bring over dinner.” (For
doula services, see dona.org.)

OceanofPDF.com

 ROLE ADJUSTMENTS
Bringing a new baby into the household means adjustments for everyone—
not just mom but dad and siblings too. Here’s what you can expect and
some practical hints about ways to cope.

OceanofPDF.com

 For Fathers Only

Fathers may have even more difficulty than mothers adjusting to life with a
new baby. As protector of the nest, they have three jobs at home: bonding
with baby, sharing in the care of the newborn, and caring for the mother.
Many fathers are uncomfortable about getting their hands on tiny babies
and equally uncomfortable caring for a postpartum mother whose normal
hormonal changes may not make her the most fun person to live with for a
while.
An understanding of what is occurring in the mother-infant relationship
during the early weeks puts a higher value on dad’s role. During the first
few weeks a mother’s feelings of attachment oscillate between oneness and
separateness (bringing either confidence and euphoria or uncertainty and
depression). Sometimes she feels in tune with her baby, sometimes distant.
As mother and baby practice their cue-response scene dozens of times each
day, they grow into an attachment of mutual sensitivity, mother knowing
baby and baby knowing mother. You will see this attachment unfold when
your wife begins to exclaim, “I finally know what she needs” or, “I can read
her.” This is quality time for mother and baby. Dad creates an environment
that allows this mother-infant attachment to mature. It’s important for dad to
understand this early mother-infant attachment (not be threatened by it) and
support it. Here are some practical nest-keeping tips.

 Keep the nest tidy. An upset nest yields an upset mother—and baby. In the
postpartum period seeing one dirty dish unglues Martha, whereas normally
she is unruffled by a whole sinkful. Take over the housekeeping yourself, or
hire someone to do it. Stroll around the nest each day and take inventory of
what needs to be done—and do it. TIDY is your memory word for the day:
Take inventory daily—yourself.
Improve your serve. Stan, a professional tennis player, once asked me how
he could help in the care of his newborn. I responded in the language of his
trade, “Improve your serve.” Pass out refreshments frequently during the
day. Breastfeeding mothers need extra snacks and fluids. Serve breakfast in
bed. Your wife’s sleep has no doubt been disturbed, but you probably
managed to stay asleep. Take a walk with your baby while you insist your
wife indulge in a tub soak. Feel like a servant and waiter? You are.
Be sensitive. Many new mothers are unwilling to ask for help, perhaps for
fear of shattering the supermom myth. Dads, be aware of your wife’s needs.
As one mother confided, “I’d have to hit my husband over the head before
he’d realize I’m giving out.”
Guard against intruders. While it is neither necessary nor healthy to
become a postpartum recluse, socialize only when you want to. There will
be times when you and your wife want to share the joys of a new baby with
friends and be on the receiving end of new-parent strokes. Other times you

 will find crowds of well-wishers annoying. When you need to be alone, take
the phone off the hook and put a “Do not disturb” sign on the door.
Take charge of the siblings. The other children are used to having mom all
to themselves and may not be eager to share her with the new baby. If you
are able to take a week or two (or more) of paternity leave, take over most
of the sibling care. Trips to the playground and other out-of-the-house
activities keep the nest quiet. Instruct the older children to pick up after
themselves and tell them why a neat nest is important to mom. They are
future mothers and fathers too. The postpartum period is a time when the
little (and big) takers give to mom.
Be a gatekeeper against unhelpful advice. Love for her new baby and an
overwhelming desire to be a good mother make your wife particularly
vulnerable to any advice that implies she might not be doing the best for her
baby. Guard your mate against well-meaning but intrusive visitors who may
upset the harmony of the nest. Fend off purveyors of bad baby advice: “You
probably don’t have enough milk” or “You’re spoiling that baby.”
Confusing advice plants doubts in the mind of even the most confident
mother. If you sense outside advice upsetting your wife, protect her style of
mothering. Put a stop to it, even if it’s coming from your own mother.
Respect the nesting instinct. Avoid making major changes around the time
of childbirth. This is not the time to move into a new house or to get a new
job. If possible, make these changes long before the birthday. The nesting

 instinct is very strong in a new mother, and to upset the nest is to upset the
mother.
Become a shareholder. Mothers do not have an exclusive patent on
carrying babies. Fathers have an important role in the postpartum period.
They form their own father-infant attachment and make their own
contribution to the growth and development of their baby. It is not greater
than mom’s, nor less—it is different. Babies thrive on this difference.
Prove yourself. Dads, let me share with you some family secrets I’ve
learned about new mothers. As a mother is developing an attachment to her
baby, she experiences a reluctance to share the baby care with anyone else.
As soon as baby cries, you stride over only to be outrun by your wife,
sprinting toward her helpless infant. (See here to read how a baby’s cry
affects mother.) If on rare occasion you win the race, be prepared for your
wife to hover around waiting to rescue baby. Because baby seems to quiet
more quickly in your wife’s arms, you back off from becoming a baby
comforter—and your wife lets you off the hook. Two problems arise from
this: Father never gets a chance to develop his nurturing skills, and mother
falls into the exhausting trap of “My baby needs me so much I can’t do
anything else.” Dads, you first have to prove yourself as a baby comforter
before your wife is comfortable releasing baby into your charge. Read about
being a babywearing father here, and other nurturing tips here and here.

 Dads, don’t miss out on baby. Mothers get plenty of bonding time with
baby while breastfeeding and sleep sharing. Not so for fathers. New dads,
want to form a close attachment to your baby like your wife has? Hold your
baby as much as you can. Wear baby in a sling, especially during naps. This
time with baby will give you a bond almost as close as the mother-baby
bond. Don’t concentrate so much on housework and the other kids that you
miss out on your new baby.

OceanofPDF.com

 For Mothers Only

If dad never gets his share of baby care, how can he learn nurturing skills?
Want your husband to share those fussy moments and wakeful nights?
Here’s how to get it to happen.
Show and tell. Pick out the baby-care tasks you most need help with and
tell your husband specifically what you need. Otherwise your husband may
surmise that you want to do everything yourself. Rather than get teachypreachy, do baby-care basics together, such as bathing baby, comforting,
and changing diapers. Subtly (and sometimes not so subtly) point out to him
techniques that work best for your baby.
Set up dad. Beginning with short solo walks around the block, periodically
arrange for dad and baby to be home alone. When it’s just baby and him,
you may be surprised how dad measures up. To be fair, leave the
breastfeeding baby with a full tummy, otherwise dad may really be stuck.
Delay the rescue. Your baby is crying, and dad picks her up. She’s still
crying. Dad bounces her and sings to her. She continues crying. By now
you’re a wreck. Your milk is leaking, and you have the overpowering urge
to rescue crying baby from fumbling daddy. Rather than immediately
hovering about, ready to say, “I’ll take her,” hold off a bit. Allow dad and

 baby some time to work it out. If the scene is obviously deteriorating, come
to the rescue, but without casting doubt on his comforting abilities. A
hungry baby, after all, needs to be fed. Part of his skill building as a cue
reader is to know when to announce “Dinner is served” and hand baby over.
Perhaps next time baby will settle better. And to be honest, there are times
when baby isn’t instantly comforted by you or your breast either.
Be patient. Baby care may not come as easily for some fathers, especially
if they come from a family in which baby tending was exclusively left to
females. Gradually encouraging dad’s involvement and affirming his results
will eventually get him hooked on infant care, at least as a pinch hitter if not
as an equal shareholder.

OceanofPDF.com

 Introducing a New Baby to Siblings

Children more than three years of age are usually excited by the birth of a
new baby. They realize how much fun baby will be to play with. Children
under three may not welcome a new baby with open arms, but here’s how to
foster an early friendship.
Make friends before birth. Get your older one acquainted with baby
before birth. “Johnny, put your hand on the bulge—feel baby kick.” This
gives him an appreciation of a real baby inside. Talk to your preborn baby
and let your child join the conversation. Soon he’ll come up and begin
talking to this little brother or sister, too. Take him along for prenatal
checkups, and let him hear the heartbeat. “Do you hear baby?… Soon he
will be talking to you.” Don’t start talking about the baby with a younger
child (say, under two and a half) until the last trimester or when he notices
something about you is different. Giving notice too early will confuse him
—he has no concept of months passing.
Pictures, pictures, pictures. Show pictures of how babies develop in the
womb and use correct terms. Babies grow in mommy’s uterus not in
mommy’s tummy. It helps to get a child in the mood for a baby-in-the-house
atmosphere by reliving a page-by-page trip through his own baby book,

 commenting that what you’ll be doing with your new baby you actually did
with him. There are many good picture books—called sibling books—to
prepare a young child for the arrival of a baby. Try Baby on the Way and
What Baby Needs by William Sears and Martha Sears and Christie Watts
Kelly (Little, Brown, 2001).
Prepare your child for your hospital stay. Your two-year-old is probably
more interested in what’s going to happen to him while you are gone than
what’s going to happen at the hospital. Present the thought of separation
from you not as a loss, but as something special (a marketing phrase you
will use many times). “Grandma is coming to our house and will bake
cookies and bring you new toys….” It is best to leave your two-year-old in
his own home with someone he knows and enjoys.
Stay connected. While in the hospital, phone your child frequently and
welcome lots of sibling visits. It’s best not to bring home a stranger.
Play “big brother or big sister.” Get into the mind of your child; his first
thought is how the new baby will affect his life. The sooner he learns that
having to share mommy with another child is not so bad after all, the more
kindly he will take to the new baby. Make a game out of “mommy and
daddy’s little helper”: changing diapers, loving, dressing, and bathing baby.
The role of helper evolves to that of a teacher: “Show baby how to hold her
rattle.”

 Be a “yes” parent. Most parents worry that their two- or three-year-old
child will accidentally hurt the baby as she pokes and prods the new little
one. Yet try to avoid saying, “No!” or, “Don’t do that!” or, “Be careful,
don’t hurt the baby!” Such negative and restrictive comments may
inadvertently cause some resentment in your older child and may end up
enticing her to be even more devious toward the baby. In truth, an older
toddler is unlikely to cause harm to a baby above and beyond an accidental
pinch or bump, which is ultimately harmless. We encourage you to let your
child explore the new baby, with you nearby in case you need to run
interference. Your child’s common sense, and your positive instructions and
example, will likely teach her how to gently play with and handle the baby.
If things get too rough, you can calmly pick up the baby and move on to
another activity, without letting on that something negative occurred. A
while later, instruct your child again on how to be gentle. Keep your
instruction positive and avoid the impression that “that baby” is getting him
in trouble. Take out his baby pictures and show him how he was so little
once, too.
Help your child feel important, too. Siblings can get spin-off presents
from the new baby. Rather than having him feel left out as everyone
showers gifts on the new mother and baby, be sure your child reaps the
benefits of the birth harvest. Wise gift-bearing friends will bring along an
extra gift for the sibling. If they don’t, keep a few of your own in reserve.
And make sure he gets the message that he is still important to you, even
though you have to spend so much intimate time with the new baby.

 Give your child more of dad. During those early weeks when you are
naturally preoccupied with your new baby, dad can take up the slack by
doing special things with the older child. Where the child may feel she has
lost some of mom, she gets more of dad.

Dr. Bob advises: Dads, spending extra time with your older children should
be in addition to, not instead of, time spent with your new baby. Don’t miss
this fleeting time of early father-infant bonding.

Make double use of your time. Wearing your baby in a baby sling gives
you two free hands to do fun things with your toddler while nurturing your
baby. At the same time as you sit and breastfeed your baby in the sling, you
can read a book or play with your older child. Babywearing also helps older
children catch the spirit of having a new baby in the house. If your older
children resent baby’s being in mom’s arms all the time, use your sling as
much as possible and encourage them to “wear” a doll or even a pet in their
own homemade slings. (See section on baby-wearing siblings, here.)
Getting the toddler involved in the care of your baby is like rewinding a
tape of his own baby care. As you breastfeed, change, and care for your new
baby, talk about what you are doing and how you did the same nurturing
with your toddler when he was a baby. Reliving a bit of their own babyhood
helps older children better understand family life with a new baby.

 It is best not to try to convince the older one that he or she is a big boy
or a big girl now, thinking that you can use ridicule to help the older one
“grow up.” One look at all the love and holding and time the baby gets is
enough to convince any sibling that being little is best. It’s normal for the
sibling to regress in daily habits, toileting, eating, sleeping, and so on.
Here’s where more of dad will make up for less of mom. And it’s helpful to
point out that babies are cute but they sure can’t do much, like go to the
park to play, eat a Popsicle, or ride a trike.

OceanofPDF.com

 PREVENTING

AND

OVERCOMING

POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION
You train for the big event for nine months. You finish the race and hold the
prize. Hospital attendants cater to your every need at the push of a button.
You’re a star. You deserve the attention and the high feelings that go with it.
After the incredible high of giving birth, most mothers experience baby
blues, a temporary “down,” about three days later. Hormonal shifts are
partially responsible, as well as just the natural letdown your emotions go
through after any mountaintop experience. This explains why you’ll
suddenly find yourself crying as you sit holding your newborn.
After a few weeks of parenting, things seem different. Baby’s days and
nights are mixed-up and so are yours; your milk may not be enough (or so
somebody advises you). As soon as you crash on the couch for a muchneeded catnap, baby calls. Your energy is going out faster than it’s coming
in. Add to this body fatigue, the healing of birth wounds (an episiotomy or a
cesarean section), and possibly memories of a birth less fulfilling than you
rehearsed, a baby who is not acting according to the books, and a husband
who isn’t either. Put all these daily scenes together, and by the end of two
weeks you may have a case of more than just the baby blues.

 More changes occur in the first month after birth than at any other time
in a woman’s life. It’s no wonder that 50–75 percent of all mothers feel
some degree of baby blues (the incidence would be 100 percent if males
gave birth and fed babies). Besides simply feeling down, around 10–20
percent of mothers drift into postpartum depression, manifested by
incapacitating anxiety, insomnia, fears, outbursts of crying, making
mountains out of molehills, mental confusion, inertia, lack of interest in
grooming and physical attractiveness, and a negative attitude toward
husband—and sometimes baby.
The feelings of postpartum depression are your body’s signals that you
have exceeded your physical, mental, and emotional capabilities to adapt to
all the recent changes and energy demands that have been put upon you.
This does not imply a weakness on your part, only that you have exhausted
your body’s capacity to adjust to these changes. Besides the energy-draining
events of birth and baby care, hormonal swings can contribute to
postpartum depression. Even though after-birth blues and depression are
common, there are ways to avoid or at least minimize these crippling
feelings.

WHEN DEPRESSION BECOMES SERIOUS
It is extremely important for the doctor and family members to recognize
when postpartum depression has worsened into psychosis so that immediate
treatment can begin and safeguards can be put into place. Symptoms
include:
delusions
hallucinations
severely impaired judgment

 difficulty with day-to-day functioning
suicidal thoughts
thoughts of hurting baby

Respect the nesting-in period. Don’t try to be all things to all people.
Giving birth is your license to be pampered. You need time to settle in with
your baby. You can’t be gourmet cook (or even short-order cook), social
hostess, housekeeper, and mother. You won’t have the energy for all these,
nor should you be expected to.
Stick to priorities. There will be days when you feel, “I’m getting nothing
done.” You are doing the most important job in the world—mothering a
new human being. Especially if you have a high-need baby (we will meet
this baby in Chapter 16, “Parenting the Fussy or Colicky Baby”),
temporarily shelve all obligations that siphon off energy from yourself and
your baby. The constant-baby-care stage does not last forever.
Get out—get moving. There is nothing in the new mother-baby contract
that requires staying in the house. “Home” to a tiny baby is where you are.
Wear your baby (see Chapter 14, “Babywearing”) and take hours-long
walks through parks, stopping periodically to let the peace of nature speak
to you. Since inertia is part of depression, set aside a certain time of the day
for outside living and stick to it.
Try group therapy. You are not alone in your depression. Nearly all new
mothers have down days, some more than others. The traditional model for

 a mother and a baby has never been a mother alone in the home with a
baby. It has always been mothers with babies sharing their joys and burdens
together. Your childbirth class, friends and relatives, or a local support
group such as La Leche League will help you get through this stage. You
may also need to talk to a counselor who specializes in postpartum
depression. More mothers are now aware of the value of counseling for this
transition in their life. Many areas offer group counseling, in which women
come together for support.

Martha notes: Shortly after the arrival of our eighth baby I felt
overwhelmed with kids. I was not a pleasant person to be with. And—can
you believe it?—I doubted my ability as a mother. I felt even more guilty
when our fourteen-year-old daughter announced, “I’m never having any
kids!” When I realized that my mood was getting the whole family down, I
was determined to get help and get better. I don’t want my daughters
growing up thinking that being a mother is no fun.

Eat well. Depression causes lack of appetite, and inadequate nutrition feeds
more depression. Some force-feeding of balanced nutrition must be in your
daily menu (see here). Fish oil supplements have been shown to improve
the symptoms of depression.

 Practice good grooming. “I just don’t have the energy to put a comb
through my hair” is a common feeling in depression. Like poor nutrition,
poor grooming contributes to the unattractive cycle of depression. If you
look good, you’re more apt to feel good. Invest in a simple, easy-care
hairstyle to get you through the early months.
Treat yourself. You deserve a break today—and every day. Occasional trips
to the hairdresser, a facial, a massage, an hour at the spa, along with daily
showering and resting or a soak in the tub, is good medicine, and just what
the doctor orders.
“But I don’t have time; my baby needs me,” you may argue. You do have
the time and your baby needs a healthy mother.

OceanofPDF.com

 Fixing a Poor Start

Susan, a first-time mother of a well-researched baby, had planned for the
ideal birth and instant intimacy with her baby. But, through no one’s fault, a
medical complication required a surgical birth and mother-baby separation
because baby was transferred to a newborn intensive care unit in another
hospital for one week. When I saw Susan and her baby in my office for the
two-week checkup, she did not have the spark that I recognized in her
before birth. She was distant from her baby, perhaps angry, but didn’t know
whom to be angry with and was preoccupied more with mending her
wounds, physical and emotional, than getting into motherhood to the depth
she had envisioned. In fact, she confided, “I feel like I’m holding someone
else’s baby.” The start she had wanted was not the start she got.
Having a difficult birth experience is one of the main causes of
postpartum depression. If this scene pushes a button in you, here’s how to
help yourself fix a poor start.
Take the first steps. First, the most important step in fixing a poor start is
to realize that you had one and that grieving this loss is causing a distance
between you and your baby. Next, hold a family council with your husband
and reveal your feelings. Tell him specifically about the help you need—for
example, with doing housework, with holding the baby, and so on. Let your

 husband know you want some time to bond. Temporarily shelve all in-home
and outside activities that drain your energy away from time with your
baby. Impress upon your husband that you require a time of nesting-in with
your infant, and why. You need to go back to day one. Return to the mindset you had on the day of birth and live these days over again now that you
are able to focus on baby. You need to get connected, and that takes time
and energy. You must do it now, because it will be harder to do it later.
Let baby be your therapist. Babies have a way of bringing out the best in
a mother, provided she creates a baby-centered environment that allows this
to happen. For a period of at least two weeks—longer if necessary—stay
glued to your baby. If you are having trouble breastfeeding, seek help from
a professional lactation consultant. Not only does baby need your milk, but
you

need

the

hormonal

stimulation

that

breastfeeding

provides.

Breastfeeding gets your mothering juices flowing. If you are bottlefeeding,
touch and groom your baby during the feeding as though you were
breastfeeding.
Try a daily touch. To get more in touch with baby, give your newborn a
daily massage (see here for techniques). Let baby fall asleep skin to skin on
your chest. As an added touch, wear your baby in a baby sling for many
hours during the day. Take long walks together—as though spending time
with someone you are in love with.

 Think baby. Besides keeping physically attached, keep mentally close to
your baby. While baby is napping or sleeping—better, if you and baby are
napping or sleeping snuggled together—allow yourself the luxury of
thinking motherly thoughts. All competing worries or preoccupations with
business can be put on hold in favor of this important work that can only be
done by you.
Journalize. Write your baby’s birth story, emphasizing how it made you
feel at the time and how you feel now. Write about both your feelings and
the everday developmental changes you notice in your baby. It is easy to get
so preoccupied with all the upsetting thoughts that you may forget the
precious moments that you really do have with your baby. If you record
these precious moments on paper, you won’t feel robbed. Writing is
therapeutic and can help you focus on the pleasant interactions you have
with baby.
Large doses of baby touch, taken as directed, are the best medicine to heal a
poor start. If this medicine is not working, seek professional help from a
therapist knowledgeable in disorders of mother-infant attachment.

OceanofPDF.com

 Tips for Dads

All these dealing-with-depression tips sound easy, but in reality your wife
won’t do them without a boost. Here’s a prescription that’s much quicker
and cheaper than an hour with the doctor: “I’ve booked an hour at the spa
for you and I’ll drive you there. I’ll pick you up at six P.M. and we’ll stop
by for pizza on the way home. Besides, I need an hour at the park with
Junior.”
When an hour with the doctor is advisable, recognize the red flags of
serious depression that needs professional attention. If the symptoms
mentioned earlier do not go away after you and your wife have done what’s
suggested here, consult your doctor for advice. New approaches, including
hormone therapy, are available now for treating postpartum depression. Just
a word of caution—if the professionals recommend therapy that would
result in mother-baby separation, get a second opinion. Separation, in our
experience, only compounds the problem. For resources and referral for
professional

help,

contact

DAD—Depression

After

Delivery—at

depressionafterdelivery.com.

POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION IN FATHERS
While fathers do not experience the hormonal and physiologic changes that
mothers do, a bit of letdown is common in new fathers. Fathers’
postpartum-adjustment concerns are mainly caused by the increased
responsibility of another mouth to feed, sudden changes in lifestyle, and

 changes that they had not anticipated in their relationship with their mate.
The emotional, financial, and sexual adjustments that occur in the
postpartum period usher in another season of marriage—a season in which
more adjustments take place in a shorter period of time than in any other
stage of married life. Just as the upsetting stages in baby’s growth and
development pass with time, the after-baby blues and depression in mothers
and fathers also pass.

OceanofPDF.com

 NOW WE ARE THREE
No matter how much they have planned for a new baby, couples are taken
by surprise at how this demanding little person challenges the husband-wife
relationship. That’s part of the parenting package! But being aware of the
likely consequences can help you cope with this new season in your
marriage.

OceanofPDF.com

 For Fathers Only

Here are some normal feelings new fathers express: “I feel left out.” “All
she does is nurse.” “She’s too attached to our baby.” “We haven’t made love
for weeks.” “We need to get away—alone.”

A Season of the Marriage

Both your feelings and your wife’s attachment to baby are normal. It’s
natural to conclude that your wife is less interested in you. If you
understand the changes that occur in the postpartum mother, it’s easier to
grasp why you feel this way and why your wife acts this way.
A woman has both sexual and mothering hormones. Before birth the
sexual hormones are higher, and her desire to be a mate may have been
greater than her desire to be a mother. After birth a hormonal reversal
occurs. Her hormones to mother prevail over her hormones to mate. This
shift from attachment to husband to attachment to baby is a sort of
biological insurance policy that the young get mothered.
Besides these biological changes, another reason for your wife’s
apparent lack of sexual interest is she’s just too tired. This new little person
has big demands, and there’s only so much of a woman’s energy to go

 around. Most mothers feel so drained by the incessant demands of a new
baby that all they want to do is sleep. Mothers describe these end-of-the-day
feelings as: “I feel all touched out,” “I feel all used up.”
New mothers also realize their energy limitations and try to portion out
their energy to meet needs and not wants. One tired mother told us, “My
baby needs nurturing; my husband wants sex. I don’t have enough energy
for both.” For several months after childbirth most wives do not have the
energy for a high level of intimacy both as a mother and as a mate. It is
normal to feel left out of the inner circle of mother-infant attachment and
conclude that your wife has lost interest in you.
Dads, appreciate that a new mother is biologically programmed to
nurture her baby. You are not being displaced by the baby, but some of your
wife’s energies previously directed toward you are temporarily redirected
toward your baby. This is a time primarily to parent and secondarily to
mate, and ideally a time to find opportunity and energy for both.

Dr. Bob notes: Dads, if you’re feeling left out of the mother-infant bond,
jump on in and join your wife and baby in their new-found relationship.
Staying on the sidelines will only increase the distance between you and
your wife and baby.

Sex After Childbirth

 Be a supportive and sensitive husband and father during this early season of
mother-infant attachment and the season to be sexual will return—and will
be better. Here’s how to spark the sexual fire after childbirth.
Go sensitively. Don’t pressure. Pregnancy, birth, and postpartum
adjustment leave the woman physically and emotionally drained. Let your
wife’s system recharge before making sexual overtures. For many men, sex
equals intercourse. For women there is more of a mental component to sex.
A woman’s mind may not be ready for sex even when her body is; and her
body isn’t ready for intercourse until at least six weeks after birth.
Pressuring your wife to give too much too soon will not lead to satisfying
sex. Sex motivated by desire is better than sex motivated by obligation.
Go slowly. “I don’t care if the doctor said it’s okay, he’s not the one
recovering from pregnancy and childbirth,” said a tired mother to her
impatient husband. The doctor’s green light does not mean your sexual
relationship will pick up, overnight, where it left off before pregnancy and
childbirth.
Court and woo your wife all over again. New mothers do want to be
sexually reunited with their mates, but in a progression similar to courtship.
They want to be held, caressed, cared for, loved, and above all to feel that
their mate is sensitive to their needs. Only then is intercourse likely to
follow willingly.

 Six weeks after the birth of her baby, Joan was beginning to feel sexual
again. Meanwhile, her husband, Larry, hovered like a sexually thwarted
male ready to pounce. When the doctor-prescribed waiting period was over,
Larry moved too quickly. Joan stopped him and said, “Please hold me for a
while instead of making love right away.” This couple needed a more
gradual process of lovemaking for the sexual reunion to be fulfilling. If
Larry had been making the right moves all month long (holding, courting,
serving, and so on) he might have gotten a green or at least a yellow light
instead of a red one.

The First Reunion

Sensitivity and gentleness are the keys to postpartum sex. Dads, respect the
physical changes that are going on as your wife’s body is returning to its
prepregnant state. Fathers often describe their sexual reunion with their
wives as “getting to know her body all over again.” Here are some tips to
help you and your wife to get sexually reacquainted.
Opening night. The bulge is now gone, and you will be able to snuggle
close together again. Make the first night you plan to have intercourse after
childbirth a special time of courtship and romance, complete with a
candlelight dinner and flowers.

 Comfortable positions. Postpartum women often experience vaginal
discomfort during intercourse. Vaginal dryness is common in the months
after birth because the hormones that usually prepare the vagina for
intercourse by releasing a protective lubricant are at a lower level during
lactation. Also, an incompletely healed episiotomy may contribute to
vaginal pain. To ease the dryness, use a water-soluble lubricant (such as KY Jelly). Experiment with positions that do not put pressure on your wife’s
episiotomy—for example, the side-lying and woman-on-top positions. Ask
her to guide your penetration in the most comfortable position, and move
slowly to avoid pain.
Leaking milk. Milk leaking from breasts is a natural part of sex after
childbirth and is a sign your wife’s body is responding to your lovemaking.
Be careful not to give your wife the message that this normal body function
is distasteful. Also, avoid lovemaking positions that apply pressure to full
breasts, as this is uncomfortable for the mother. Emptying the breasts by
feeding baby prior to lovemaking alleviates much of the leaking and
discomfort—and may prevent an untimely interruption.

More Keys to a Better Marriage Adjustment

Remember baby comes first. Respect the mother-infant bond. Dads, don’t
try to compete with baby—you’ll likely lose. Remember that the motherinfant bond that forms after birth is stronger than any sexual urge. A father

 once confided to us, “I feel like I’m making love to a split personality.” It is
normal to feel that while your wife’s body may be in your arms, her mind is
with her baby. If baby and daddy both want mommy at the same time, guess
who wins. Be prepared for this sexual scene in a home with a new baby:
Baby is asleep (you hope), but as lovemaking begins, baby awakens and
within a millisecond mother’s radar shifts from you to baby. How would
you handle this? The wrong way: You could let loose with an angry “foiled
again” reaction, giving your wife the message that baby has had enough of
her and it’s your turn. This selfishness is a guaranteed turnoff, and not-verysatisfying sex, if any, will follow.
Here’s a better way. Since birth, perhaps even during pregnancy, you
have given your wife the message that baby will be high priority. Now, in
the middle of sex, you have a chance to prove yourself. Either get up and go
comfort your baby and then return to your wife or say to her, “Go comfort
baby first, and we’ll make love later.” Nothing will earn you more points
(and better sex!) than giving your wife the sincere message that you
understand why she feels that baby’s needs come before yours. After
comforting baby she will likely return to your side feeling even more loving
and responsive because you have encouraged her to meet baby’s needs first.
Share baby care. Dads, while you can’t (and shouldn’t) fight biology, you
can fight fatigue. Your wife may be too tired to make love. Besides sharing
baby care, take over or hire help for all the household chores that drain your
wife’s energy away from you and baby.

 Part of maturing as a person is being able to give yourself to another person
and to delay your gratification because someone else takes priority. That’s
just what becoming a father does. Baby takes; you give; you wait. These are
real facts of a new father’s life. Every time you feel you are suffering from
an acute lack of sex, realize that sharing your wife with your baby and
delaying your gratification is a temporary season of the marriage. There is
sex after childbirth! It is a selfless kind of sex that matures a man into a
husband and a father.
For a unique and humorous look at becoming a new mom or dad, check
out Father’s First Steps by Drs. Robert and James Sears, and 25 Things
Every New Mother Should Know by Martha Sears. In these two guidebooks,
the Sears family shares personal stories and indispensable advice to help
new moms and dads get the right start with their newborn.

OceanofPDF.com

 For Mothers Only

While you may feel your husband doesn’t understand the changes in your
body and hormones after pregnancy and childbirth, do you realize that your
husband’s urges haven’t changed? His hormones are the same before and
after birth.
Talk it out. Talk about sex—or a lack of it—after childbirth. Explain to
your husband the hormonal changes described earlier that are occuring in
you, why they occur, and how this is a normal season of the marriage. Be
sure your husband knows it’s not his fault that your sexual feelings are not
what they were before childbirth.
Tell him you still need him. If your husband feels displaced by the baby,
impress upon him that you still need him, but those needs may be
temporarily different while baby is still a baby. Tell him exactly what you
need, when, and how much. “I need to be held tonight” is a good start.
Keep your mind on what you’re doing. Your husband can sense when you
are physically connected to him but mentally connected to your baby. He
does not expect you to be thinking primarily of him during breastfeeding;
should you be thinking about your baby during lovemaking? If you have
trouble releasing yourself physically and mentally from your baby to enjoy

 your husband, these are normal new-mother feelings that you need to work
out.
Avoid the “But my baby needs me” syndrome. You do not have to make
an either/or choice between your mothering and your marriage relationship.
They can complement each other. Like many issues in parenting, these
relationships are a question of balance as you learn to juggle new roles and
new relationships to fit one another.
Here’s a situation we frequently encounter in our counseling practice.
Steve and Marcia, both professionals, married in their late twenties and had
their first baby a few years later. Marcia had been very successful in her
career and wanted to carry on this high level of success as a mother. She
wanted to “do it right.” She became deeply attached to her baby, day and
night, and it seemed to be working—for her. Steve was a bit uncomfortable
handling babies. He was more at home on the fast track of his career.
Sensing Steve’s uneasy feelings about baby care, Marcia was afraid to leave
him alone with the infant and seldom allowed Steve to comfort him. As an
added stress they were blessed with a baby who needed to be held most of
the time. Even when Steve did hold his son, Marcia would hover around,
ready to come to the rescue at the first whimper, so Steve never had a
chance to develop comforting skills. Because he fumbled at fatherhood,
Steve immersed himself in his work. He felt left out of the inner circle of
mother-baby attachment. He got more strokes at work. Gradually he and
Marcia drifted down different interest paths, Marcia into her mothering,
Steve into his work. Marcia became more attached to her baby, Steve

 became more attached to his job, and they became less attached to each
other.
One day Marcia came into our office for marriage counseling and began,
“But I tried to be such a good mother, and my baby needed me. I thought
Steve was a big boy and could take care of himself.” We told Marcia, “What
your baby needs is two parents.” We counseled Marcia that she needed
Steve if she was to avoid burning out. No mother can continue a high level
of solo giving to a high-need baby without having someone give to her and
share the parenting. Steve needed her attention and her help in building up
his confidence to take care of the baby. They could take care of each other’s
needs as well as baby’s. Fortunately, Marcia and Steve went on to mature as
parents and as mates.

Dr. Bill notes: When Lauren was having one of those high-need days,
Martha, exhausted and in the usual mother mode of “baby first, me
second,” said, “My baby needs me so much I don’t even have time to take a
shower.” I reminded her, “What our baby needs is a happy, rested mother,”
and I took over baby care for a few hours.

OceanofPDF.com

 For Couples Only

During the three years preparing for and writing the original edition of this
book we had our seventh baby, Stephen, celebrated our twenty-fifth
wedding anniversary, and adopted our eighth child, Lauren. Friends always
ask us how we have any time for each other. Answer—we make time for
each other. Early in our marriage we realized the danger of two high-output
people getting so involved in their careers and in parenting that it would be
easy to drift apart as a couple. We vowed never to let that happen. We
realized that children have insatiable appetites in draining energy from their
parents. We had to learn to save energy for ourselves, because indirectly this
would make the whole family function better. It’s okay to say no to your
kids.
One custom we have stuck to—and our children have learned to respect
it—is our weekly dinner for two, sometimes at home, sometimes out on a
date. Our older children have grown accustomed to our weekly date and
even remind us if we forget. Sometimes when we dine at home they make a
game out of it and act as our waiters or perform a skit for our after-dinner
entertainment. We have continued this custom even when there is a
newborn in the house, sometimes making it a dinner for three.
Moms and dads, working hard to become a couple is as important as
working hard to become a parent. The most difficult times are the early

 months, but remember your baby is a baby a very short time. This highmaintenance stage soon passes. Yes, there is romance after birth.

OceanofPDF.com

 SHAPING UP AFTER CHILDBIRTH
For months after giving birth, your body shows many telltale signs and
feelings that you have grown and delivered a baby. The excess fat
accumulated during pregnancy—normal reserve energy stores for you and
your baby—may leave you with unwanted postpartum bulges. Pushed-out
tummy muscles may weaken normal abdominal support for the back and
contribute to backache.
Losing weight and toning muscles are an important concern of most new
mothers. Patience and persistence are the keys here.

OceanofPDF.com

 Losing Weight While Breastfeeding

It took nine months to put it on, expect nine months to take it off safely.
Breastfeeding mothers require, theoretically, an average of 500–600 extra
calories per day to provide adequate nutrition for themselves and their
babies. These figures are averages. If you were underweight prior to or
during your pregnancy, you may require more calories to prevent
undernourishing yourself. If you were overweight, you may require fewer
calories as the excess fat stores in your body are gradually used up. Several
studies in the late 1980s showed that metabolic efficiency is enhanced
during lactation, so that the theoretical recommended daily values (RDVs)
for lactating women may be higher than what is actually needed. The key to
weight loss during lactation is to find the level of calorie intake that works
for you individually.
Here is our safe weight-loss program, which considers the nutritional
health of both mother and baby if breastfeeding.
Set what you feel is an optimal number of calories for your health and
well-being. We advise most breastfeeding mothers to eat at least 2,000
nutritious calories a day, balanced among the basic food groups. With less
than this amount most lactating women cannot supply enough calories for
their health and well-being.

 Set a safe and realistic goal. A gradual weight loss should be your goal;
usually around 2½ pounds per month, slightly more if overweight, less if
underweight, prepregnancy.
Exercise for one hour per day. By choosing an activity you enjoy—
preferably one that you can do with your baby—you are more likely to stick
with it. A very comfortable exercise for mother and baby is to put baby in a
sling-type carrier and walk for at least one hour every day. Walking briskly
for one hour while carrying baby burns off an average of 400 calories (see
Chapter 14, “Babywearing”). This exercise plus one fewer chocolate-chip
cookie or its daily equivalent in junk food burns off about 1 pound per week
(a deficit of 500 calories a day, or 3,500 calories per week, results in a
weekly 1-pound weight loss). Exercising after feeding is more comfortable,
since your breasts are less full and weighty. Wear a supportive bra during
vigorous exercise, and use soft breast pads to prevent friction on your
nipples.
Breastfeeding mothers in our practice have been surprised with the
effects of strenuous exercise such as jogging and aerobics. Some women
have reported a drop in their milk supply if they worked out more than two
days per week. Exercises that work the upper arms, such as jumping rope,
have been known to cause breast infections, and there have been reports of
breast milk developing an unpleasant taste after too much vigorous
exercise. So besides making mother more comfortable, breastfeeding before
exercising also seems more desirable for baby. We advise each

 breastfeeding, exercising mother to stick to an activity that works for her. In
our experience swimming is an ideal exercise.
Chart your progress. If you are losing weight according to your goal, feeling
good, your baby is thriving, and your milk supply is not lagging, then you
have selected your optimum level of calories. A breastfeeding mother at her
“ideal weight” can usually eat 500 extra nutritious calories a day without
abnormal weight gain. This figure depends upon your body type and
whether or not you were overweight or underweight before lactation. If you
are losing more than 1 pound a week you are probably eating too little, and
we would advise consulting your doctor and a nutritionist. If you are still
gaining weight while following this program, you are probably eating too
much. In short, a consumption of 2,000 nutritious calories a day plus one
hour a day of comfortable exercise will usually result in a weight loss
between 2½ and 4 pounds per month, which is a safe range for most
mothers and their breastfeeding babies.

OceanofPDF.com

 Exercise to Get Back in Shape

Perhaps the best reason to exercise after childbirth is to feel good. A happier
woman is likely to be a happier mother. In addition to the daily hour of
comfortable exercise recommended above, there are a number of structured
exercises you can do to help the muscles most directly affected by
pregnancy and childbirth.
Don’t hurry your body back into its pre-pregnant state. Some
postpartum-exercise instructors recommend not doing any structured
exercises for the first two weeks, except pelvic muscle exercises. They
believe the abdominal muscles naturally shorten during the first two weeks,
so that much “muscle work” is being accomplished even though you think
you are doing nothing. Just being up and around and going through daily
living activities is enough exercise initially.
When you are ready to begin structured postnatal exercises, here are a
few that most women can safely handle. Begin gradually, working up to an
average frequency of ten times, twice daily.

SPECIAL NOTE: Before beginning any exercise program, be sure to
check with your doctor regarding when to begin and at what pace. You may

 have special circumstances (such as a cesarean birth) that require adding
or omitting some exercises.

OceanofPDF.com

 POSTPARTUM POSTURE

Why: To correct the forward sag and sway-back posture caused by the
weight of your baby and uterine contents naturally pushing your abdomen
forward during pregnancy.
How: Stand with your back against the wall and heels about 4 inches from
the wall. Flatten the small of your back against the wall by pulling in your
abdominal muscles and tucking in your buttock muscles. Raise your chest
so that your upper back is flat against the wall. Now walk away and try to
maintain this posture during the day.

 Postpartum posture.

OceanofPDF.com

 PELVIC

MUSCLE

EXERCISES

(KEGEL

EXERCISES)

Why: To restore the tone of the vaginal muscles for intercourse and to
prevent leaking of urine during coughing. (The muscles and tissues
surrounding the vagina and urethra—which are called the pelvic-floor
muscles—have been loosened by the hormonal changes of pregnancy and
the stretching of delivery.)
How: You can do Kegels in almost any position. Begin by lying down on
your back or front, whichever is more comfortable (face-down is the most
comfortable position if you have had an episiotomy). Also, practice these
pelvic exercises standing, squatting, and sitting cross-legged against a wall.
The muscles you are exercising are the same as those used for control of
urination and during intercourse. Tense your vaginal muscles and hold for
around five seconds. Contract and release these muscles fifty times a day, or
as often as you think about it.

 Pelvic muscle exercise (Kegel exercise): cross-legged position.

OceanofPDF.com

 PELVIC TILT

Why: To strengthen abdominal and lower back muscles and to improve
posture. (The pelvic tilt decreases the curve in the lower part of the spine
and strengthens the lower back muscles that have been stressed and
stretched by the forward-leaning position of your weighty abdomen.)
How: Lie on your back in the basic exercise position, bent knees together
and feet flat. (You may want to use a thin pillow under your head, but this
isn’t essential.) Slowly breathe in deeply, let your abdomen rise, then while
exhaling pull your abdomen in tightly and push the small of your back flat
against the floor. Hold for five seconds. Release and repeat ten to fifteen
times.

 Pelvic tilt: basic exercise position.

OceanofPDF.com

 ABDOMINAL CONTRACTIONS

Why: To strengthen the abdominal muscles.
How: This can be done standing or cross-legged, or in all-fours position.
Take a deep breath, then exhale slowly while drawing in your abdominal
muscles tightly, and hold these muscles tight for a few seconds after you
have completely exhaled. (Be careful to keep your back straight; do not
sag.) Do these several times daily.

OceanofPDF.com

 HEAD LIFT

Head lift: supporting abdominal muscles.

Why: To strengthen abdominal muscles and stabilize the posture by
flattening the back.
How: Lie on your back with your knees bent (the basic exercise position).
You can do the head lift exercises along with the pelvic tilt. Place one or
both hands on your tummy to remind you to keep your backbone flat to the
floor and avoid overstressing abdominal muscles. (If you had a lot of
separation of abdominal muscles during pregnancy and birth, support your
abdominal muscles with both hands during the early weeks of abdominal

 muscle–strengthening exercises.) Take a deep breath and raise your head
slowly while exhaling. Then lower your head slowly while inhaling. Raise
your head a little higher each day. Keep your eyes toward the ceiling. This
keeps your chin off your chest and avoids muscle strain from too much curl.
As your abdominal muscle tone gradually improves over the next month or
two, take your hands off your abdomen and raise your arms toward the
ceiling. Progress from head lifts to lifting your shoulders off the floor and
finally to a full sit-up.

OceanofPDF.com

 KNEES TO CHEST

Why: To strengthen lower back and hip muscles.
How: Beginning with a back-lying pelvic tilt, slowly raise one knee to the
chest, grab the knee with your hands, and pull gently toward your chest.
Hold for five seconds, then release and relax leg. Do this ten times with
each leg. Again raise one knee to your chest, and this time while holding it
to your chest stretch the opposite leg out flat. Hold for a few seconds, then
return to the starting position. Repeat this ten times with each leg. Finally,
progress to flexing both knees to your chest: Slowly raise one knee to your
chest, then the second. Pull both knees toward the chest with your hands.
Hold for five seconds, then release and lower each leg slowly and
separately. Repeat ten times.

 OceanofPDF.com

 LEG LIFTS

Why: To strengthen abdominal, lower back, and thigh muscles.
How: Lie on your back with knees bent. Flex one leg up toward your chest
as in the knees-to-chest exercise and then extend it as far as you can
overhead while keeping the opposite leg bent. Also, you can try raising and
lowering one leg at a time while keeping it straight.

OceanofPDF.com

 Caring for Your Baby’s Bodily Needs

The high-maintenance stage of the first two years is often tedious,
sometimes fun, but it’s also a chance to get to know your baby. In this
chapter you will find practical ways to take good care of your baby—and
enjoy it.

OceanofPDF.com

 DIAPERING YOUR BABY
During the early years your baby will spend a lot of time in diapers, and you
will spend a lot of time changing them. Here’s how to be kind to your
baby’s bottom and to your time.

OceanofPDF.com

 Making Changing Time Quality Time

During life before toilet training, expect to change around five thousand
diapers, an interaction surpassed only by the frequency of feeding your
baby. Rather than being a mundane task to be handled with dispatch and
distaste, diapering can be a satisfying time to interact with your baby. More
happens during diapering than baby’s going from wet to dry. Baby feels
your touch, hears your voice, watches your face, and responds to your
giggles (and you to your baby’s). Before you even begin to change the
diaper, connect with your baby. Focus on the child, not the job. Reserve
some special facial expressions, jingles, and massage strokes just for
diapering time so that baby looks forward to getting more than a clean
diaper, and be sure to convey this diapering attitude to any substitute
caregiver.
Look forward to diapering as a time to communicate to your baby that
he or she is special. Avoid expressions of disgust with the sight or smell
(here’s where breastfed babies have an advantage—the odor is not
unpleasant!). Your face is baby’s mirror. Baby regards himself by what he
sees on your face. We chatter to our babies about finding “treasures” and
keep the tone of our voice excited and loving. Of course, not every diaper
change will be a magical, happy, playful time. Sometimes you just want to
get it over with so you can move on.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Choosing a Diaper and Diaper Cover

Whether you choose cloth or disposables is a matter of convenience, cost,
and your concern for ecology. And, of course, your baby’s skin should be a
factor. Which type of diaper is kindest to your baby’s skin? Many parents
use both: 100 percent cotton cloth diapers for home use and disposables
when on the go. The bottom line is to choose a diapering system that is user
friendly for parents, skin friendly for your baby, and kind to our
environment.
One day I was asked what I thought was the biggest recent breakthrough
in child care. I responded, “The elimination of diaper pins.” As a frequently
stuck father of eight, I don’t like diaper pins, and they don’t like me. Cloth
diaper covers with Velcro fasteners or plastic snaps have eliminated stuck
babies and parents. They’re great! And because they breathe, cloth diaper
coverings are kinder to baby’s bottom than plastic pants, which aggravate
diaper rashes.

OceanofPDF.com

 Changing Diapers

Here is the basic approach to changing your baby’s diapers. These steps
may vary, depending on what kind of diapers you use.

Preparing Baby

Change baby in a warm room and on a safe and soft surface. Before
starting, be sure you have all the necessary equipment within arm’s reach.
You will need:

Clean diapers ready. There is nothing more
frustrating than getting baby naked, then reaching
for a new diaper and finding the bag or stack
empty. For cloth diapers, get the new one ready
before you begin changing.
Baby wipes. For newborn girls, use warm wet
washcloths for the first few weeks, or rinse the
baby wipes in warm water before using them. The
cleansing ingredients in wipes can irritate the
vagina during the first few weeks of life.

 Changing pad or towel to lay baby on.
Diaper rash ointment. Most newborns get a rash
as their sensitive skin adjusts to life in diapers.
We suggest using a small amount of a clear diaper
ointment to protect baby’s skin during the early
weeks. Use a white zinc oxide cream if a
persistent rash develops. Eventually you may not
need to use any ointment at all, except
periodically during flare-ups.
Change of clothes. Baby will inevitably leak onto
his clothes, and it always seems to happen when
you don’t have a new outfit handy. Keep a few
outfits near the changing table.
Diaper covers. If using cloth diapers, always keep
a stack of covers ready because baby will
frequently leak.
It is best to have a changing table or a designated changing counter where
all the items you need are conveniently arranged.
If you are having difficulty with diaper rashes, see “Dealing with Diaper
Rash,” here.

Safe and Fun Diaper-Changing Tips

 Don’t take both hands off baby; babies can fall off
changing tables during diaper changing,
especially as they approach four or five months
and begin rolling over. While your back is turned
or you are searching for a diaper, it takes your
infant one second to roll off the counter or
changing table. Use the safety strap on the
changing table, but don’t rely on it.
Handle pins safely. If using diaper pins, don’t
leave them within grabbing distance of your baby.
Avoid putting diaper pins in your mouth, as baby
may imitate this dangerous habit. For easy
storage, stick pins in a bar of soap, which keeps
the pin sliding smoothly into the cloth.
We recommend that baby-sitters and other people
not used to changing diapers use the floor. It is
much safer.
If your baby is prone to diaper rash, change
diapers frequently.
Beware! Babies like to pee when naked. Have an
extra cloth diaper or towel nearby in case baby
decides to “spray” all over the place. Trust us, it
will happen!
After baby is past the stool-a-feeding stage
(usually by the end of the first month), change

 baby’s diaper (if soiled or wet) just before a
feeding. Baby can then drift into an after-feeding
slumber without being interrupted by a diaper
change.
Be especially careful when baby has a painful
rash—this is a very sensitive area. Either soak
baby’s bottom clean in warm water in a shallow
basin or tub or use a warm cloth compress to
apply soothing heat, and pat the area clean with
minimal rubbing. Generously apply a barrier
cream, spreading it gently without rubbing.
TYPES OF CLOTH DIAPERS
If you choose to use cloth diapers, here are your options:
Separate diaper and cover. This is the least-expensive type. The cloth
diapers are available as either rectangles that must be folded into a diaper
shape or contoured in a diaper shape already. A separate waterproof plastic
or cloth diaper cover is put on over the diaper. Both are washable.
All-in-ones. These are a combination of inner cloth diaper with outer
waterproof cover. They are easier to use but more expensive.
Hybrids. This type has a washable outer cover with a disposable snap-on
inner liner. The benefit is that this inner liner is much smaller than regular
disposables and creates less diaper waste. Plus, it’s flushable.

OceanofPDF.com

 Changing the Wiggly Baby

Dr. Jim notes: Diapering wiggly babies often amounts to an unfinished
wrestling match and a half-diapered baby. Parents often ask me, “Why
won’t my toddler let me change her diaper anymore? She kicks and
screams, and it turns into a battle every time.” Well, older infants and
toddlers are supposed to act this way. They are naturally going to resist
anything in which they are restrained.

Reserve special entertainment only for diaper
changing. Sing a song that you have saved just for
this event. When your baby hears this song, he is
likely to calm down and listen.
Dangle a special toy from your mouth (your third
hand) to try to settle the squirmer; let him grab for
it and play with it. Keep this toy only for diaper
changing, and change the toy periodically.
Place a mobile or similarly entertaining toy over
the changing area to distract baby.

 Walk your fingers up and down baby’s legs and
abdomen during the change while singing a song.
(Our babies have enjoyed this.)
Have him “find” his belly button, eyes, nose, and
so forth.
Reserve special, funny facial expressions and
contortions to hold your baby’s interest during the
diapering, getting him to focus on your face rather
than the bottom cleaning.
If baby is a real squirmer, use the floor, the safest
place to change a diaper.
Be creative in your diaper-changing techniques, especially with a
toddler. A strip of masking tape can entertain a toddler long enough to get
the job done while the two of you discuss this sticky subject. (The tape
comes out only at changing time.) Some toddlers like holding the wipe or
the diaper for you. Keep a dialogue going so baby senses your focus is on
her and your enjoyment of this special time. If you are negative about
diaper changing, she will be, too.

OceanofPDF.com

 CORD CARE
The nurse or birth attendant usually removes the plastic clamp from your
baby’s cord by twenty-four hours of age. In the first few days your baby’s
cord may be swollen and jellylike. Over the next few days it begins to dry
and shrivel up, usually falling off within two or three weeks. It is normal to
see a few drops of blood the day the cord falls off.
For decades doctors recommended that parents wipe the healing
umbilical cord with rubbing alcohol several times each day to prevent
infection. New research has shown that this isn’t necessary; most cords will
heal just fine without alcohol. If, however, you begin to notice that the
drainage from the cord is foul-smelling, or that the umbilical stump appears
unusually red, apply an alcohol swab or drip alcohol onto the stump three
times daily until this mild infection resolves.
If your baby’s cord continues to have a puslike discharge and/or an
increasingly offensive odor, visit your doctor, who may apply a silvernitrate solution to help dry it out. A slight odor from the drying cord is
normal, but a particularly putrid odor may be a sign that an infection is
brewing and it’s time to step up the use of the antiseptic solution. If the skin
around the drying cord looks normal and is not inflamed, there is seldom
any reason for concern. A sign of infection for which you should call your

 doctor is a red, hot, swollen, and tender area the size of a half-dollar around
the base of the cord.
To avoid irritating the cord, do not cover the cord area with a diaper or
plastic pants, and, if using disposable diapers, be especially careful to fold
the irritating plastic away from the cord area. Whether or not it is safe to
immerse baby in a bath until the cord falls off is controversial. Some
physicians feel getting the cord wet increases the risk of infection; some do
not. If there is pus draining at the base of the cord, it would be unwise to
immerse baby in a bath for fear of contaminating the water and spreading
infection. In this case sponge bathe baby until the cord falls off and the
stump is well healed.

OceanofPDF.com

 CARE OF THE CIRCUMCISION SITE
Your doctor will instruct you on caring for the circumcision site. Apply
petroleum jelly to the head and shaft of the circumcised penis with every
diaper change for about three weeks to aid in healing. We have found that
massaging the ointment into the circumcised area, instead of simply laying
it over the top of the head of the penis, helps with swelling, promotes better
healing, and allows for a lower chance of becoming restuck. Apply a
generous amount of ointment to your three middle fingers and spread it
around a bit with your thumb, then surround the penis with your fingers and
thumb and gently massage the ointment into the head and shaft of the penis.

DISAPPEARING PENIS?
Oftentimes, during the first two years boys develop an increased
accumulation of fat, called the pubic fat pad, around the base of the penis.
This mound of growing fat may appear to bury the penis. (We have gotten
phone calls from worried mothers exclaiming, “His penis is gone.”) No, it is
not gone. It resides comfortably buried beneath the mounds of fat. As your
baby goes through the normal stretching and lengthening of his whole body,
the mounds of baby fat melt away and the penis reappears. This curious
relationship between fat and penis occurs in both circumcised and
uncircumcised infants.
The circumcised site will go through the typical healing process.
Initially it is swollen, then a yellow scab appears. The swelling and the scab
resolve by one week. Be sure your doctor informs you how to tell if the

 circumcision site becomes infected. Surprisingly, circumcision sites rarely
become infected, but here are signs to call your doctor: The entire penis is
red, warm, and swollen, and the surgical site is draining pus. A yellow,
nondraining scab is normal during healing.

OceanofPDF.com

 NAIL CARE
Some newborns enter the world with fingernails so long that they need to be
trimmed right away to prevent them from scratching their faces. Expect
your newborn’s nails to grow very fast and don’t be afraid to cut them. If
you’re timid about cutting your baby’s fingernails, as many parents are, you
can gently peel or file them. When you decide to begin cutting them, here’s
how to make it easier:

Trim your baby’s fingernails while baby is in a
state of deep sleep, recognized by the limp-limb
sign: Baby’s limbs dangle limply at his side, and
the hands are wide open.
Use a miniature nail clipper designed especially
for babies. They are much easier and safer than
scissors or adult-sized clippers, and baby’s paperthin nails are so easy to cut anyway. If not using a
nail clipper, use safety scissors with blunt ends in
case baby startles during the cutting.
To avoid snipping the fingertip skin as you clip
the nail, depress the finger pad away from the nail
as you cut. As a beginning nail cutter, have your

 spouse hold baby’s hand while you manipulate
the finger and the nail clipper. After a while you
will be able to trim baby’s nails by yourself.
Drawing a drop of blood is part of learning nail
trimming. Apply a bit of pressure and a dab of
antibiotic ointment to the little nip.
If you’re squeamish about cutting tiny nails,
cover them with cotton mittens to prevent
scratches.
A baby’s toenails do not grow as fast, and quite often the nails are
surrounded with heaped-up skin, making trimming difficult. Don’t worry
that the toenails may grow into this skin. Ingrown toenails are rarely a
problem in newborns.

OceanofPDF.com

 BATHING BABY
Most babies are overwashed. In reality, newborns don’t get very dirty. The
toddler–mud puddle friendship has not yet begun.
When to give baby her first bath is a matter of some debate. It is still
general practice to advise parents to sponge bathe baby until the cord falls
off and the circumcision heals. Some physicians question the necessity of
this advice, feeling that an immersion bath does not increase the risk of
infection. Check with your doctor. Our own personal recommendation is to
sponge bathe baby until the cord is no longer moist and the circumcision is
well healed.

OceanofPDF.com

 Sponge Bathing

Let’s go step-by-step through baby’s early bath.
Select a bathing area. Try the kitchen or bathroom counter next to the
sink. You can also lay baby on a soft towel in a regular bathtub. The room
should be warm and draft free. Take the phone off the hook so that you will
not be tempted to leave baby unattended even for a moment.
Have your bath kit ready in the bathing area before you start. You will
need:

two washcloths
a mild soap and baby shampoo
cotton balls
a hooded towel
diapers
clean clothes
While some babies like to be bare, most don’t, so for the first part of the
bath—cleaning the face and head—remove all clothing except the diaper
and swaddle baby in a towel. You can hold baby on your lap while sitting in
a chair with your bath kit on an adjacent table, or stand up at the counter

 with baby lying on a pad of thick towel, or lay baby on a sponge pad in an
empty baby bathtub.
Squeeze a bit of warm water on top of baby’s head, apply a dab of baby
shampoo, and gently massage the entire scalp. Use no special caution over
the soft spot. It’s really tough underneath. (If baby’s scalp is flaky or crusty,
see instructions for caring for cradle cap, here.) Gently pour water over
baby’s head to rinse, or carefully hold baby over a sink and use the faucet.
Blot dry with a towel hood. Meanwhile, baby is still swaddled in a towel,
with only his head and face exposed, not getting cold. Then you can
proceed with the rest of the body.
Have your swaddled baby’s head and face exposed. Begin washing his
face with warm water, especially behind the ears, in the ear crevices, and in
the neck creases. Unless baby’s face is sweaty, oily, or dirty, plain water is
enough; for the rest of the head and body, use a mild shampoo and soap.
Unswaddle baby, remove his diaper, and wash the rest of his body.
Extend the arms and legs to wash the groin, knee, and elbow creases, where
there are likely to be oily collections.
Turn baby over on his tummy and clean the crevice just above his
buttocks and around the diaper area. Or you can lift both feet up and clean
the lower back and buttocks while baby is lying on his back. To keep baby
from getting cold and upset, cover the rest of the body while cleaning the
diaper area.
Clean the genitalia. Hold baby’s legs outward like a frog’s. For girls,
spread the labia and, using a moistened cotton ball, gently wipe between the
labia. When cleaning around the vagina always wipe from front to back.

 You may notice that secretions and diaper creams collect and cake between
the vulva and the outer labia. This area requires the most cleansing. A
normal egg-white vaginal discharge is common between the inner labia and
vagina. It is not necessary to clean away this normal discharge. For boys,
clean the creases beneath the scrotum and the skin of the groin and buttock
and around the base of the penis. While the circumcision site is still sore,
avoid wiping; gently rinse it with clean water. After it is healed, you can
wipe it the same way you would the rest of the diaper area. Do not retract
the foreskin if the penis is uncircumcised. (See here for further suggestions
on the care of the diaper area and preventing diaper rash.)

KID GLOVES
Here’s a washing tip that we have used to make bathing baby safer and
easier: Wear a pair of old white gloves and rub a little mild baby soap on the
white gloves. You have an instant washcloth that automatically shapes itself
to baby’s body and reduces the slipperiness of bare hands on soapy skin.
Quickly diaper baby and dress him in clean clothes before he has a
chance to get cold and more upset.

OceanofPDF.com

 Additional Bath Tips

As you move from one area of the body to
another, change the parts of the washcloth in
order to keep clean cloth on cleaner parts of the
body.
Pat the skin with a washcloth and blot dry with a
towel rather than vigorously scrubbing, which
may irritate baby’s sensitive skin.
Spot cleaning works best for babies who do not
like either a total sponge bath or an immersion
bath. Clean the areas that get the most oily,
sweaty, or dirty.
Clean the eyes on an as-needed basis rather than
during the regular bath. Babies often protest eye
cleaning, which may set off a protest for the entire
bath. Using cotton balls and warm tap water
(always squeeze a few drops of the water from the
cotton ball on the inside of your wrist to make
sure it is not too hot), wash accumulated
discharge out of the corners of baby’s eyes.

 It is not necessary to clean inside the ear canal,
for you may damage the canal or eardrum.
OceanofPDF.com

 A Rub in the Tub

After the sponge-bath stage, the real fun begins. First, choose the right tub
that’s safe and easy to use. There are many types of baby tubs on the
market, or you can simply use the kitchen sink, which makes great pictures
for your baby book. The kitchen sink is easy to use because it is the right
height. If using the kitchen sink, observe the following safety tips: Purchase
an insert-type plastic or rubber tub that fits into your sink, or line the bottom
of the sink with a folded towel or sponge mat to keep baby from slipping.
There are even inflatable baby bathtubs. If you have a movable faucet, be
sure to turn it away from baby.
Before the splash begins, make sure the water is comfortably warm but
not too hot. Tie a towel around your own neck like a bib to keep yourself
dry during the bath and in case baby needs to be picked up quickly and
cuddled. Most newborns do not eagerly await their bath. Singing a few
songs, making eye-to-eye contact, and gently massaging baby during the
bath often relaxes the reluctant bather.

OceanofPDF.com

 Questions About Bath Time

Here are some questions new parents commonly ask us about the bath-time
routine.
How often should we bathe our baby?
Bathing is primarily playtime. Babies don’t get dirty enough to need a daily
bath. For busy parents this is good news. Once or twice a week is enough
bathing, providing you clean your baby’s diaper area sufficiently well each
time there is a bowel movement. Daily spot cleaning is necessary in areas
that get particularly sweaty, oily, or dirty, such as behind the ears, in the
neck folds, in the creases of the groin, and in the diaper area.
Which soap and shampoo should I use when bathing our baby?
Baby’s skin, especially a newborn’s, is sensitive, and all soaps are mild
irritants. The function of a soap is to suspend particles and oils on the skin
surface so that they can be more easily removed from skin with water.
Without soap, some oils, dirt, and surface secretions would simply stick to
the skin and require vigorous rubbing with a cloth and water to remove
them, which in itself would irritate the skin. Every baby’s skin has an
individual tolerance to different soaps. How much soap, how often, and

 which kind can be determined only by trial and error, but here are some
general guidelines:

Use soap only on areas that are caked with
secretions, such as oil or sweat, that are not easily
removed with plain water without much rubbing.
Do not use soap on the face.
When first using a soap, try a test wash on one
small part of the body. If, over the next few hours,
the skin reddens or dries or noticeably changes in
any way relative to other areas, ban that soap and
try another.
Use a mild soap. Baby soaps are regular soaps
with fewer additives such as anti-microbials,
fragrances, or abrasives.
Limit the soap’s time on the skin to less than five
minutes to avoid drying or irritating the skin.
Wash it off as soon as possible and rinse the skin
well.
Above all, avoid vigorous scrubbing of any area
of the skin with soap.
If your baby is prone to eczema or has allergic dermatitis, use a
moisturizing soap such as unscented Sensitive Skin Dove.

 Shampoos are similar to soaps, and over-use can irritate the scalp and
rob the hair of natural oils. Shampooing once a week is enough for most
babies. Use a mild baby shampoo; like baby soaps, baby shampoos contain
fewer additives than other commercial shampoos. It is seldom necessary to
massage shampoo deep into the scalp. If your baby’s scalp is covered with
the flaky, crusty, oily substance called cradle cap, after shampooing
massage a vegetable oil into the crust to soften it, and remove it carefully
with a very soft toothbrush.
Here is a final thought about soaps and shampoos that many mothers
have expressed to us over the years. Sensitive mothers feel that too much
soap and shampoo (and scented oils and powders) camouflage natural baby
scents that mothers find irresistible. Also, it is better not to mask the
mother’s natural scent, which baby needs, and perfume is irritating to some
babies.
Should I use powders on our baby’s skin?
Gone are the days when a baby was sprinkled with perfumed talcum after
every bath. Powders are unnecessary, and they may be irritating and even
harmful. Moisturizers may be used on patchy areas of dry skin. Powders
easily cake and build up in skin creases and can actually contribute to skin
irritation and rashes. Powders, if inhaled, can irritate baby’s nasal and air
passages. Cornstarch is not recommended. It can serve as a medium for the
growth of harmful fungi.

 My baby screams every time I try to give her a bath. How can we both
enjoy bath time more?
If your baby screams every time you try to put her into the water, it either
means that she is hungry, the water is too hot or cold, or you have a baby
who doesn’t like to be alone in the water. Her security may be threatened.
Here’s how we have enjoyed bathing our babies. Take your baby into your
bath with you. Get the water ready, slightly cooler than you usually have it,
then undress yourself and undress your baby. Hold her close to you as you
get into the water and then sit back and enjoy this warm skin-to-skin
contact. If your baby still protests, sit in the tub first, showing that you are
enjoying your bath. Then have someone else hand your baby to you while
you are sitting in the bathtub. Mothers, don’t be surprised if your baby
wants to breastfeed at this time. It is the natural result of being close to your
breast. In fact, if your baby still fusses upon entering the water in your
arms, relax her by putting her to your breast first, slowly ease your way into
the tub, then gradually let your arms lower baby into the water as she
continues to suck. This is a special way to enjoy mothering and bathing
your baby. As your baby gets older, bath toys such as the traditional rubber
ducky may entice the reluctant bath taker. When bathing together in a tub,
take special precautions to avoid slipping. While you are getting used to
bathing with baby, it is safer to hand baby to another person or place her on
a towel rather than holding baby as you get in and out of the tub.
Here’s another Sears family trick for enticing the reluctant bather. This
involves getting baby into the mind-set that a pleasant event will follow one

 that he or she may have mixed feelings about. After the bath you may have
a special cuddle time. Or follow the bath with a soothing massage. Baby
will develop an association with the bath as the wet stage to put up with in
order to get the total body massage. (See the section on infant massage at
the end of this chapter.)
Over the years we have bathed a lot of babies. There is no one right way to
bathe baby, just one that works for you safely with a minimum of hassles.
We have learned to regard bath time as more of a parenting ritual than a
cleaning regimen; that way the pressure is off in case we miss a crevice.
Enjoy bathing your baby and bathing with your baby as just another ritual
for getting in touch with your infant.

OceanofPDF.com

 KEEPING BABY COMFORTABLE
New parents also ask us about their baby’s general comfort. Here are a few
common questions.
How should I dress our one-month-old at night?
As a general rule, dress and cover your baby in as much or as little clothing
as you would wear yourself, plus one more layer, such as a blanket of
appropriate weight. Get used to feeling your baby’s body temperature. Cold
hands and feet indicate the need for more warmth; hot, sweaty head means a
need for less clothing and/or a cooler sleeping environment. If your baby
was premature or weighs under 8 pounds and has little insulating body fat,
dress him even more warmly. Cotton clothing is best because it absorbs
body moisture and allows air to circulate freely. Your baby’s clothing
should be loose enough to allow free movement but well fitting enough to
stay on the proper body parts. If your baby’s sleepers do not contain feet,
cover these cold little feet with cozy bootees. Avoid dangling strings or ties
on your baby’s sleepwear (and yours as well), since these could cause
strangling. While blanket sleepers are great for babies who sleep alone, a
baby who shares his parents’ bed also shares their body warmth and can
easily become overheated, which will cause him to be restless. In this

 situation even a thin polyester sleeper can be a problem, and cotton would
be better. (See “Irritating Sleepwear,” here.)
How warm should we keep our baby’s nursery?
Regarding the temperature of your baby’s room, the consistency is more
important than how hot or cold it is. Premature or small babies under 5½
pounds have incompletely developed temperature-regulating systems at
birth and need a reasonably consistent temperature to avoid cold stress.
Term healthy babies over 8 pounds usually have enough body fat, and their
temperature-regulating systems are mature enough to feel comfortable in an
environment in which an average adult would be comfortable. Since babies
do not adjust to marked swings in room temperature in the first few weeks,
a consistent room temperature around 68–70°F (20–21°C) is preferable.
Besides the temperature of baby’s environment, humidity is important.
Best is a consistent relative humidity around 50 percent. Dry air may lead to
a stuffy nose, a common contributor to night waking. A warm-mist
vaporizer in your baby’s sleeping area helps maintain an adequate and
consistent relative humidity, especially with central heating during the
winter months. And the constant hum is an additional sleep inducer. As a
rule, if the heat goes on, so should the humidity. When traveling with a baby
during the winter, take along a vaporizer, especially if you are staying in
motels or cabins with electric heat. Heating, particularly dry forced air or
heat from electric baseboard heaters, is drying and not conducive to sleep.
Unless it’s very cold, turn off central heat at night. Here’s a healthier

 alternative: An inexpensive warm-mist vaporizer (available at pharmacies
and department stores) adequately heats and humidifies a 15-by-15-foot
room with normal ceiling height. (See here for vaporizer tips.)
Is it better to put our newborn down to sleep on her stomach or her back?
Unless advised otherwise by your doctor, put your baby to sleep on her
back. Most newborns do seem to sleep “better” on their stomachs than on
their backs, accounting for the traditional advice of putting babies down to
sleep on their tummies. But research has shown that sleeping “better” may
not equate sleeping safer. New insights into infant sleep patterns have
resulted in a reversal of the traditional tummy-sleeping position to backsleeping, mainly because of the reduced risk of Sudden Infant Death
Syndrome (SIDS) in infants who sleep on their backs. “Back to Sleep”
campaigns have reduced the incidence of SIDS by 50 percent. Babies who
sleep on their backs awaken more easily and sleep less deeply than tummy
sleepers, and easier arousability from sleep seems to be a protective
mechanism against SIDS. Be sure to check with your doctor to see if your
baby has any medical condition that necessitates front-sleeping, such as
small jaw bones or other oral structural abnormalities that may compromise
the airways when she is sleeping on her back; a mucus-producing
respiratory infection; or gastro-esophageal reflux (GERD). (For more
information on safe sleeping, see here for the possible relationship between
baby’s sleeping position and SIDS; crib safety, here; and safe ways to sleep
with your baby, here.)

 How soon can we take our baby outside?
Follow the guidelines mentioned in the preceding discussion about baby’s
clothing and room temperature. Consistency of temperature is still
necessary in the first month. A newborn’s immature temperature-regulating
system may not tolerate exposure to extreme temperature swings. Traveling
from a heated house to a heated car maintains this consistency. If your baby
is term, healthy, and has enough body fat (usually with a weight of at least 8
pounds), baby is mature enough to tolerate brief exposure to extremes of
temperature (such as house to car and back). If your baby is premature or
small and does not yet have a generous amount of body fat, avoid extreme
temperature changes for at least a month. In climates where the inside and
outside temperatures are similar, you and your baby can enjoy a walk
outside within the first few days. Passersby love to stop and peer at a tiny
baby. To avoid unnecessary exposure to germs, shun crowds, shopping
malls, and handling by—or being within sneezing distance of—persons
with colds. Going outside won’t make baby sick. Being around sick people
will.

AVOID FLAT HEAD AND TILTED NECK
Many babies develop a favorite sleeping position, with the head primarily
turned to one side (usually facing toward mother at night). Because the
skull bones are relatively soft, one side of the back of the head may become
flattened (the side that is against the bed) relative to the other side. If baby
always sleeps facing straight up, the back of the head will flatten. This is
called positional plagiocephaly. Switching the direction in which your baby
faces at night will prevent this. If you notice that every time you look at

 your sleeping baby she is facing the same direction, it’s time to begin
rotating.
A similar thing can happen with the neck. If babies are held in one
position much of the time (such as cradled in the left arm, facing one
position in a sling or other carrier, held against the chest facing one way, or
draped over only one shoulder), the head will usually be tilted toward one
side. If baby spends much of her time in this position, the neck muscles will
become tight on one side and weak on the other (called torticollis). You will
then begin to notice baby’s head is always titled to the tight side when you
are holding or sitting baby upright. You can prevent this by routinely
alternating on which side and orientation you hold baby. This rotation will
allow the neck muscles to stretch evenly on both sides.

OceanofPDF.com

 PACIFIERS: IN OR OUT?
Every age has its props, but none is so controversial as this tiny plug. Some
babies like them, grandmothers turn their heads, parents are unsure, and
psychologists offer no comment. Babies have an intense need to suck, and
some have more intense needs than others. Babies even suck their thumbs
in the womb. Next to holding and feeding, sucking is the most time-tested
comforter. Even preemies grow better when they can suck on pacifiers.
These silicone “peacemakers” have their place, but they can also be abused.

OceanofPDF.com

 When Pacifiers Are Out

In the early weeks of breastfeeding. When learning how to breastfeed, a
baby should have only mother’s nipple in his mouth. One thing a newborn
has to “learn” is how to suck on mother’s nipple the right way to get the
most milk. A baby sucks on a pacifier differently than on mother’s nipples.
Some newborns, but not all, develop nipple confusion when given a pacifier
or bottle nipple at the same time as they are learning to suck from mother.
Pacifiers have a narrow base, so baby doesn’t have to open his lips wide.
This often results in poor latch-on techniques, sore nipples, and a difficult
start at breastfeeding. Many sensitive babies gag on every pacifier you
might try. The texture, taste, and smell are rejected hands down. Other
babies make the transition from rubber to flesh nipples without any
confusion or complaint. Our advice: Avoid pacifiers until your newborn
learns to latch on properly and you have a good milk supply. If your own
nipples are wearing out, or at least the mom they are attached to is, use your
finger (or, better yet, get dad or someone else to give you a break). The
skin-to-skin element is still there, and your index finger (or dad’s little
finger) can be placed more properly farther back in baby’s mouth to
simulate sucking at the breast. Your fingernail should be trimmed short and
the nail should be turned down toward the tongue so it won’t poke baby’s

 palate. Many of our babies have been soothed by the touch of a wellscrubbed pinkie.

PACIFIERS VERSUS THUMB-SUCKING—
WHICH IS BETTER?
We would vote for the thumb. It’s easily found in the middle of the night, it
doesn’t fall on the floor, it tastes better, and baby can adjust the position to
her own sucking needs. Pacifiers get lost, get dirty, and are always falling
on the floor. Those of the pacifier set claim, however, that it is easier to
“lose” the pacifier than the thumb; and intense thumb-sucking, if prolonged
three to four years, may lead to orthodontic problems. Parents of tiny
thumb-suckers, don’t choose your child’s orthodontist yet. Most babies suck
their thumbs at some time. Most outgrow it, and if their sucking needs are
appropriately met in early infancy, they seldom carry the thumb-sucking
habit into childhood.
As habitual substitutes for nurturing. Ideally, pacifiers are for the
comfort of babies, not the convenience of parents. To insert the plug and
leave baby in the plastic infant seat every time he cries is unhealthy reliance
on an artificial comforter. This baby needs picking up and holding. Always
relying on an alternative peacemaker lessens the buildup of baby’s trust in
the parents and denies the parents a chance to develop baby-comforting
skills. Pacifiers are meant to satisfy intense sucking needs, not to delay or
replace nurturing. A person should always be at the other end of a
comforting tool. The breast (or the finger) has the built-in advantage of
making sure you don’t fall into the habit of just plugging up the source of
the cries as a mechanical gesture. When baby cries, if you find yourself, by

 reflex, reaching for the pacifier instead of reaching for your baby, pull the
plug—and lose it.

OceanofPDF.com

 When Pacifiers Are In

If used sensibly and used for a baby who has intense sucking needs—in
addition to, not as a substitute for, human nurturing—pacifiers are an
acceptable aid. If you have one of these babies and experience times when
the human pacifier wears out, use the rubber one, but don’t abuse it. There
will be times when being a baby is socially unacceptable, for example,
during a sermon in church or in a quiet theater. If baby is finished feeding
and won’t accept finger sucking, a pacifier may keep the peace. Since
pacifiers stimulate the flow of saliva, which is a natural digestive aid and
intestinal lubricant, extra sucking on a pacifier may help babies with
intestinal upsets, such as gastroesophageal reflux.
Pacifiers bother adults more than they harm babies. I confess that while
examining a baby and needing an unobstructed view of baby’s face, I wish
that thing were not there. Besides, pacifiers obstruct those adorable smiles.
But in defense of the much-maligned pacifier, I soon relax my unfair
judgment of the rubber comforter as baby sucks contentedly during the
entire exam.

OceanofPDF.com

 Choosing and Using a Safe Pacifier

Select a sturdy one-piece model that will not
break into two pieces, allowing baby to choke on
the bulb. Also, be sure it is dishwasher safe and
easy to clean.
Be sure the base of the pacifier has ventilation
holes. Avoid large circular shields that may
obstruct baby’s nasal passages when baby draws
in the pacifier during intense sucking.
One size doesn’t fit all. Choose a smaller, shorter,
newborn-sized pacifier for the early months.
Pacifiers come in a variety of nipple shapes.
Some are symmetrically round, like a bottle
nipple. Others are preshaped, supposedly to
duplicate the elongated, flattened breast nipple
during sucking. Preshaped nipples, however, may
not always fit baby’s mouth, especially if the
pacifier turns during sucking or is inserted upside
down. Some pacifier manufacturers claim
orthodontic benefits, but these are questionable.

 Try various shapes and let baby’s discerning
mouth decide.
Avoid attaching the pacifier to a string or ribbon
around baby’s neck or pinning the pacifier string
onto baby’s clothing. This is a setup for
strangulation. “But it’s always falling on the
floor,” you plead. Answer: Keep one hand on
baby and the other hand on the pacifier. Perhaps
babies are not meant to be left unattended with
anything in their mouths. Good safety and good
nurturing go together.
Do not make your own pacifier out of a cottonstuffed bottle nipple. Baby may suck the cotton
through the hole.
Resist the temptation to sweeten the offering by
dipping the pacifier in honey or syrup. If baby
does not yet have teeth, he is too young for honey
or syrup. If he has teeth, he is too old for the
decay-producing sweets—and probably the
pacifier, too. If he has to be enticed to suck by
sweetening, he would probably benefit from some
other form of comforting—having a change of
scene, going out in the fresh air, playing, cuddling
with you, rocking to sleep, being worn more, and
so on.

 Our advice about pacifiers: In the early weeks only the real nipple belongs
in a baby’s mouth. If you have a baby who really needs a pacifier, then use
it, don’t abuse it, and quickly try to lose it.

SHORTEN SWADDLING TIME
Once upon a time, wrapping babies burrito-style in a blanket was advised to
help them settle easier. New insights, however, have shown that swaddling
babies too often and for too long may harm their hip development. In order
for the ball-and-socket structures of the hip joint to develop properly, babies
need to have freely swinging motion of their legs and spend time with their
legs outward in a frog position. This is especially crucial in the first few
months, when the hip joint is rapidly developing. Swaddling your baby for a
few hours a day won’t harm her hip development. Avoid letting her sleep
tightly swaddled for long periods of time, such as through the entire night;
unwrap her when she wakens during the night to give her legs a stretch.

OceanofPDF.com

 THE RIGHT TOUCH: THE ART OF INFANT
MASSAGE
It’s one of life’s simple pleasures (massage has long been enjoyed by
adults), and research is showing that babies grow better and act better when
they are on the receiving end of the right touch. Infant massage is a skin-toskin connection that helps parents and baby better read each other’s body
language—without saying a word.

OceanofPDF.com

 Why Massage?

Besides the fact that it is just plain fun to touch your baby, infant massage
helps babies grow and develop better. Other cultures highly value touch to
help babies grow. In some Eastern societies a mother is expected to give her
baby a daily massage. One of the most exciting areas of research is the
connection between touch and growth. Touched babies thrive and here’s
why.
Touch stimulates growth-promoting substances. Health care providers
have long known that babies who are touched a lot grow better, and now
there is research to back up this observation. There seems to be a biological
connection between stroking, massaging, and grooming infants and their
growth. Touch stimulates growth-promoting hormones and increases the
enzymes that make the cells of the vital organs more responsive to the
growth-promoting effects of these hormones. For example, premature
infants in a “grower nursery,” where they can gain needed weight, showed
47 percent more weight gain when they received extra touch.
Animal researchers have recognized the connection between a mother
animal’s licking her offspring and how well her babies grow. When
newborn pups were deprived of their mothers’ frequent licking (equivalent
to infant massage), the level of growth hormone decreased, and the pups

 stopped growing. Even injecting growth hormone into the untouched pups
would not cause them to grow. Only when the mother animal’s touching
and licking were restarted did the pups resume their growth.
Researchers have found that human babies, too, when deprived of touch
showed decreased growth hormone and developed a condition called
psychosocial dwarfism; even more amazingly they also did not grow when
given injections of growth hormone. Only when given human touch did
these infants grow. This finding implies that touch causes something
beneficial to occur at the cellular level that makes the cells respond to
growth hormone. Yes, there is something magical about a parent’s touch.
Touch promotes brain growth. Not only is touch good for the body, it’s
good for the mind. Studies show that newborns receiving extra touch
display enhanced neurological development. Why this smart connection?
Researchers believe that touch promotes the growth of myelin, the
insulating material around nerves that makes nerve impulses travel faster.
Touch improves digestion. Babies receiving extra touch show enhanced
secretion of digestive hormones. Researchers believe that this is another
reason that touched infants grow better. It seems that touch makes the
babies’ digestive system more efficient. Babies with colic caused by the
irritable colon syndrome may have less trouble in the colon when massaged
frequently.

 Touch improves behavior. Research shows babies receiving extra touch
become better organized. They sleep better at night, fuss less during the day,
and relate better to caregivers’ interactions. Touch settles babies. Massage
can be a wonderful tool for helping baby go to sleep at night.
Touch promotes baby’s self-esteem. Being on the receiving end of loving
hands helps babies develop a feel for their body parts by learning which
areas of the body are most sensitive and which need relaxing. Being
touched gives value to a person, like an adult feeling “touched” by the
remarks of a friend.
Touch helps parents. A daily massage helps you to get in touch with your
whole baby, to read her body language, and to learn her cues. Giving your
baby the right touch is just one more step up the ladder of learning about
your baby. Infant massage is especially valuable for the parent and infant
who had a slow start—for example, when separated by a medical
complication. Massage helps parent and baby reconnect. For the slow-start
mother who doesn’t feel naturally “motherly” toward her newborn, massage
is the extra spark to ignite the fire. Likewise for the slow-to-warm-up baby,
massage helps break down the barrier so that the uncuddly baby gets to like
being handled—and the parents get used to handling their baby.
Several employed mothers in our practice use an evening infant massage
as a tool to help them reconnect with their baby after being away for the
day. This special touch enables them to tune in to baby and tune out their
work as they reenter home life.

 For dads who are novices at caring for babies, massage is a hands-on
course in baby handling. Also, it’s important for baby to get used to dad’s
touch as well as mom’s. Babies thrive on different strokes.
Special touches for special babies. Handicapped infants—and their
parents—particularly benefit from infant massage. Studies show that
massage helps motor-impaired infants better communicate their needs to the
parents—a process called social cueing. Massage puts you in touch with
your infant’s body signals.

OceanofPDF.com

 Learning the Right Touch

Massage is a touch you do with your baby, not to your baby. It’s an
interaction, not a task. You learn which strokes your baby enjoys and, as if
dancing, go with the flow of your baby’s body language. While it is nearly
impossible to rub your baby the wrong way, here’s how to learn the right
touch for your baby.

Get Ready

Choose a warm, quiet, draft-free place. Our favorite is in front of a floor-toceiling window with the rays of sunlight warming baby. Do this ritual
wherever you and baby are comfortable: on the floor, a padded table, grass,
beach, or bed. Put on soothing music (see discussion of soothing sounds,
here). Infant-massage instructors are a good reference source for music to
massage by.
Choose a time when you are not in a hurry, not likely to be interrupted,
and baby is most in need of relaxing. Some parents like to start the day off
with a morning massage. Some prefer a before-nap massage. Babies with
evening colic are best massaged toward late afternoon or early evening

 before the “happy hour” of colic begins. Sometimes a late-afternoon
massage can prompt the colicky infant to forget his evening blast.
Choose the right massage oil. Infant-massage instructors and their
selective infant clientele prefer fruit or vegetable oil (“edible oils”), vitamin
E enriched and unscented. Look for “cold pressed” on the label, which
means the oil has been extracted only by the use of pressure, not by heat or
chemical solvents, which change the characteristics of the oil. Avoid oils
made from a petroleum base. Massage oils that have stood the test of time
are coconut, almond, apricot, safflower, and avocado oils. Watch for a
possible skin allergy rash to occur within an hour, especially to nut oils.

Get Set

Position yourself and baby so you’re both comfortable. Sit on the floor with
your back against the couch or wall, or kneel alongside your bed. In the
early months babies like to lie in the natural cradle formed in your lap when
you sit cross-legged; or just stretch your legs straight out in front of you.
Place baby on a diaper-covered lambskin or a dryer-warmed towel draped
over your legs as a pillow. When baby grows out of your leg cradle, stretch
out your legs alongside baby. Be sure to keep a spare diaper handy for the
unexpected sprays.
Veteran infant-massage instructors stress the importance of respecting
baby’s desire for a massage. They advise, before laying on hands, asking
baby’s permission—“Would you like a massage?” Babies become attentive

 to a setting event, a group of events that signal a familiar event will follow.
When baby sees you rubbing oil into your hands and hears you pronouncing
the cue word “massage,” watch for his face to light up approvingly. If baby
is upset, it’s best to postpone the massage and just hold him awhile or use
one of the comforting techniques in Chapter 16, “Parenting the Fussy or
Colicky Baby.” Remember, massage is something you do with your baby; if
he’s not “with” you, wait till a better time. If he becomes upset during the
massage at any point, stop and just hold him. Massage is not meant to be
like a Band-Aid that you apply to a baby who is hurting but rather is a
process that equips baby (and you) to be better able to handle life’s stresses.
If baby is wiggling or appears stiff and tense, open the ritual with a
touch-relaxation technique: Engage baby in eye-to-eye contact before you
start. Grasp baby’s wiggly or tense legs and bicycle them while speaking
softly, “Relax, relax…” This opener sets baby up to associate the touchrelaxation motions and sounds with the pleasant ritual to follow. This is
baby’s opening cue that the play is about to begin. And relax yourself. A
tense baby doesn’t relax to the touch of tense hands. Read and feel the
response of your baby rather than making massage a mechanical exercise.

 Regular massage sessions can help you and your baby stay “in touch.”

Go!

Begin with the legs, the easiest part to work with and the easiest for baby to
accept. Hold the foot with one hand and “milk” the leg from ankle to thigh
with the other. Then, hold the thigh with both hands, as if holding a baseball
bat, and using a gentle twisting and squeezing motion, move your hands
from thigh to foot. Finally, roll the leg between your hands from knee to
ankle. As you move down the leg to the foot, do a series of thumb presses
with your hand encircling the ankle and foot. For the finishing touch, lightly
stroke the legs from thigh to feet before you move on to the trunk.

 To massage the abdomen slide your whole palm and fingers in a handover-hand circular motion, working from the rib cage downward. Next,
slide both hands around the abdomen in clockwise circular movements. To
relax a tense, bloated abdomen try the “I Love U” stroke (see here). Finally,
using fingertip pressure, try “walking” over the abdomen.
For the chest, slide both hands along the rib cage from center to sides
and back again, like flattening the pages in a book.
The arms and hands are done in the same fashion as the legs and the
feet, beginning, however, with a “pit stop” (massaging the lymph nodes in
the armpit).
The face has special strokes all its own—whole-handed smoothing;
lightly pressing, pushing, and circling with the thumbs; and finally combing
from forehead over cheeks with light fingertip strokes.
Last, do the back, everyone’s favorite. With the pads of your fingers,
lightly rub small circles all over the back. Then gently comb with the
fingertips from back over buttocks and legs to ankles.
There are many other creative touches that you and your baby will work
out together as you learn the art of infant massage. You might also take a
look at the book Infant Massage: A Handbook for Loving Parents by Vimila
Schneider McClure (Bantam Books, 2000), complete with photographs
illustrating the strokes. Remember, as in all aspects of parenting, read your
baby along with the book. You can also purchase videotapes to learn the
technique or obtain the services of a certified infant-massage instructor who
can teach you personally. For more information or to contact a local
instructor, consult the International Association of Infant Massage, U.S.

 Chapter, at IAIM-US.com; e-mail IAIM4US@aol.com; (805) 644–8524;
fax (805) 644–7699.

Giving your baby a massage is like reading a long poem. If both of you are
in the mood to hear the whole poem, you start at the beginning and go line
by line in an orderly sequence (baby knows what to expect). If time is short
or the setting not conducive to poetic retreat, you can jump in anywhere
with a few favorite lines that you have memorized. For example, if you
have had the whole massage earlier in the day, then at bedtime it is possible
to savor the beauty of the whole by doing only the arm or the back massage
to send your little one off to dreamland. Since he has learned to associate
this with relaxing, you have a wonderful finishing touch to your bedtime
routine, and one that can be administered by father.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Common Concerns in the Early Weeks

So much happens so fast as your baby adjusts to life outside the womb
and you adjust to life with this little person. Knowing what to expect and
understanding why babies do what they do will help you ease more
comfortably into parenting.

OceanofPDF.com

 EARLY NEWBORN CHANGES
Big changes occur in your newborn. Part of getting to know your child is
cherishing these fleeting changes.

OceanofPDF.com

 Breathing Patterns and Sounds

Watch your newborn breathe. Notice the irregular patterns. Baby takes
many short breaths of varying lengths, an occasional deep sigh, and even
has a worrisome ten-to-fifteen-second period when she doesn’t appear to
breathe; then baby breathes deeply (and so do you), and the cycle continues.
Called periodic breathing, this irregular pattern is normal for the first few
weeks. Breathing becomes more regular by the end of the first month. The
younger or more premature the baby, the more irregular the breathing.
First “cold.” Because the nasal passages are small in the newborn, even a
slight amount of clogging can cause noisy, uncomfortable breathing. You
may think that this is your baby’s first cold. But, although very loud and
noisy, these early sniffles are usually not caused by an infection. Babies’
nasal passages are easily congested with lint from blankets or clothing, dust,
milk residue, or environmental irritants such as cigarette smoke, perfumes,
hair sprays, and aerosols. A stuffy nose may cause baby a lot of difficulty
breathing because newborns are obligate nose breathers, meaning they need
to breathe through their noses rather than their mouths. A newborn with a
stuffy nose does not switch easily to breathing with her mouth but rather
struggles to get more air through her nose. One of the reasons that newborns

 sneeze a lot is to clear their nasal passages. It is unlikely to be her first cold.
She is trying to clear her nose. This usually subsides by two months.
Gagging and choking. Your baby’s lungs were filled with fluid while in the
womb. Most of this fluid was squeezed out of the lungs during passage
through the birth canal or was suctioned by the doctor or nurse after birth.
Your baby may cough up some remaining mucus, which momentarily sticks
in the back of the throat. Baby gags, then swallows the excess mucus and is
all right. Placing baby on her side prevents this mucus from pooling in the
back of the throat.
Noisy breathing. In addition to being uneven breathers, newborns are noisy
breathers. Toward the end of the first month you may hear a gurgling sound
in baby’s throat and feel a rattling in her chest. Your baby seems generally
well and happy—she is just noisy. This is not a cold, since it is seldom
caused by an infection. Near the end of the first month or during the second
month of age, babies begin to produce a lot of saliva, often more than they
can comfortably swallow. Some of the saliva pools in the back of the throat.
Air passing through it produces gurgling noises. When you place your hand
on baby’s back or chest, the rattle you hear and feel is not really coming
from the chest but from the vibrations produced by air passing through
saliva in the back of the throat. These normal sounds subside when baby
learns to swallow the saliva at the same rate she produces it.
You may notice that baby seems quieter in her sleep. This is because
saliva production lessens when babies fall asleep. Your baby will not choke

 on these secretions and will eventually learn to swallow the excess saliva.
No medicines are necessary.
Normal noises. Newborns are anything but silent, even when they are
asleep. Most noises are caused by too much air passing too fast through
small passages. Here are our favorite precious sounds: gurgles caused by air
passing through pooled saliva in the back of the mouth; if accompanied by
nasal congestion they are a combination of a snort and a gurgle we call
snurgles. A burping sound may pass through mucus in the mouth or nose
and become a blurp or, if accompanied by bubbles, a burble. Normal
breathing may take on a purring quality when air and saliva compete for the
same space. During sleep the already narrow breathing passages relax and
become even narrower, causing each breath to take on either a musical,
grunting, or sighing quality. And don’t forget those delightful birdlike
chirps and squeaks. Enjoy these sounds, for they won’t last long.

CLEARING LITTLE NOSES
Here’s how you can help your newborn breathe more easily.
When your newborn is awake, place her on her stomach with her head
turned to one side. This position allows the tongue and any saliva in
the throat to come forward, making more room for air to pass.
Keep your baby’s sleeping environment as fuzz free and dust free as
possible. Remove dust collectors such as feather pillows, fuzzy
animals, and the dozens of furry gifts that surround most newborns.
(There is no need to defuzz baby’s sleeping environment if her nose is
not congested.)
Keep baby away from nasal irritants: cigarette smoke, paint and
gasoline fumes, aerosols, perfumes, and hair sprays. Do not allow

 smoking in the same house as baby. This is one of the most common
irritants to baby’s sensitive nasal passages.
Hose the little nose. Use saline nasal spray or drops to loosen the nasal
secretions and stimulate baby to sneeze the secretions from the back of
the nose toward the front, where you can gently remove them with a
bulb syringe, called a nasal aspirator, available at your drugstore. (See
here for how to make and use nose-clearing solutions.)

Hiccups. All babies hiccup, in the womb and outside. Hiccups frequently
occur after burping. We don’t know the cause, and they don’t bother baby.
They will pass within five to ten minutes.

OceanofPDF.com

 Baby’s Elimination Patterns

Changes in your baby’s stools. Expect your newborn’s stools to progress
from black to green to brown to yellow. The first few days baby’s stools
contain a black, tarlike, sticky substance called meconium, which is
composed of amniotic-fluid debris from the newborn’s intestines. Your
newborn should have a meconium stool within the first twenty-four hours.
If not, notify your doctor. Near the end of the first week your baby’s stools
will become less sticky and turn greenish brown. Between one and two
weeks later they assume a yellowish-brown color and more regular
consistency.
Breastfed versus bottlefed. The stools of breastfed and formula-fed infants
are different. If you are breastfeeding, after a week or two, as your baby
gets more of the fatty hindmilk, expect his stools to become yellow, seedy,
and mustardlike in consistency. Because breast milk has a natural laxative
effect, the stools of breastfed babies are more frequent, softer, more yellow,
and have a not unpleasant buttermilk-like odor. The stools of the formulafed infant tend to be less frequent, firmer, darker, greenish, and have an
unpleasant odor. While the stools of the newborn baby are usually mustard
yellow, an occasional green stool is of no significance if your baby seems
generally well.

 How frequent. How many stools a day varies greatly among newborns. As
mentioned previously, breastfed infants usually have more stools than
formula-fed infants. Some babies have a loose stool after or during every
breastfeeding. And mothers often hear the gurgly sounds of the soft stool a
few minutes into the feeding. An occasional watery gush (called an
explosive stool) is usual and not to be confused with diarrhea. (If worried,
read about diarrhea and signs of dehydration, here.) A newborn who is
getting enough breast milk usually has two to five bowel movements a day,
but it can also be normal to have one or two a day. Occasionally baby may
even go two to three days without a bowel movement as a normal bowel
pattern, but usually not until one or two months of age. Infrequent stooling
in a breastfed baby less than two months old may mean the baby is not
getting enough milk.
Blood in the stool. Occasionally babies have a hard stool, or a sudden
explosive stool, that causes a tiny tear in the rectum, called a rectal fissure.
If you notice a few spots of bright red blood on baby’s diapers or streaks of
blood in the stools, a fissure is probably the cause. These heal easily by
lubricating baby’s rectum with over-the-counter pediatric glycerin
suppositories (cut in half lengthwise).

RX FOR INCONSOLABLE CRYING
Sometimes a baby who is generally not colicky and was previously well
suddenly shows an outburst of unexplained, inconsolable crying. Before
racing to the phone to summon your doctor, go through the following
checklist.

 Does baby have an emergency medical problem? Two concerning signs
are (1) persistent vomiting and (2) pale all over. If neither of these signs is
present and baby does not look sick, it is not necessary to call your doctor
immediately before going through the next steps.
Is baby hurting? Undress baby completely and observe the following:
Are any of baby’s limbs not moving normally? Do you notice any
unusual lumps or swelling? These observations are important to detect
any injury from a recent fall; consult your doctor if a problem is noted.
Is there swelling in the groin? This could indicate intestinal obstruction
from a hernia, which requires medical attention.
Is baby’s abdomen tense and bloated, with more swelling on one side
than on the other; or tense or tender when you try to massage it? These
signs plus sudden onset of colicky behavior could indicate an intestinal
obstruction, but this emergency medical problem is usually associated
with persistent vomiting and a pale, generally ill-appearing baby. Be
sure to feel baby’s abdomen between outbursts because crying babies
often swallow air and have tense-feeling abdomens simply due to
crying.
Does baby have a scalded-skin type of diaper rash? This can be very
painful. (See treatment of diaper rash, here.)
Is there a thick yellow discharge from the nose? This is often a sign of
ear infection. (See treatment tips, here.)
Has baby been straining to pass a stool? This suggests constipation; try
a glycerine suppository. (See here.)
Does baby have swollen gums with profuse drooling? He may be
experiencing teething pain. (See here and here.)
Does baby have a hair wrapped around a finger or toe? Carefully
remove it.
If your parent exam does not suggest any of the above problems or trigger
an alarm that you need to seek immediate medical attention, proceed to the
next step.

 Have you introduced any new foods that could upset baby? If
breastfeeding, have you eaten any gas-producing foods within the past few
hours? (See here.) If bottlefeeding, have you recently changed formulas?
Have you introduced baby to a new solid food? (See here on food allergies;
see also here for deflating gassy babies.)
Is your baby just upset? If your parent detective work does not suggest
any medical, physical, or allergic cause of baby’s crying, try the following
soothing techniques:
putting baby in a sling and taking a walk
nursing while carrying baby
infant massage, especially the abdomen (see here and here)
If none of these suggestions yield either cause or consolation, consult your
baby’s doctor. (For more soothing tips and for detailed insights into the
cause and comfort of hurting babies, see here.)
Wet diaper changes. In the first week baby’s urine is very unconcentrated,
like water. After a few weeks the urine may assume a more concentrated
yellow-amber color. During the first week your newborn may normally
have two to three wet diapers a day. Thereafter expect your baby to wet at
least six to eight cloth diapers (four to five disposables) a day.
What about reddish urine? Within the first week it is common to see a
few orange or reddish spots on the diaper that may alarm you, since they
resemble blood. These red spots are caused by urates, normal substances in
the urine of the newborn that form an orange-to-red color on the diaper.

OceanofPDF.com

 The Newborn’s Body

Weight changes. Newborns usually lose around 6–12 ounces (170–350
grams), or about 5–8 percent of their birth weight, during the first three or
four days. Babies are born with extra fluid and fat to tide them over until
their mother’s milk can supply sufficient fluid and nutrition. How much
weight a newborn loses depends on the following factors.
Large babies with a lot of extra fluid tend to lose the most weight, even
as much as a pound. Babies who are fed frequently on cue and room-in with
their mothers tend to lose the least weight. How quickly your milk appears
also influences your newborn’s weight loss. If you room-in with your baby
and breastfeed every two hours, your high-calorie hindmilk will appear
sooner, and baby will lose less weight. Babies who are separated from their
mothers a lot during the first week or who are fed on a three- to four-hour
schedule tend to lose the most weight. Remember to record your baby’s
weight upon discharge from the hospital. This is an important reference for
measuring weight gain at your baby’s first checkup. Babies should regain
their birth weight by ten to fourteen days.
Normal lumps. When you run your hand over baby’s head you may feel
lots of bumps and ridges, especially on top of the head, on the back of the
head, and behind the ears. Babies’ skull bones consist of many small bones

 that are unconnected to allow for brain growth and also for molding to the
birth canal. During the second year baby’s head will feel much smoother.
Another normal lump is a hard bump in the center of baby’s chest, just
above the tummy. This is the end of the breastbone, and in some babies it
sticks out for a few months. Around the second or third month you will find
several pea-sized lumps beneath the skin on the back of the head and along
the neck. These are normal lymph glands.
Swollen scrotum. The testicles begin inside the abdominal cavity and,
usually before birth, push through the groin tissue forming a scrotal sac.
(Occasionally, one or both testes do not descend into the scrotum by birth
time but may come down later. If the testes remain undescended by one
year of age, they can be brought down by hormonal or surgical treatment.)
The opening in the abdominal wall through which the testes migrated
usually closes. Sometimes this passageway remains open, allowing fluid to
accumulate around the testis. Called a hydrocele, this swelling seldom
bothers baby and usually subsides by the first birthday. During your son’s
checkup the doctor may shine a penlight on the scrotum, illuminating the
water around the testicle to confirm the diagnosis.

CROOKED FEET
A newborn’s legs and feet reflect the scrunched-up position of “no standing
room” in the womb. The legs are normally very bowed, and the feet turn in.
Since the bones were curved that way for many months inside, expect
several months of free kicking before the legs and feet straighten. You can
help the straightening process by not letting baby sleep in the fetal position
—with feet and legs curled beneath (see here). For the persistent fetal

 sleeper, sewing the pajama feet together prevents sleeping in this tucked-in
position.
When not to worry. Pick up those precious feet and look at the soles. It’s
normal for the front of the foot to be curved in a bit. Now hold the heel of
baby’s foot with one hand and gently stretch the front of the foot to the
straight position. If the foot straightens easily with gentle stretching, this is
normal curvature that will self-correct within a few months. To help these
little feet straighten, do these stretches with each diaper change and
minimize sleeping in the fetal position, as mentioned above.
When treatment may be needed. If the front of the foot is curved inward
and you see and feel the following features, your doctor may suggest
treatment:
The front half of the foot is very curved in relation to the back.
You are unable to straighten the foot with gentle pressure.
There is a deep crease in the sole where the front of the foot begins to
curve inward.
If your baby’s foot or feet (usually it’s both) have these features at birth and
show no signs of self-correcting over the following month or two, your
doctor may send baby to an orthopedic specialist for a simple and painless
treatment called serial casting. Plaster casts resembling little white boots
are placed over your baby’s feet. The doctor changes these casts every two
weeks, each time straightening the foot a bit, over the course of two or three
months. After the cast treatment your doctor may prescribe special shoes for
a few more months to keep baby’s feet straight.

 Crooked foot.

Normal foot.
Occasionally a loop of intestines may poke through this opening into the
scrotum. This is called an inguinal hernia. Unlike a hydrocele, which is
round and soft, a hernia feels more firm and oblong, about the size of a
thumb. A hernia swelling comes and goes, usually disappearing back into
the abdomen when baby is asleep or relaxed and bulging out again during
crying. Mention this swelling to the doctor on baby’s next checkup. The
hernia will need to be repaired by a minor surgical procedure, usually
without an overnight stay in the hospital.

 Rarely, the loop of intestines gets stuck in the scrotum, prompting
immediate surgical release to prevent damage to the intestines. Call your
doctor right away if the swelling suddenly gets larger, harder, darker, tender,
or baby is vomiting and suffering colicky pain.
Lump in the labia. The labia are equivalent to the scrotal sac in males.
Sometimes an ovary can migrate into the labia and feels like a movable
marble beneath the skin. Mention this to your doctor, who will arrange to
have the ovary repositioned in the abdominal cavity by a minor surgical
procedure.
Baby’s swollen breasts. Because of a surge of breast-enlarging hormones
at birth, your baby’s breasts may become swollen, firm, and lumpy within a
week after birth. And these baby breasts may even produce a few drops of
milk. These are normal physiologic changes in both girl and boy babies.
The swelling should subside within a few months.
Closing vagina. Commonly during the first year or two you may notice that
the slitlike opening in your daughter’s vagina begins to close. Mention this
to your doctor during your baby’s regular checkup. Called labial adhesions,
this condition occurs because the sides of the vaginal opening are so close
to each other that they begin growing together. This does not cause baby
any discomfort or harm. Oftentimes these adhesions open by themselves.
But if the adhesions are becoming thicker or obstructing the whole orifice
enough to block the flow of urine, your doctor may gently open the

 adhesion. You can prevent them from growing together by gently spreading
the labia apart on a daily basis. If they continually grow back, the doctor
may prescribe an estrogen cream to be applied around the edges to prevent
further adhesion. Around two years of age, as your daughter begins
producing her own estrogen in this tissue, the labial adhesions will subside.
Protruding navel. Babies are born with an opening in the abdominal wall
through which the umbilical-cord vessels connect with the placenta. When
the cord is cut, the stump shrivels up. Sometimes the newly formed navel
bulges out—other times it stays flat or inverts. Whether it’s an “outie” or an
“innie” depends on the individual way a stump heals, not the way it’s cut.
Most outies flatten with time.
Two large bands of muscles grow down the center of baby’s abdomen
and encircle the navel. Sometimes there is an opening between these
muscles, and when baby cries or strains the navel protrudes. The intestines
poke through beneath the skin, and you feel a squishy bulge of intestines in
the protruding navel. This is called an umbilical hernia. It may be the size
of a golf ball or a fingertip. As the muscles grow, the opening in and around
the navel seals, and the hernia disappears. Umbilical hernias are particularly
common in African American babies. They do not hurt baby. Above all,
don’t tape over the hernia. This doesn’t speed the closure and can lead to
irritation. Nearly all heal with only the treatment of time, usually by the
second birthday.

 Quivers and shakes. Baby’s immature nervous system causes frequent
muscle twitches: quivering chin, shaking arms and legs, and grinlike lip
twitches. These normal movements, especially noticeable while baby is
drifting off to sleep, subside by three months.
Creaking joints. When you move baby’s joints you may hear crackles or
“joint noises.” These are normal, caused by loose ligaments and loose
bones.

OceanofPDF.com

 SPITTING UP
The spots of dried milk on your clothing are telltale signs that you are the
parent of a spitter. Most babies regurgitate, or spit up, their milk or formula
several times a day during the early months. This is more of a laundry
problem than a medical problem and seldom bothers baby. Dress for the
occasion. If you are blessed with a baby who shares a bit of each meal with
your clothing, wear prints and avoid dark-colored clothing. Keep a cloth
diaper handy as a burp cloth.
Not much lost. When baby spits up, you may feel she has lost the whole
meal of the milk your body worked so hard to produce or wasted the
expensive formula you bought. But you are likely to vastly overestimate the
volume of regurgitated milk. Pour a tablespoon of milk or formula on the
countertop and watch the huge puddle it makes. Now, does that amount
match the spot on your dress? Most spit-up measures less than this, and
babies usually eat 4 to 8 tablespoons in a feeding in the early months.
Why babies spit up. Babies spit up because they are just being babies.
They gulp milk and air, and the air settles beneath the milk in the stomach.
When baby’s stomach contracts, like an air gun the stomach shoots some
milk back up the esophagus, and you have sour, curdled milk on your

 shoulder. Some ravenous eaters gulp too much milk too fast, and the
overloaded tummy sends some back. Jostling babies after eating may also
trigger regurgitation.
Settling the spitter. Here are some suggestions that may help your spitter:

Slow the feedings. Respect that tiny babies have
tiny tummies. If you are formula feeding, give
your baby smaller-volume, more frequent
feedings.
Burp baby during and after the feedings.
Formula-fed spitters should be burped after every
3 ounces (9 milliliters) of milk, and breastfed
spitters should be burped when switching sides or
during a pause in baby’s sucking if baby lingers
on one side. (See “Burping Baby,” here.)
Feed upright and keep baby upright twenty to
thirty minutes after feeding. If you do not have
time simply to sit and hold your baby upright,
wear your baby in the upright position in a baby
sling as you go about your work. Gravity is the
spitter’s best friend.
Avoid jostling or bouncing baby for at least a half
hour after a feed.

 If bottlefeeding, be sure the nipple hole is neither
too large nor too small. (See here and here for
how to judge the right nipple-hole size.)
Talk to your doctor about a formula change (see
here).
Avoid “foremilk” overload. Baby’s nursing
sessions may be too short, without draining the
breast to get to the high-fat hindmilk (which stays
down more easily). See here for more
information.
When to expect the last spat. Most spitting up subsides around six to
seven months when baby sits upright and gravity holds down the milk. (See
discussion of gastroesophageal reflux, here.)
Blood in spit-up. Don’t panic at baby’s first bleed. If you breastfeed, most
often this is your blood, not baby’s. It usually comes from cracked nipples
during breastfeeding and subsides when your nipples heal. Occasionally
baby may retch or spit up forcefully and tear a tiny blood vessel at the end
of the esophagus. This also heals quickly. If neither of these causes seems
likely and the bleeding continues, notify your doctor.

SPITTING UP: WHEN TO WORRY
Spitting up becomes a problem and needs medical attention if any of the
following occur:

 Baby is losing weight or not gaining weight sufficiently.
The vomiting increases in frequency and volume and becomes
projectile (the spit-up flies across your lap and onto the floor).
The vomitus is consistently green (bile stained).
Painful colicky behaviors accompany the vomiting. (See the discussion
of gastroesophageal reflux, here.)
Baby gags and coughs during every feeding.

OceanofPDF.com

 EYES

OceanofPDF.com

 Discharging Eyes

Most newborns’ eyes begin tearing by three weeks of age. These tears
should drain into the nose through tiny tear ducts at the inside corners of the
eye. During the first few weeks or months you may notice a yellow, sticky
discharge from one or both eyes. This is usually caused by a blocked tear
duct. At birth, the nasal end of these ducts is sometimes covered by a thin
membrane that usually breaks open shortly after birth, allowing proper
drainage of tears. Often this membrane does not fully open, causing the tear
ducts to remain plugged and tears to accumulate in one or both eyes. Fluid
that does not drain properly becomes infected. If this happens, the discharge
from your baby’s eyes will be persistently yellow, indicating infection in the
region of the blocked tear ducts.
Here’s how to unclog your baby’s tear duct. Gently massage the tear
duct that is located beneath the tiny “bump” in the nasal corner of each eye.
Massage in a downward and inward direction (toward the nose) about six
times. Do this tear-duct massage as often as you think of it—for example,
before each diaper change (after washing your fingers). Massaging the tear
duct applies pressure on the fluid backed up within the ducts and eventually
pops open the membrane and clears the ducts.
If you still notice persistent tearing or yellow drainage from one or both
eyes, during your well-baby checkup ask your doctor to instruct you in how

 to massage the tear ducts. If the yellow drainage persists, your doctor may
prescribe antibiotic ointment or drops to treat this infection. Mothers often
report that squirting a few drops of their breast milk (which is loaded with
germ-fighting substances) will clear up the eye discharge.
Blockages may recur intermittently, but tear ducts usually remain open
by six months. Occasionally this conservative treatment does not work, and
between nine months and one year it becomes necessary for an eye doctor
to open these tear ducts by inserting a tiny wire probe into them. This is
usually a short, minor office procedure but may require outpatient surgery
under general anesthesia if done after one year. Discharge from the eyes in
the first few months is almost always caused by blocked tear ducts; in the
older infant and child, discharging eyes may be caused by an eye infection
called conjunctivitis or, more commonly, may be part of an infection in the
ears and sinuses. (See conjunctivitis, here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Red Streaks in Eyes

Shortly after baby’s birth you may notice a red streak in the whites of one or
both of baby’s eyes. Don’t worry! These are called conjunctival
hemorrhages and are caused by blood vessels broken during the squeeze of
delivery. These do not harm baby’s eyes and disappear within a few weeks.

OceanofPDF.com

 BABY’S MOUTH
You look inside your baby’s mouth and see white cheesy patches on the
inside lips or cheeks or on the tongue or the roof of the mouth. These spots
weren’t there before, and new spots bother new mothers. You can’t wait to
share your newly found spots with the doctor, who is only a phone call
away.

OceanofPDF.com

 Thrush

Hold the phone—it’s only thrush, a yeast infection inside baby’s mouth.
Yeast is a fungus that normally resides in warm, moist areas of the skin,
such as the mouth, vagina, and diaper area, and thrives on milk. Yeast
infections commonly flare up following antibiotic therapy, since antibiotics
also kill the good bacteria that normally keep the yeast germs under control.
If mom is breastfeeding, antibiotics taken by her can cause thrush in baby.
Unless it is left untreated, thrush seldom bothers babies, though it may
itch and cause an irritable soreness in the mouth. It is more a nuisance than
a medical problem, although some babies with thrush may become quite
cranky during feeding. Milk deposits on the tongue and membranes of the
mouth may be confused with thrush, but milk can be easily wiped off;
thrush cannot. When you try to wipe the thrush off the tongue or mucous
membranes, it may leave a superficially eroded area, and sometimes even
tiny points of bleeding.
Most likely your newborn did not “catch” thrush from another baby.
Rather, it is probably due to an overgrowth of baby’s own yeast organisms,
which normally reside in the mouth and skin, usually living there
harmoniously without anyone’s knowing they’re there. In fact, baby was
probably first introduced to yeast during passage through your birth canal.

 Treatment. Notify your doctor (no emergency call necessary), who will
prescribe an antifungal medication. Using your fingertips or the applicator
that comes with the medicine, paint the thrush medicine on the patches of
thrush and the rest of the mucous membranes of your baby’s mouth and
tongue four times a day for ten days. Here’s a simple home remedy to use in
addition to the medicine for thrush: Spread a fingertipful of acidophilus
powder (available in capsules in the refrigerated section of a nutrition store)
on the thrush twice a day for a week.
Yeast residents may often be resistant to eviction from the mouth.
Several courses of treatment may be needed. If baby is using rubber nipples,
teething toys, or pacifiers, boil them for twenty minutes once daily. Oral
thrush may be accompanied by a fungal diaper rash. (See suggestions for
treatment of diaper rash later in this chapter.)
Sharing thrush. Your baby’s first bit of sharing may be to transfer his oral
thrush to your nipples during breastfeeding. Signs of nipple thrush: Your
nipples are sore; they are slightly reddened or pinkish; the skin is slightly
puffy, dry, and flaky. Your nipples may feel itchy and burn, and you may
experience a deep shooting pain, which radiates inward from the nipple
after feeding. A prescription or over-the-counter antifungal cream
medication will chase the yeast from your nipples. If the fungus infection
on your nipples is severe, your doctor may prescribe an oral antifungal
medication. Mother can take acidophilus capsules as directed to help clear
up this nuisance.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Lip Blisters

During the first month blisters or calluses may develop on your baby’s
upper lip. Called sucking pads, these develop in response to baby’s vigorous
sucking and subside toward the end of the first year. They are normal and
do not bother baby, so leave them alone. You may also notice a few tiny
white cysts on baby’s palate or gums. Dubbed “pearls,” these usually
resolve within a few months.

OceanofPDF.com

 NEWBORN SKIN MARKS AND RASHES
Run your hand over your baby’s skin. So soft, so smooth, but not perfect.
You feel dry patches, flaky areas, areas that are rough and wrinkled, and
some areas where the skin doesn’t seem to fit, such as around the chin,
neck, wrist, and heels. But don’t worry, your baby will grow into it. Let’s
run your hands and eyes, head to toe, over the variety of skin changes in
most newborns.

OceanofPDF.com

 Normal Baby Marks

When you look at your baby’s skin, it doesn’t look perfect either. There are
spots and specks, blotches and bruises, streaks and stains—a coat of many
hues that your newborn wears. But newborn skin has a remarkable quality
—the ability to change—sometimes before your eyes.
Stork bites. Most newborns have areas where lots of blood vessels bunch
up and show through their thin skin. These smooth reddish-pink marks are
most prominent on the eyelids, the nape of the neck, and in the middle of
the forehead. They are not, in correct skin talk, rashes. These are called nevi
or, in parent terms, birthmarks. Grandmothers dubbed them stork bites. But
the mythical stork did not bite your baby. These skin curiosities stem from
bunches of overgrown blood vessels showing through the newborn’s thin
skin. As the excess blood vessels shrink and your baby’s skin thickens, they
nearly always disappear or fade by the first birthday. Some nevi, especially
on the nape of the neck, persist but are obscured by hair. Sometimes these
distinguishing marks fade but reappear when baby strains or cries,
prompting parents to exclaim, “His forehead lights are on.”
Strawberries. While stork bites appear at birth and fade with time, other
birthmarks appear a week or two later and grow with time. Most begin as a

 raised red circle and gradually enlarge to coin size during the first year.
Between one and three years they begin to shrivel up. You will know when
the growth has reached its peak when you see the center turn gray.
Called strawberry hemangiomas—they look and feel like a strawberry
—these birthmarks come from blood vessels that went astray and kept
growing. And, like a bunch of strawberries, they come in various sizes and
shapes, ranging from freckle size to as large as a golf ball.
While cosmetically unattractive, most of these strawberry hemangiomas
are best left alone to self-destruct. Sometimes they are a nuisance by
location. Such a growth on the eyelid, for example, may interfere with lid
opening and strain baby’s developing vision. Others reside in areas such as
the arms and legs where they bleed when struck. Rarely do they persist as a
cosmetic

nuisance.

In

these

situations,

disfiguring

or

annoying

hemangiomas can be shrunk and removed by injections and laser treatment.
Moles. Called pigmented nevi, these brown-to-black moles range from
freckle size to large, hairy patches. The moles usually remain the same, so
they appear relatively smaller as your baby grows. They are benign and
need neither worry nor treatment. When you start using sunscreen (see
here), be sure to cover the moles with it. Very large pigmented hairy nevi
should be removed because of their potential for becoming malignant later
in life.
Mongolian spots. Never a year goes by that we don’t get an embarrassing
call from someone accusing a parent of child abuse because of black-and-

 blue marks on baby’s bottom. These bruiselike spots, common in African
American, Latino, Asian, Indian, and Native American babies, are
prominent on the lower back and buttocks and sometimes also on the
shoulders and legs. These “spank” marks fade in time, but most never
completely disappear.
Café-au-lait spots. These are flat, brown birthmarks, resembling tiny
puddles of coffee and cream. Most remain the same size, becoming
relatively smaller as baby grows.

OceanofPDF.com

 Baby’s First Spots

Milia. In the early weeks you may see and feel tiny whiteheads sprinkled
over your baby’s face, especially the nose. Caused by secretions plugging
the skin pores, these milia are normal and disappear within a few months
without any treatment.
Toxic erythema. Don’t be frightened by its alarming name. These dotlike
spots appear as yellowish-white pimples surrounded with a red blotchy ring.
They look like bites. These normal spots appear during the first week most
commonly on your baby’s abdomen, and disappear without treatment by
two weeks.
Prickly heat. A reddish pimply rash, prickly heat appears on excessively
moist areas of the skin, such as between the neck folds, behind the ears, in
the groin, or in areas where clothing fits tightly. Run your fingers gently
over the rash, and you will know why parents call this rash prickly. It has a
coarse, sandpaperlike feel. We suspect prickly heat can bother a baby. To
take the heat and the prickles out of the rash, dress your baby in lightweight, loose-fitting cotton clothing and gently wash the skin with plain
cool water or a solution of baking soda (1 teaspoon to a cup of water).

 Remember to dab, wash, and blot dry; do not scrub and rub sensitive
newborn skin.
Newborn acne. Around the third or fourth week be prepared for the
picture-perfect baby face to show its first complexion problem.
In a situation similar to the hormonal stages of puberty, the increased
hormones at birth may cause the overproduction of a waxy, oily substance
called sebum in the oil glands of the skin, most noticeably in the face and
scalp. Plugging of these glands leads to inflammation and the formation of
pimples. Parents call it baby acne. The medical term is seborrheic
dermatitis.
Like teenage acne, the red, pimply, oily rash covers much of baby’s face,
and the previously soft, smooth cheeks feel sandpaper rough. Hold the
camera; this first puberty is short-lived (in fact, veteran baby-face watchers
plan first photos or christenings before or after the acne period). Newborn
acne usually peaks around the third week and clears within a month or six
weeks.
Newborn acne bothers parents more than baby. Cut baby’s fingernails
short to prevent scratching. Gentle washing with water and a mild soap will
remove the excess and sometimes irritating oil. If the acne pimples get
infected (red area around the pimples or honeylike oozing), your doctor
may prescribe an antibacterial cream. Most newborn acne disappears
completely without any special care of the skin.
If the condition appears early (that is, in the second week) and/or
worsens quickly, spreading past the face into the hair and down onto the

 neck and even the shoulders, you may be observing one of the first signs of
allergy to a nutrient in baby’s formula or in your breast milk. This happened
with our seventh baby, Stephen, and the acne retreated dramatically when
cow’s milk products were eliminated from Martha’s diet.
Cradle cap. In another form of seborrheic dermatitis, you will notice and
feel a crusty, oily, plaquelike rash on baby’s scalp, especially over the soft
spot. In a mild case of cradle cap the flaky, dry skin on the scalp resembles
dandruff. This seldom needs any more treatment than gentle washing and
increased humidity. Wash the scalp with a mild shampoo no more often than
once a week. Too-vigorous and too-frequent hair washing will only dry out
the scalp and make the cradle cap worse.
Here’s how to treat a more severe case of cradle cap:

Massage cold-pressed vegetable oil into the
crusty areas to soften them. Give the oil fifteen
minutes or so to soak in.
Using a very soft toothbrush, gently remove the
scales or comb them out.
Wash off the excess oil with a mild baby
shampoo.
If the cradle cap is persistent, severe, and itchy, try an over-the-counter
(OTC) mild tar shampoo twice a week until it clears up. (See “Rx for
Healthy Baby Skin,” here.)

 You may also notice a crusty, oily rash behind your baby’s ears and in
the skin folds of the neck. This seborrheic dermatitis is usually cleared with
gentle washing with warm water, but sometimes hydrocortisone cream may
help. Skin enjoys humidity. This is why most rashes worsen during the
winter months, when central heating dries the air. A vaporizer or humidifier
in your baby’s sleeping room will moisturize dry skin.

OceanofPDF.com

 DIAPER

RASH:

PREVENTION

AND

TREATMENT
Take a close look at your newborn’s blemish-free bottom. Its complexion
may never be so clear for the next year. When you begin diapering, a rash is
soon to come. Diapers and skin just don’t go together without friction. To
protect the surroundings from baby’s excrement, diapers were invented—
and baby’s skin rebels at losing its freedom to enjoy fresh air and sunshine.
Where does diaper rash come from? Start with ultrasensitive skin, add
the chemicals of urine and stools, occlude the area with a big “bandage,”
and rub it all together. Presto! You have diaper rash. Keep this mixture
together long enough, and bacteria and fungi begin to grow into the
weakened skin, and you have more diaper rash.

HEALING CRACKED SKIN
Many newborns, especially if postmature, have dry flaky skin, most
noticeably on the hands and feet. Baby’s natural skin oils suffice; no lotion
is necessary. If cracks develop in the creases around the wrists and ankles,
apply a moisturizing cream such as Soothe and Heal with Lansinoh or an
infant massage oil, such as coconut, almond, safflower, apricot, or avocado
oil.
Excessive moisture on sensitive skin is the main culprit in diaper rash.
Too much moisture removes the skin’s natural oils, and wet skin is more

 easily damaged by friction. Once the skin has been irritated by excessive
moisture, it is no longer a good natural barrier. Infants have a lot of fat folds
around the groin. These moist folds of skin rubbing together is the reason a
rash is most often seen in the creases of the groin. Just as the skin gets used
to the wetness, solid foods present different chemical irritants, and the rash
changes—the bottom’s reflection of something changing at the other end.

OceanofPDF.com

 Dealing with Diaper Rash

Don’t take diaper rash too personally. “But I change him as soon as he
wets,” mothers often say, apologizing for their baby’s persistent rash.
Babies of even the most attentive diaper changers get rashes. But here are
ways to lessen it.
Change frequently. Studies have shown that infants who are changed at
least eight times a day have fewer cases of diaper rash.
Try different types of diapers. While each brand claims victory over
diaper rash, experiment with both cloth and different brands of disposable
diapers to see which one causes the least diaper rash.
Rinse irritants from diapers. If washing your own diapers, to remove soap
residues and alkaline irritants add ½ cup of vinegar to the rinse cycle. You
can also request this treatment from your diaper service.
Rinse or wipe well. During each change rinse baby’s bottom, especially if
the diaper is soaked or you smell ammonia. Experiment with what gets
along well with your baby’s bottom. Sensitive skin does best with plain
water; some bottoms need a mild soap. Some sensitive bottoms rebel at the
chemicals in disposable baby wipes, especially those that contain alcohol;

 some bottoms accept them without a rash. Try different wipes until you find
the one that works.
Pat gently. Blot dry with a soft towel or a clean cotton diaper. Avoid
excessive towel rubbing or scrubbing with a strong soap on irritated skin.
One of our babies had such sensitive skin that even towel blotting reddened
the skin. We used a hair dryer (lowest setting, 12 inches away) to blow-dry
her bottom.
Air-condition baby’s bottom. Allow the diaper area to breath by applying
disposable diapers loosely. Avoid tight-fitting diapers and occlusive elastic
pants that retain moisture; reserve these pants for occasions when a leaky
diaper would be socially unacceptable.
Keep bottoms up. While baby is sleeping, expose his bare bottom to the air
and occasionally to a ten-minute ray of sunlight near a closed window.
Place naked baby on a folded cloth diaper with a rubberized pad underneath
to protect bedding and blankets. In warm weather and after the newborn
period let baby nap outside with his bare bottom exposed to fresh air.
Remove friction. To reduce friction, try a larger-size diaper. Fold the
plastic liner of disposable diapers outward so that only the soft area of the
diaper touches baby’s skin. A “border” rash around baby’s belt line reveals
friction as the culprit. Besides this diaper-to-skin friction, the fat folds
around baby’s groin rub together during cycling of the legs or during

 toddler walking. Apply a clear diaper ointment to reduce chafing along the
groin creases or other rashy areas.

OceanofPDF.com

 Barrier Creams

For most rashless bottoms, creams and ointments are not needed, as they
may prevent the skin from breathing naturally. But if your baby’s bottom is
prone to rashes—“As soon as I get the rash cleared up, it starts again”—
barrier creams may be a good ounce of prevention. At the first sign of a
reddened, irritated bottom, generously apply a barrier cream containing zinc
oxide. Barrier compounds protect the underlying skin from irritants and
friction rubs. Cornstarch, one of the oldest protective compounds, can be
used in groin creases to prevent friction rubs, but in our experience
cornstarch cakes and is more of a nuisance than a help.

OceanofPDF.com

 Dietary Changes

When conditions change at one end, expect changes at the other. Changing
the diet—including formula changes and beginning solids—teething, or
taking medicines all result in a change in the chemistry of stools and urine,
producing a rash. (Incidentally, studies have shown that breastfeeding
babies have less severe diaper rashes.) As soon as these “mouth end”
conditions change, apply barrier creams before the rash begins, especially if
your baby is prone to diaper rash.
If baby is taking antibiotics, give a daily teaspoon or break open a
capsule of acidophilus or Lactobacillus bifidus powder to lessen the
antibiotic-produced diarrhea and resulting rash. (See “Probiotics,” here.) If
the rash doesn’t improve quickly, try an antifungal cream (see below).

OceanofPDF.com

 How to Be a Diaper Rash Detective

“Diaper rash” is really an umbrella term for a number of skin rashes in the
diaper area. Here are tips for identifying and treating some specific types of
diaper rash.
Allergy ring. A red ring around baby’s anus reflects a dietary irritant as the
culprit, similar to a rash around baby’s mouth when beginning a new food.
Excess citrus fruit and juices, tomato-based sauces, and wheat are the main
irritants. Discontinue the food to see if the red ring goes away. You may
even need to drop the food from your diet if you are breastfeeding. (See
here for a thorough discussion of food allergies.)
Contact dermatitis. A red, flat, scald-type rash, contact dermatitis appears
over the area of rubbing by the diapers, usually around the belt line and
upper thighs. A telltale sign of this type of rash is the sparing of the creases
where the skin is not in intimate contact with diapers. Causes of the rash
include a chemical irritant in the diaper itself or in the detergent, or the
chemical irritants that form after urine and stools remain in the diaper for a
period of time. Chafing of synthetic material on sensitive skin is another
possible cause, as are the chemical changes in the stools during diarrheic
illness or antibiotic treatment.

 To treat, soak baby’s bottom in warm water for five minutes; after
soaking, if you detect a whiff of ammonia on baby’s diaper area, soak
longer. Leave your baby diaperless as much as is practical. Experiment with
different diapers and apply an over-the-counter 1 percent hydrocortisone
cream twice daily for a few days in addition to your usual cream.

YOUR OWN DIAPER RASH RX
Try this “prescription” to treat your baby’s diaper rash:
zinc cream with each diaper change
antifungal cream (clotrimazole)
1 percent hydrocortisone cream (do not use for more than three days
without consulting your doctor)
Apply each twice daily at different times. (All three are available in overthe-counter preparations.) They can also be mixed.
Intertrigo. In appearance, intertrigo is just the opposite of contact
dermatitis. It occurs where the skin folds rub together, such as in the groin.
This is caused by the “tropical climate” heat and moisture retention in the
creases, resulting in irritation of the skin. When urine touches the irritated
areas of the intertrigo, it may burn the skin, causing baby to cry. To treat,
apply clear diaper ointment to the irritated skin with each diaper change.
Seborrheic dermatitis. The margins of seborrheic dermatitis are sharply
demarcated, and the condition looks like a big red patch over the groin,
genitalia, and lower abdomen. This is one of the most sore-looking diaper
rashes—more raised, rough, thick, and greasy than any of the others.

 Besides the preceding preventive measures, this type of rash is usually
treated with an OTC ½ percent or 1 percent cortisone cream or, if severe, a
prescription cream. A word of caution: Do not use cortisone cream on the
diaper area longer than prescribed by your doctor, as overuse may damage
the skin. (See also “Treating Eczema,” here.)
Yeast rash (candida). If your baby’s diaper rash persists despite all of the
preventive measures and over-the-counter creams already mentioned,
suspect yeast, and try an over-the-counter or prescription anti-fungal cream.
A yeast rash is a reddish-pink, raised, patchy rash with sharp borders,
primarily over the genitalia but with satellite spots sprinkled around the
main area of rash and often appearing as tiny pustules. Yeast infection may
occur on top of any of the preceding diaper rashes if they last more than a
few days. Sometimes for persistent yeast rashes it is necessary to give an
antifungal medication orally, as in treating thrush.

RX FOR HEALTHY BABY SKIN
Healthy baby skin depends not only on what the skin touches and is
exposed to (what I call the outside job), but also on what feeds the skin—
the inside job! Besides being kind to baby’s sensitive skin by not using
irritating clothing and not exposing baby to the damaging rays of the sun,
feed baby’s skin the right nutrients and you will continue to see and feel that
adorable baby skin for a long time.
Hydrate baby’s skin. Like fertile soil, babies need lots of fluids to keep
skin from drying out. Formula-fed babies should drink one bottle of water
every day. Breastfed babies do not need extra water.
Oil baby’s skin. Next, healthy skin needs to be rich in healthy oils. The
best oils for healthy skin are omega-3 fatty acids. Besides breast milk the

 best food source of omega-3s is cold-water fish, such as deep ocean salmon.
In our pediatric practice, I have seen dramatic results in my little patients
with dry, scaly skin when I prescribe extra omega-3s for the breastfeeding
mother or flax oil added daily to a bottle of formula for infants. For toddlers
I prescribe 1 tablespoon of flax oil added daily to a fruit-and-yogurt
smoothie. (For more skin health tips, see “Treating Eczema,” here.)
Impetigo. Caused by a bacteria (usually streptococci or staphylococci),
impetigo appears as coin-sized blisters that ooze a honey-colored crust.
These are spotted around the diaper area, primarily around the buttocks.
This type of diaper rash needs a prescription antibiotic cream and
sometimes oral antibiotics.
Diaper rash is a fact of civilized, bottom-covering baby life. Like all the
nuisance stages of infancy, it too will pass.

OceanofPDF.com

 REDUCING THE RISK OF SUDDEN INFANT
DEATH SYNDROME
Until recently the traditional wisdom about sudden infant death syndrome
(SIDS) was: “No one knows why it occurs, and there’s nothing parents can
do to prevent it.” New research challenges this dismal view. For parents
who worry about this tragedy, here is the current thinking about SIDS and,
more important, what you can do to lower the risk.
Before proceeding further, we want to offer a caution: The following
discussion is meant to inform, not to offend; to inspire, not to scare. By
understanding the details of this grim mystery, parents will worry less. By
knowing they can participate in their own risk-lowering program, parents
need not feel so helpless. We don’t want to imply that if you don’t take the
precautions we recommend, your baby might die—or that if you do, he
won’t. Besides, SIDS is rare (see box “SIDS Facts”). But our suggestions
may lower the risk of SIDS for your baby. They are based on the most upto-date research about SIDS, as well as on our own experiments. All of
these risk-lowering tips have been well researched. Until more research
helps us better understand and prevent this tragedy, we give you our best
shot.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Background of the Risk-Lowering Program

Our SIDS risk-lowering hypothesis is this: By taking certain health
precautions and by practicing the attachment style of parenting, parents can
lower the risk of SIDS. Specifically, here are the practical recommendations
to support this hypothesis:

1. Get good prenatal care.
2. Don’t smoke around your baby.
3. Put baby to sleep on his back.
4. Breastfeed your baby.
5. Avoid overheating baby during sleep.
6. Avail yourself of health care for baby.
7. Keep baby’s sleeping environment safe.
8. Practice attachment parenting.
9. Sleep in the same room as your baby.

Some of these measures may seem like commonsense precautions. They
are. Others may seem new to you, so we will discuss each in detail. But to

 help you understand how we arrived at these recommendations, we will first
review how our understanding of SIDS evolved.
My (Dr. Bill’s) involvement in the subject began in the early years of my
pediatric practice. During checkups I would usually ask new parents if they
had any worries. “SIDS,” they would confide. “Why does it happen?”
“I don’t know,” was my feeble answer.
“Is there anything we can do to prevent it?” they persisted.
“Not that I know of,” I evaded.
Every time I finished this unhelpful dialogue I felt that I had let parents
down. For there to be no way to lower the risk seemed defeatist. I was
especially shaken when trying to console parents who had lost a baby to
SIDS. I grieved for their loss, and I grieved for my inability to explain why
it occurred and what they might do to lower the risk of such a tragedy
happening again. As a parent I wanted a list of things I could do to keep
SIDS from claiming our babies. As a physician I wanted a list that was well
researched. And I set out to compile that list.
Over the next twenty years I studied the most reputable investigations of
SIDS. Contrary to popular belief, SIDS is not a complete mystery. There is
a lot known about what SIDS is, and what it is not. But only recently has
the valuable insight made it out of the research laboratory and into the
homes of parents. I also discovered that there was a general reluctance of all
baby books to tackle this delicate issue from a preventive viewpoint. But, in
my experience, and I assume in the experience of those who read this book,
informed parents worry less, not more.

 In these studies of SIDS, two facts stood out: It occurs during sleep, and
it occurs most frequently between two and four months of age. SIDS may
have various causes, but wouldn’t it seem reasonable to think that for most
infants SIDS could be a basic sleep disorder? And why was the age two to
four months so vulnerable? I set out to answer these questions. I found two
groups of investigators—basic science researchers, who were studying the
possible physiological characteristics of SIDS babies, and statistics
collectors, who looked for patterns and risk factors of SIDS. While both of
these approaches were necessary to unravel this puzzle, I felt yet another
approach was needed. I wanted to know how certain sleeping arrangements
might affect an infant at risk of SIDS, especially during the high-risk
situation (sleep) and during the high-risk period (the first six months). I
wanted to fill in this research gap.

SIDS FACTS
Sudden infant death syndrome (also known as crib death) is defined as the
sudden death of an infant under one year of age that remains unexplained
after the performance of a complete postmortem investigation, including an
autopsy, an examination of the scene of death, and a review of the case
history. In the United States, SIDS occurs in less than one in one thousand
babies, usually between two and six months of age, and has a peak
incidence between two and four months. Ninety-five percent of SIDS
deaths occur by six months. This tragedy occurs most commonly between
midnight and 6:00 A.M. It is more common in the months of December and
January. Around three thousand babies die in the United States from SIDS
each year, and it is the leading cause of death between one month and one
year.
While most babies dying of SIDS have shown no previous warning
signs or risk factors, some infants have a slightly higher risk of SIDS than
others. These include:

 premature infants
infants who have had stop-breathing episodes (apnea) in the early
weeks of life
infants who have had an ALTE (apparent life-threatening event), such
as a stop-breathing episode in which the baby was pale, blue, and limp
(the older term for this was near-miss SIDS)
babies whose mothers had little or no prenatal care
infants in a poor socioeconomic environment
It is noteworthy that even babies in these high-risk groups have less than a 1
percent chance of SIDS. SIDS is not caused by immunizations or choking;
and it is not contagious.
The cause of SIDS is presently unknown. There are many theories, but
none proven. The prevailing concept is that SIDS is a sleep disorder.
Studies suggest that a baby at risk of SIDS is born with some physiological
differences. On the outside, these babies look healthy and act just like any
other baby, but on the inside these at-risk babies have an immature
breathing-regulating system. Deep within everyone’s brain lies a master
control center designed to receive stimuli and regulate breathing. For
example, your furnace has a master control center that is set to click on and
off whenever the temperature goes below or above a preset level. Similarly,
the breathing center in the brain is preset to maintain a healthy level of
oxygen in the blood. When the oxygen level in the blood falls too low, or
the carbon dioxide goes too high (as happens when a person stops breathing
or holds his breath), the breathing center automatically clicks on to
stimulate breathing. This protective mechanism is supposed to function
even when one is in a deep sleep. But in some infants, for some unknown
reason, breathing does not automatically restart. In short, some SIDS babies
have a disorder of arousal from sleep.
Since SIDS seems to be a disorder of sleep, I wondered if a parent, most
often the mother, could affect the arousability of her infant by changing
their sleeping arrangement. I developed a hypothesis: Sleeping with a baby
may reduce the risk of SIDS. Here is the first case we studied to test this

 hypothesis. A baby at high risk of SIDS was using an electronic apnea
monitor in her crib at home. When she was around three months of age,
stop-breathing alarms began going off with increasing frequency. But when
mother took baby into her bed and slept next to her, the episodes of alarm
sounding ceased. When the baby was moved back into separate sleeping
quarters, the alarms resumed.
In 1986 I was invited to present this case, and the whole hypothesis, at
the International Congress of Pediatrics in Honolulu. The title of my
presentation was “The Protective Effects of Sharing Sleep: Can It Prevent
SIDS?” I wanted my presentation to stimulate research to prove or disprove
my theory. Over the next few years, research organizations began showing
more interest and support in studying a relationship between parenting
styles and SIDS. The National Institutes of Health began funding studies on
mother-infant sleeping pairs. Beginning in 1988, there was a surge in SIDSprevention research. In early 1992, two blessings further helped us study
our hypothesis: Improved computer technology for home sleep studies
became available, and a new baby entered the Sears bedroom laboratory.
We will discuss our exciting findings and others later.
From this background the following SIDS risk-lowering program
evolved.

OceanofPDF.com

 Nine Ways to Lower Your Baby’s Risk of SIDS

Based on the current SIDS research—including our own theories—here are
some ways you can reduce a baby’s risk of SIDS.

1. Get Good Prenatal Care

Strive for a healthy pregnancy and obtain good prenatal care. SIDS has
been shown to be higher in babies whose mothers smoked or took addicting
drugs during pregnancy and those who lacked good prenatal care. The
reasons for these risk factors are unknown, but they probably stem from
chronic oxygen deprivation and the increased risk of prematurity in these
babies.

2. Don’t Smoke Around Your Baby

Studies show that smoking is the highest risk factor and the one that all
researchers agree increases the chance of SIDS. The risk is proportional to
baby’s exposure to smoke and the number of cigarettes smoked each day.

 New Zealand studies show that infants of smoking mothers and fathers have
a seven times greater risk of dying of SIDS. The mechanism of this
preventable association is not completely understood. It’s probably a
combination of many factors. Babies exposed to smoke are more likely to
have congested breathing passages. Researchers have recently found that
children of smoking parents have certain chemicals in their blood that
indicate they have been chronically oxygen deprived. (See here for more
effects of passive smoke on babies.)

3. Put Baby to Sleep on His Back

Conventional wisdom used to say that it is safer to put babies to sleep in the
prone (tummy-down) position. The rationale behind this time-honored
advice is that if an infant spits up or vomits, the material will run out of the
mouth by gravity, whereas if baby is supine (on the back) it may lodge in
his throat and be breathed into his lungs. But new studies question this old
advice. According to SIDS researchers, it is extremely unlikely that a baby
will choke on spit-up when sleeping on his back. In the past decade,
worldwide Back to Sleep campaigns have reduced the incidence of SIDS by
40 to 50 percent.
Why sleeping on the back or side may lower the risk of SIDS is
unknown. The most plausible theory is that back-sleeping babies arouse
more easily from sleep. Another theory is that babies are less likely to
become overheated. Lying on the side or back leaves the internal organs

 more exposed so they can radiate heat more readily than when on the
tummy. Another possibility is that when sleeping facedown, a baby may
press his head into the soft surface, which then forms a pocket around his
face, allowing carbon dioxide to accumulate and baby to rebreathe his own
exhaled air. I wish to reassure parents that in no way should they conclude
that if they put their baby to sleep on his tummy he is going to die. Studies
only show a statistical increase in SIDS risk.

BABIES WHO SHOULD SLEEP PRONE
Be sure to check with your doctor to see if your baby has any medical
conditions that warrant putting baby to sleep on his tummy. Babies who
should sleep prone are:
Premature babies still in the hospital; sleeping on the tummy increases
breathing efficiency in prematures.
Babies who suffer from gastroesophageal reflux; these babies are best
placed to sleep on their left side, with the head of the crib elevated 30
degrees (see here).
Babies with small jawbones or other structural abnormalities of the
airway.
Should babies sleep on back or side? One reason some authorities prefer
the back position is the concern that babies put to sleep on their side may
roll over on their tummy. But in our experience, babies usually roll from
side to back, not side to tummy, possibly because their outstretched arms act
as a barrier from rolling onto the tummy. We have found that in the early
months some babies sleep best on their side. Also, when placing baby to
sleep on his side, pull his underneath arm forward to make it less likely that
baby will roll onto his tummy.

 OceanofPDF.com

 BACK IS BEST FOR BABY’S SLEEP
Now you lay me down to sleep
On my back for safest keep.
It’s tummy time when I’m awake,
but back is best for sleeping breaks.
Keep quilts, toys, and pillows out of my bed.
Never put covers over or beneath my head.
Cigarettes are bad for me.
Please keep my environment smoke-free.
These may be many rules to know,
but minding them will help me grow!
Remember this rhyme when caring for kids,
and help reduce the risk of SIDS.
From SIDS Alliance, sidsalliance.org

4. Breastfeed Your Baby

 New research confirms what we have long suspected: The incidence of
SIDS is lower in breastfed babies. In a New Zealand study, SIDS was three
times higher in nonbreastfed babies. Older studies from New Zealand have
also shown that SIDS occurred less in breastfed babies. Even large-scale
studies from the U.S. National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development (NICHD) found SIDS babies were breastfed significantly less
often, and, if breastfed, were weaned earlier.
Why breastfeeding may lower the risk of SIDS is unknown, but we
suspect it is a combination of the following factors. The infection-fighting
factors in breast milk result in fewer upper respiratory infections that can
compromise breathing, and the nonallergenicity of breast milk could keep
breathing passages less congested. Also, it could be that the breastfed baby
might have sleep cycles that enable him to be more easily aroused in
response to a life-threatening event.
Could it be the nature of breast milk itself? Gastroesophageal reflux
(GERD, see here) can increase the risk of SIDS. Milk regurgitated into
upper airways can trigger a stop-breathing reflex. Reflux occurs less often
in breastfed babies. Could the swallowing and breathing mechanisms of
breastfeeding babies be better coordinated? We do know that breastfed
babies suck and swallow differently than those who are bottlefed. Breastfed
babies also usually feed more frequently than their formula-fed friends.
Therefore, they could get more practice at coordinating their swallowing
and breathing mechanisms. Finally, breastfeeding babies, especially if they
sleep next to the mother at night, show different sleep patterns, more

 frequent sucking, and usually sleep on their side, facing mother. Could these
also be safer sleep patterns? The effect of breastfeeding on mother’s sleep
and the effect of breast milk itself on an infant’s physiology are poorly
understood; further study of these fields, we believe, will eventually shed
light on the puzzle of SIDS.

5. Avoid Overheating Baby During Sleep

Babies who become overheated from overbundling have a higher risk of
SIDS. Be particularly careful of overheating if baby sleeps next to you. The
parent’s body acts as a heat source. If baby is dressed to sleep alone and
then during the night you put her in bed with you, change her dress
appropriately. Studies have shown higher incidence of SIDS in countries
that heavily bundle babies as opposed to those in which babies are loosely
and lightly bundled and the room is appropriately heated. Signs of
overbundling are sweating, damp hair, heat rash, rapid breathing,
restlessness, and sometimes fever. Both overheating and overcooling have
detrimental effects on breathing. One recent study showed that the
incidence of SIDS was reduced with use of a ceiling fan, because it kept the
air around baby fresh and cool.

6. Avail Yourself of Health Care for Baby

 While SIDS spares no one group of babies, the incidence is higher among
the socioeconomically underprivileged. If you are overwhelmed with
domestic and financial stresses and your ability to mother your baby is
compromised, seek help from your doctor and the social welfare agencies in
your community. Studies have shown that increasing parenting skills can
decrease SIDS. An interesting study in Sheffield, England, validated that
mothers can be their baby’s best emergency medical system. Researchers
divided a large number of high-risk babies into two groups. After birth one
group received biweekly home visits by a public health nurse. Their
mothers were educated in mothering skills, nutrition, hygiene, and
recognizing when their infants were sick. The mothers in the second group
received no special attention. The SIDS rate was three times greater in this
second group.

7. Keep Baby’s Sleeping Environment Safe

Remember that nearly all babies who die of SIDS die in their sleep. If
putting baby to sleep on an adult mattress, place him on his back. Always
use a firm mattress. Use the same precautions when traveling or in any
strange sleeping environment. (See also “Safe Co-sleeping,” here, and “Crib
Safety,” here.)

 8. Practice Attachment Parenting

Have we been paying a price for replacing a style of parenting that has
endured for thousands of years? We believe, and research supports, that
three key elements of attachment parenting—breastfeeding on cue, sharing
sleep, and wearing baby—promote organization of the baby and sensitivity
in the parents. In the early months, baby’s central nervous system and
breathing-regulating mechanisms are immature and somewhat disorganized,
as are their sleep-wake patterns. Attachment parenting promotes an overall
regulation of baby’s physiological systems and this carries over into
regulating his breathing mechanism.
Attachment parents develop a radarlike awareness of their baby. One
day I, Dr. Bill, was writing at my desk when my emergency beeper
sounded, beckoning me to the hospital emergency room to evaluate a fivemonth-old baby who had stopped breathing. The parents and baby were
visiting friends. Bedtime came and mother put baby down in their friends’
upstairs bedroom. The party was noisy when, unexpectedly, mother’s
sensitivity alarm sounded. She felt, “My baby is very sensitive to noise.
Why isn’t he waking up? I’d better check.” She found him pale and not
breathing. She summoned her husband to revive the baby with mouth-tomouth resuscitation. The child is alive and well.

9. Sleep with Your Baby

 Here is where the controversy begins. Does sleep sharing decrease or
increase the risk of SIDS, or does it make no difference? We believe
sleeping with your baby can reduce the chance of SIDS. But some
researchers have the opposite opinion. Overlying (rolling over onto your
baby, which we have discussed here) is nearly always associated with
abnormal sleeping circumstances, such as the parent’s being under the
influence of drugs or alcohol, too many children in one bed, or not taking
the precautions mentioned in item 7 above. The New Zealand cot-death
study that sparked many of these precautions also considers sleep sharing a
risk factor, and these findings are creeping into the press, alarming parents
into believing that if they allow their baby into their bed they put him at risk
for SIDS. Could a normal nighttime parenting style that has endured for
centuries be all of a sudden unsafe? The real lesson to be drawn, we believe,
is not to discourage parents from sleeping with their baby but to show them
how to do so safely.
Convincing research suggests that infants at risk of SIDS have a
diminished arousal response during sleep. It follows that anything that
increases the infant’s arousability from sleep or the mother’s awareness of
her infant during sleep may decrease the risk of SIDS. That’s exactly what
sleeping with your baby can do.
In the end, researchers agree on one thing: sleeping in the same room
with a baby reduces the risk of SIDS. This has prompted the American
Academy of Pediatrics to recommend that babies share a room with their
parents.

 OceanofPDF.com

 How Sleep Sharing Can Lower the Risk of SIDS

In the early months of life, much of a baby’s night is spent in active sleep—
the state in which babies are most easily aroused. This state may “protect”
the infant against stop-breathing episodes. As baby gets older, the
percentage of active sleep decreases and quiet, or deep, sleep increases.
This is called sleep maturity, when babies reach that long-awaited nocturnal
milestone—sleeping through the night. That’s the good news. The concern
arises, however, that as baby learns to sleep more deeply, perhaps the risk of
SIDS increases, since sleeping deeper does not always mean sleeping safer.
Offsetting this worry is the fact that at the same time baby is sleeping
deeper, his compensatory cardiopulmonary regulating system is maturing,
so that by six months the breathing centers are more likely to restart should
breathing stop. But between one and six months, when sleep is deepening
and the compensatory mechanisms are not yet mature, there is a vulnerable
period when babies are most at risk for SIDS. Sleep sharing fills in this gap.

Mother as a Pacemaker

Picture what happens when mother and baby sleep side by side. Put baby
next to a warm body and that person acts as a “breathing pacemaker” during

 these vulnerable early months of life when baby’s self-start mechanism is
immature. The sleep-sharing pair develop what we call sleep harmony.
Mother sleeps like a baby until baby is mature enough to sleep like an adult.
Both members of the sleep-sharing pair develop synchronous sleep stages,
perhaps not perfectly in step but close enough to be mutually aware of the
other’s presence and mutually affecting the other’s physiology, but without
disturbing each other’s sleep. Because of this mutual sensitivity, the
presence of the mother raises baby’s threshold of arousability, a protective
benefit should a stop-breathing episode occur.
Even when SIDS has occurred in sleep-sharing pairs (and it has), the
mother has the comfort of knowing that she was there. This sleeping
arrangement does not imply that mother is expected to be a guardian angel
during every sleeping hour for the first six months, or that she is an
inadequate parent if she chooses not to do so. This takes the joy out of
nighttime parenting and replaces it with fear. We’re simply talking about
forgetting cultural norms and doing what comes naturally for you. And
don’t fear that you must never let your baby sleep alone and that you must
go to bed early with baby every night. Also, the time of day in which SIDS
is most likely to occur is after midnight. Remember, SIDS is a relatively
rare occurrence and this section is written in answer to the question, “Is
there anything I can do to lower my baby’s risk of SIDS?”

The Evidence for Our Sleep-Sharing Hypothesis

 Testimonies from nighttime parents. Over our years in pediatric practice,
we have been impressed by stories from numerous parents about their
sensitivity while sharing sleep. Many times mothers would relate, “I wake
up just before my baby does; I nurse him and we both drift back to sleep.”
To many parents there is no doubt that a mutual awareness occurs while
sleeping with their baby. In fact, it was these insights that prompted us to
develop this SIDS-prevention hypothesis. Purists will argue that this is only
anecdotal evidence, but we have grown to value the wisdom of an intuitive
parent as much as the methods of the most meticulous scientist.
Our experience. We logged more than twenty-six years of sleeping with
babies. As we have watched our own sleeping beauties, we were impressed
by how sleeping babies automatically gravitate toward mother. They usually
sleep face-to-face with their mother and spend much of their time on their
side. Is there more physiology going on here than meets the eye? Perhaps
the face-to-face position allows mother’s breath to stimulate baby. We
noticed that when we lightly breathed on our babies’ cheeks, they would
take a deep breath. Could there be sensors in a baby’s nose that detect
another’s breath and stimulate baby to breathe? Then there’s the reach-outand-touch-someone observation. While sleeping close by, our babies would
extend an arm, touch mom, take a deep breath, and resettle. In essence,
there seems to be a mutual awareness without a mutual disturbance.
Our experiments. When we were writing the first edition of this book, we
were sleeping with our four-month-old daughter, Lauren. On seven

 occasions we continuously measured Lauren’s pulse, blood oxygen,
breathing movements, air flow, and sleep patterns in two settings: sleeping
next to Martha one night and sleeping in another room the second night.
The instrumentation was painless and Lauren literally slept right through.
Our studies vividly demonstrated a mutual sensitivity. When Lauren slept
next to Martha, her breathing physiology improved. The oxygen level in her
blood was higher in the sleep-sharing arrangement. Our studies and others
are too preliminary to draw conclusions about SIDS prevention, but at this
point we are confident to conclude: The presence of the mother sleeping
next to her baby does influence her baby’s physiology.
Current research. Dr. James McKenna, director of the Mother-Baby
Behavioral Sleep Laboratory at the University of Notre Dame, has studied
sleep-sharing pairs for more than ten years and has come to the following
conclusions:

Sleep-sharing pairs show more synchronous
arousals than when sleeping separately. When one
member of the pair stirs, coughs, or changes
sleeping stages, the other member also changes,
often without waking.
Each member of the pair tends to often, but not
always, be in the same stage of sleep for longer
periods if they sleep together.

 Sleep-sharing babies spend less time in each cycle
of deep sleep. Lest mothers worry they will get
less deep sleep, preliminary studies show that
sleep-sharing mothers do not get less total deep
sleep.
Sleep-sharing infants arouse more often and
spend more time breastfeeding than solitary
sleepers. Yet the sleep-sharing mothers do not
report awakening more frequently.
Sleep-sharing infants tend to sleep more often on
their backs or sides and less often on their
tummies, a factor itself that could lower the SIDS
risk.
A lot of mutual touch and interaction occurs
between the sleep-sharers. What one sleeper does
affects the nighttime behavior of the other.
Studies of infant sleep-wake patterns. Experiments have shown that
babies who sleep next to mother, especially if breastfeeding, awaken more
frequently than infants who do not. In one study researchers compared
sleep-wake patterns in infants of different nighttime parenting styles. Group
one breastfed on cue during the day and night and slept with their babies.
Group two breastfed their babies but tended to wean earlier and sleep
separately. The third group neither breastfed nor slept with their babies.

 Babies who breastfed and shared sleep with the mother awakened more
frequently and slept shorter stretches at a time; those who breastfed but did
not sleep with the mother slept longer; and the babies who neither breastfed
nor slept with the mother slept the longest. Could babies who sleep alone be
training themselves, before their time, to sleep too long and too deeply?
SIDS rates in sleep-sharing cultures. The incidence of SIDS is lowest in
populations that traditionally share sleep, but the SIDS rates may increase in
these populations when their cultural environment changes. For example,
SIDS rates are low in Asian immigrants to the United States, but a recent
California study showed that the longer these immigrant groups lived in the
United States, the higher their rate of SIDS, as perhaps these populations
adopted more detached parenting styles.
From the preceding evidence, draw your own conclusion: If there were
fewer cribs, would there be fewer crib deaths?
Certainly we do not wish to lead parents to believe that any of these
precautions and parenting styles will absolutely prevent their baby from
succumbing to SIDS. The best we can hope for is to do whatever possible to
lower the risk. And, if a baby does die of SIDS, it may be of some comfort
to parents to feel in their hearts that they did everything they could to
prevent this tragedy. (For more information about SIDS, see “Resources,”
here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 II

OceanofPDF.com

 Infant Feeding and Nutrition
Baby feeding is a learned art with a pinch of science and a touch of
patience. Becoming your child’s own nutritionist takes knowledge of good
nutrition, awareness of infant development, and skill in creative marketing.
Both the food choices and the eating patterns you instill into your toddler
will help shape his young taste for lifelong healthy eating habits. Reading
the feeding cues of your baby, introducing solid foods wisely, and
encouraging self-feeding all lead to an important principle of infant
nourishment—creating a healthy feeding attitude. To a baby, feeding is not
only a developmental skill but a social event. There’s a person at both ends
of the feeding, whether it be by breast, bottle, or spoon. During the first
year you will spend more time feeding your baby than in any other
interaction. Here’s how to make the most of it.

OceanofPDF.com

 Breastfeeding: Why and How

Breastfeeding is a lifestyle—and a way of feeding. In the early weeks, you
may have days when you are ready to toss in the nursing bras and reach for
a bottle. But when you realize how breastfeeding benefits mother, baby, and
family, you will strive to deal with the problems and master the art of
providing the oldest and choicest in infant nourishment. Breast milk does
good things for baby. Breastfeeding does good things for mother. Martha
has breastfed all eight of our children and was breastfeeding our new baby
as we first wrote this book twenty years ago. We want to share the self-help
techniques we have learned in our eighteen years of personal breastfeeding
experience and our professional experience in counseling breastfeeding
families. Breastfeeding matters!

OceanofPDF.com

 WHY BREAST IS BEST
Mother’s milk is special. No two mothers make the same milk; no two
babies need the same milk. Your milk is custom-made to meet the needs of
your baby. And every milk has what is called biologic specificity—meaning
every species of mammal formulates a milk that is unique for the young of
that species, ensuring their growth and enhancing their survival. Mother
seals, for instance, make a high-fat milk because baby seals need high body
fat to survive in cold water. What is a human baby’s survival organ? The
brain. And human milk contains special nutrients that promote brain
growth.

OceanofPDF.com

 Components of Mother’s Milk

Let’s take a look at the main ingredients in this custom-designed recipe and
see how each is tailor-made to fit your baby.

Fats

The most changeable ingredient of breast milk, the fat content, varies
according to the caloric needs of your growing baby. The fat content of your
milk changes during a feeding, at various times during the day, and as your
infant grows, adjusting like a self-formulating fuel to the energy needs of
your baby. At the start of a feeding your foremilk is low in fat, like skim
milk. As the feeding progresses the fat steadily increases until your baby
gets the “cream,” the higher-fat hindmilk. This milk contains a built-in
satiety factor that gives your infant a feeling of contented fullness, and your
baby stops eating. Watch breastfeeding babies at the end of a feeding.
Notice how they radiate an “I feel good” look.

 Because breastfeeding is an exercise in baby reading, it helps you get to
know your baby.
Suppose your baby is just thirsty. She will suck lightly for only a few
minutes and be satisfied with the lower-fat foremilk. Babies enjoy this
occasional two-minute kind of “pick-me-up” for various reasons. When
truly hungry, your baby will suck longer and more vigorously, eventually
being rewarded with the more-filling, higher-calorie hindmilk. As their rate
of growth decelerates, older babies need fewer calories per unit of body
weight. You guessed it! The fat content of human milk lessens as baby
grows, automatically changing from “whole milk” to “low fat” during the
last half of the first year.
Then come those frequent growth spurts, when every few weeks babies
seem to feed continuously for a few days—called frequency days or

 marathon feeding—to get more energy for more growth. As intervals
between feeds shorten, the fat content increases to accommodate the
increased energy needs of a rapidly growing infant. Once the growth spurt
has passed, the feedings will be needed less frequently, until the next spurt.
The moral of this fat story is that breastfeeding infants are not just
passive players in the feeding game. They take an active part in shaping the
food and the feeding to satisfy their individual needs.
“Smarter” fats. Human milk contains brain-boosting fats, namely DHA
(docosahexaenoic acid) and ARA (arachidonic acid), omega-3 fatty acids
vital for the growth and development of nerve tissue. DHA is needed to
form myelin, the insulating sheath around each nerve that helps electrical
nerve impulses travel faster and get to where they should go. Studies have
shown that DHA concentrations are highest in the brains of babies who are
breastfed and highest of all in those who are breastfed the longest. About
ten years ago, manufacturers in the United States began to include DHA and
ARA in infant formula. It is likely, however, that DHA is only one of
hundreds of yet to be identified ingredients in human milk that work
together to give breastfed babies an edge in brain development.
Better fats, less waste. Not only does breast milk contain better fat than
cow’s milk or infant formula, less of it gets wasted. Human milk contains
an enzyme, lipase—a substance that helps digest fat so that more gets into
the baby and less in the stools. Formulas do not contain any enzymes,
because they are destroyed by the heating process. The malodorous stools

 of the formula-fed infant give a clue that the intestines are unhappy with
having to process the types of fats in formula. The intestines—the body’s
food judge—reject some of the fat of formula or cow’s milk and allow this
excess to pass into the stools, giving them an unpleasant odor—which
makes for unpleasant diaper changes.

“MOTHER’S MILK: FOOD FOR SMARTER
KIDS”
Twenty years ago, we were excited to see this headline in the February 2,
1992, issue of USA Today. While numerous studies back then had shown
that breastfeeding boosts development, this had been attributed more to
nurturing than to the type of milk itself. But this study suggested that it was
mother’s milk itself that gave the developmental advantage. Researchers in
England divided three hundred premature infants into two groups: those
who received their mother’s milk and those who didn’t. Prematures who got
their mother’s milk during the first four to five weeks of life averaged 8.3
points higher on IQ tests at age seven and a half to eight years. And the
research suggested a dose-response relationship: The more mother’s milk
they got, the better the children scored. The difference could not be
explained by increased nurturing, since the babies were fed breast milk by
tube. Twenty years later, many more studies (some tracking children for as
long as eighteen years) have come to the same conclusion: The longer
babies are breastfed, the greater their intellectual advantage. Why breast
milk builds better brains is not fully known, but researchers attribute it to
the effects of the hormones and growth factors not found in formula as well
as the special fats that contribute to the structural development of the
nervous system. There are around four hundred nutrients in breast milk that
are not present in formula. To give your baby a good intellectual start,
breast milk is the best milk for growing brains. Breastfeeding does make a
difference!

 Cholesterol: good or bad for baby? The next important component of the
fat family is cholesterol. Is this vital fat really the nutritional gremlin it is
portrayed as? Not in babies. Like other fats, cholesterol promotes brain
growth, and it provides basic components of hormones, vitamin D, and
intestinal bile. Cholesterol is present in human milk, scant in cow’s milk,
and nearly absent in formulas. Recent studies show that during the first year
exclusively breastfed infants have higher blood cholesterol than formula-fed
babies. Higher blood cholesterol at the stage of most rapid brain growth—
what a smart idea!

Powerful Proteins

If the fat facts are not heavy enough to convince you your milk is special,
listen to the protein story. Proteins are the building blocks of growth. (For
more about proteins, see here.) Quality protein is most important during
your baby’s first year because your baby grows faster during this period
than at any other time. Your milk contains proteins specifically designed for
infant growth. These powerful growth-promoting substances cannot be
manufactured or bought. Each of these special factors does good things for
your baby.
Milk (cow’s, formula, and human) contains two main proteins: whey
and casein. Whey is a gentle protein, easy to digest and very friendly to
human intestines. Casein, the curd protein of milk, is lumpy and less easy to
digest by human intestines. Your milk contains mostly whey. Cow’s milk

 and some formulas contain mostly casein. Your baby’s intestines recognize
breast milk proteins as the right stuff. They digest these nutrients easily,
absorb them quickly, and do not reject them as foreign foods. The intestines
do not so eagerly welcome the foreign proteins in formula or cow’s milk
because they must work harder to digest the lumpier curd. The intestines are
the body’s nutritional gatekeeper, letting into the blood the right proteins
and keeping out of the blood proteins that may harm the body—called
allergenic proteins, or allergens. In the early months your baby’s intestines
are more porous; the “gate” in the intestinal lining is open, allowing foreign
proteins to get through. Around six months the intestines mature and the
gate begins to close, selecting some proteins and rejecting others—an
intriguing process called closure. Giving your baby only your milk until the
intestines mature is the safest way to keep potentially allergenic proteins out
of baby’s blood.
Besides whey, your milk contains other select proteins not naturally
found in milks made by cows or companies. Let’s meet this elite group.
Taurine, the brain protein, is believed to enhance the development of the
brain and nervous system. Lactoferrin is another protein unique to human
milk, acting like a ferryboat transporting valuable iron from your milk into
your baby’s blood. This special protein also polices the right kind of
bacteria that reside in your baby’s intestines. Throughout your baby’s lower
intestines reside good and bad bacteria. The friendly, useful bacteria, in
return for a place to live, do good things for your baby, such as make
vitamins. The harmful bacteria, if not kept in check, can overwhelm the
intestines, causing diarrheal illnesses. Besides suppressing the harmful

 bacteria in your baby’s intestines, lactoferrin keeps candida (a yeast
organism that produces toxins) in check. Another group of natural
antibiotics in your milk is called lysozymes, special proteins that help ward
off harmful bacteria.
Nucleotides are another type of helpful protein in human milk. These
valuable proteins help tissues grow stronger, similar to the way strengthenhancing elements are added to structural steel. Nucleotides help the lining
of your baby’s intestines develop better by boosting the growth of intestinal
villi—the tiny fingerlike projections that process and absorb food. These
substances in your milk also help promote the bacteria that belong in your
baby’s intestines and eliminate those that don’t—a process called
maintaining the normal ecology of the gut.

How Sweet It Is!

Try the taste test. Sample formulas and breast milk, and you will instantly
know why babies prefer the real thing. Breast milk tastes fresh. Formula has
a canned taste. Human milk contains more lactose (sugar) than the milk of
any other mammal—20–30 percent more than cow’s milk. Formulas add
corn syrup or lactose to make up the difference. So why should your baby
have this better sugar? Answer: Baby’s brain needs it! Nutritionists believe
that one of the products of lactose, galactose, is a vital nutrient to
developing brain tissue. To lend support that lactose is important for central
nervous system development, researchers have shown that among all

 mammals the higher the lactose content of the milk, the larger the brain of
that species. Lactose also enhances calcium absorption, which is vital to
developing bones. Not only does lactose help growing brains and growing
bones, your baby’s intestines need this natural sweet. Lactose promotes the
growth of a useful intestinal bacteria, Lactobacillus bifidus.

Vitamins, Minerals, and Iron

No one can make these nutrients as well as you can. These nutrients are
unique because of their high bioavailability—meaning most of what is in
the milk gets used by the body. What gives a food high marks is not how
much of a particular nutrient it contains, but what percentage is absorbed
through the intestines into the bloodstream. What you see on the formula
labels is not what babies get into their blood. The vitamins, minerals, and
iron in your milk have high bioavailability. Most of these high-efficiency
nutrients in your milk get into your baby’s tissues. There is very little waste.
Not so with company-made or cow-made milk. These have low efficiency,
low bioavailability. With breast milk iron, for example, 50–75 percent gets
into the baby’s blood and tissues. Less wasted iron is left unabsorbed in the
intestines. Not so with the “other brand.” Only 10 percent of cow’s milk
iron and as little as 4 percent in iron-fortified formulas gets into the blood.
Not terribly efficient.

 Spare the leftovers. Besides the low efficiency of commercial nutrients,
the excess nutrients that are not absorbed overtax the baby’s waste-disposal
system, for which baby pays a metabolic price. Excess unabsorbed nutrients
upset the ecology of the gut, encouraging the growth of harmful bacteria.
We do not yet know all the possible long-term effects of these excesses.
Changing as baby grows. Another tribute to the efficiency of your milk is
how the amounts of these nutrients change as your baby grows. The vitamin
and mineral content of colostrum (your first milk), transitional milk (firstweek milk), and mature milk is formulated just right for your baby’s rapidly
changing needs. There is no such commercial food as colostrum or
transitional formula.
Facilitators. To further upgrade nutrient bioavailability, human milk
contains facilitators—substances that help their fellow nutrients work
better. The higher vitamin C in human milk, for example, increases
absorption of iron. In an intriguing experiment researchers added equal
amounts of iron and zinc to samples of human milk, cow’s milk, and
formulas and fed them to human volunteers. More of these nutrients in the
human-milk sample than in the other milks got into the bloodstream.
Indeed, breast milk is a unique recipe.

Protection Factors in Breast Milk

 To nourish and protect is the nutritional goal of every mother. You have
learned how breast milk so perfectly nourishes babies; now you will see
how this rich nutrient further protects them.
White blood cells. Each drop of your milk is alive with millions of tiny
white blood cells that circulate throughout your baby’s intestines ingesting
and destroying harmful bacteria. So valuable are the nutritional and diseasefighting properties of breast milk that in ancient times it was known as
white blood. Like a vigilant mother, these protective cells are most plentiful
in the early weeks of life, when your newborn’s own defense system is
weakest. As your baby’s immune system matures, the concentration of
white blood cells in your milk gradually decreases, yet they are still present
in your milk at least six months postpartum.
Besides gobbling up infection, these precious cells, like blood, store and
transport priceless elements such as enzymes, growth factors, and infectionfighting proteins—other partners in good health, which we will now
examine.
Immunoglobulins. In addition to living white cells, your milk also contains
immunoglobulins—infection-fighting proteins that circulate, like natural
antibiotics, throughout the body and destroy germs. In the first six months
of life, a baby’s immune system is immature, or deficient in protective
antibodies. Your infant makes some antibodies shortly after birth, but these
do not reach adequate protective levels until nine to twelve months of age.
Enter mother. To defend your baby against germs, you as mother make up

 for your baby’s insufficient immunity in many ways. One is by giving your
baby your blood antibodies across the placenta. But these blood
immunoglobulins are used up by nine months. As your blood antibodies in
your baby go down, your milk immunoglobulins go up; your milk
completes the job of your placenta, protecting your baby until his or her
own defense system matures—a process that is well on its way by the end
of the first year. Your breasts function after birth as your placenta did before
birth—to nourish and protect.
Milk immunization. Colostrum, the first milk you produce, is the highest
in white blood cells and infection-fighting proteins at the most opportune
time, when your newborn’s defenses are lowest. Another perfect match.
Consider colostrum your baby’s first immunization.
To appreciate milk immunization, let’s follow an important member of
the immunoglobulin team, IgA, through your baby’s intestines. In the early
months a baby’s immature intestines are like a sieve, allowing foreign
substances (allergenic proteins) to pass into the infant’s blood, potentially
causing allergies. The IgA in breast milk provides a protective coating,
sealing these leaks in the intestinal lining and preventing the passage of
unwelcome germs and allergens.
Defense system continually updated. Your milk is a custom-made
infection repellent, fighting off germs in your baby’s environment. The
germs around you are continuously changing, but your body has a
protective system that selectively recognizes friendly and harmful germs.

 This system is immature in babies. When a new germ enters mother’s body,
she produces antibodies to that germ. This new army of infection fighters
then enters her baby, via her milk. Baby is now also protected. This
dynamic process of milk immunization constantly adapts to provide the
mother-infant pair with the best defense system.

IMMUNIZE YOUR BABY EVERY DAY! BREASTFEED. (Advised by
the International Lactation Consultant Association)

More Discoveries

Several times a year we pick up a medical journal and read about a new
element discovered in breast milk. Because the exact makeup of these
substances is often unknown, researchers call them factors. We have
discussed the satiety factor and the brain-building factors. Another member
of the factor team is epidermal growth factor (EGF), so named because it
promotes the growth of epidermal cells lining your baby’s intestines that
absorb nutrients.
We have only skimmed the surface in pointing out the unique qualities and
components of human milk. There are many other valuable nutrients in

 human milk that are not in formula. As new technologies allow us to study
these special nutrients, we will cherish breast milk even more as baby’s best
nutritional start. Science is continuing to discover what mothers have long
known—something good happens to babies and mothers when they
breastfeed.

OceanofPDF.com

 Best for Mother

Not only is your milk best for baby, but breastfeeding is also best for you.
There will be those marathon days when your baby wants to “breastfeed all
the time”; you may feel drained of milk, of energy, and of patience. As a
patient of mine once said, “I feel like breastfeeding is one big give-a-thon.”
Breastfeeding is not all giving, giving, giving. The return on your time and
effort is immeasurable, both while you are breastfeeding and in years to
come.
One of the main benefits of breastfeeding—and a theme of this book—is
the concept of mutual giving: You give to baby; baby gives to you. When
your baby sucks, you give baby your milk. Baby’s sucking stimulates
nerves in your nipple to send a message to your pituitary gland (the body’s
“master gland”) to secrete the hormone prolactin. One of the mothering
hormones, prolactin travels throughout the highways of mother’s body,
telling her which turn to take and stimulating her motherly feelings.

Breastfeeding Gets You Back in Shape Faster

Sucking also stimulates the release of more of the hormone oxytocin, which
contracts your uterus to (nearly) its prepregnant size. This happens more

 quickly for mothers who breastfeed. And, by the way, breastfeeding does
not cause your breasts to lose their shape. Pregnancy is what brings on the
breast changes.

Relax, Relax!

Breastfeeding relaxes mother and baby. Watch a breastfeeding pair. Notice
how the mother mellows, and the baby drifts peacefully to sleep as if given
a natural tranquilizer. In fact, this happens. Your milk contains a natural
sleep-inducing protein that, in addition to the aforementioned satiety factor,
puts baby into a restful slumber. In turn, the prolactic released when your
baby sucks relaxes you. This aspect of breastfeeding is a beautiful example
of mutual giving when we let it happen naturally.
The relaxing effect of breastfeeding is particularly helpful to mothers
with busy life-styles. Tanya, a dual-career mother and part-time
breastfeeder, declared, “When I come home after a busy day at work, I
breastfeed my baby and it helps me unwind!”

Other Major Benefits

Breastfeeding contributes to mother’s health. Women who breastfeed have a
lower incidence of breast cancer—an important consideration if you have a

 strong family history of breast cancer. Breastfed babies tend to be healthier,
saving money in medical bills. Breastfeeding is less expensive, and it’s
better milk—truly one of nature’s best food bargains. And, for family
planners, breastfeeding can be a natural child spacer. (See “Breastfeeding as
Child Spacing,” here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Breastfeeding Is Good Discipline

Breastfeeding is an exercise in baby reading. In studying the long-term
effects of breastfeeding on babies in my practice, I found that one feature
stands out—these children are well disciplined. Very simply, our basic
recipe for discipline contains two ingredients: Know your child and help
your child feel right. Breastfeeding serves both these components. A
responsive mother knows her baby. The mother-infant interaction of the
breastfeeding pair is repeated at least a thousand times in the first three
months, leading mother to a deep perception of her baby’s behavior. During
breastfeeding more than milk flows into the baby. A baby who is on the
receiving end of nature’s best nurturing learns trust, and the right feeling
that goes with it. The mutual sensitivity that develops between both
members of the breastfeeding pair becomes the basis for positive
communication and respect in toddlerhood.

OceanofPDF.com

 PREPARING FOR BREASTFEEDING
Just as preparing for the birth of your baby increases your chances of
having a good birth experience, preparing yourself for breastfeeding helps
you better enjoy feeding your baby.
To begin with, if you feel uncomfortable handling your breasts, ask a
breastfeeding friend or a lactation consultant about the art of breast
massage. This can help you get used to the idea that your breasts will be
“handled” a lot by your nursing baby and is useful later on when you’re
learning to express your milk manually.
Notice the changes in your body. The hormones of pregnancy naturally
prepare your breasts for feeding. In fact, breast changes may have been one
of the first changes you noticed in your body at the beginning of your
pregnancy. Breasts start getting bigger in early pregnancy as the amount of
milk-making tissue in them increases, and they may feel tender at times. In
the last months of pregnancy, breasts may secrete small amounts of
colostrum, the yellow sticky substance that is your baby’s first nourishment.
This is a time to appreciate the wonderful ways that a woman’s body not
only grows a baby but prepares to care for that baby after birth.

 Should you prepare your nipples? Years ago women were advised to
toughen their nipples during pregnancy to prepare for breastfeeding. They
were told to rub their nipples with a rough towel, leave their bra flaps down
to expose the nipples to air, and if they had flat or inverted nipples, to do
nipple exercises to make their nipples more erect. That sounds like a lot of
work—and not too pleasant either. Fortunately, we now know that prenatal
nipple preparation is neither necessary nor helpful. In fact, paying so much
attention to nipples prenatally may even set women up to fail at
breastfeeding by creating unnecessary anxiety about whether their natural
nipple shape will be adequate. Nowadays, those in the know about
breastfeeding remind mothers that babies feed from breasts, not nipples,
and that being careful about how baby latches onto the breast will prevent
nipple sorenesss.

BREASTFEEDING HEALTH BENEFITS FOR
MOTHER AND BABY
Breastfeeding does lots of good things for baby, mother, and family. Here is
a system-by-system overview of the most important health benefits of
breastfeeding.
Breastfed babies enjoy:

 • brighter brains
• better vision
• fewer ear infections
• better dental alignment
• healthier hearts
• fewer respiratory infections
• improved digestion
• fewer intestinal infections
• less constipation
• leaner bodies
• less diabetes
• healthier skin
• increased immunity
• healthier growth
Breastfeeding mothers enjoy:
• relaxation
• less depression
• natural child spacing
• less osteoporosis
• less breast, uterine, and ovarian cancer
• faster postpartum weight loss

 Instead of worrying about your nipples, let them prepare themselves.
The glands around your nipples and areolas (the dark portion of your breast
surrounding the nipple) secrete a natural lubricating substance. Avoid using
soap on your nipples, because soap will remove these natural oils and leave
the skin dry and more likely to crack. If you are concerned about flat or
inverted nipples, contact a lactation consultant to assist you in the first days
after birth as your baby learns to latch on and suck properly.
Prepare your mind as well as your body. Linda, a mother in our practice,
confided: “Intellectually I thought I was prepared for breastfeeding, but
emotionally I was not.” She knew that breast milk is best for her baby, but
she did not realize the level of commitment it would take during those first
few weeks when “all baby wants to do is suck.” Then she went on to say,

 “If only someone had told me that after the first few weeks, breastfeeding
would be less draining and more fulfilling.”
Join your local La Leche League or other breastfeeding-support group.
Successful breastfeeding is not automatic for many first-time mothers who
have no models or family support. La Leche League International (LLLI) is
a volunteer organization of women members and group leaders who have
practical breastfeeding experience and special training in counseling new
mothers. Since the extended family is not usually available to most new
parents, a support group such as La Leche League often becomes the
extended family for the new mother. In the last trimester of your pregnancy
attend a series of La Leche League meetings, which cover right-start
techniques, the effects of breastfeeding on the family, and practical tips on
making breastfeeding a more enjoyable experience. Besides being
informative, these meetings help you get acquainted with other new
mothers and will be a valuable support resource after your baby is born.
Watch those mothers so effortlessly tend to their babies’ needs, as if mother
and baby have been rehearsing this breastfeeding scene for years—and
some have. You can usually find your local La Leche League through your
doctor’s office, or check with your hospital, childbirth class, or local library.
You can also call or visit LLLI.org for the name and number of your local
leader. (See “Breastfeeding,” in “Resources,” here.)
Take a breastfeeding class. Breastfeeding classes instruct you on rightstart techniques and put you in touch with a lactation specialist who may

 later be your personal breastfeeding consultant. Hospitals and birthing
centers usually offer breastfeeding classes as part of the childbirth class.
Choose health care providers who know about breastfeeding. When
choosing your baby’s doctor, impress upon him or her that breastfeeding is
a high priority in your overall parenting style. Choose a doctor who gives
more than just lip service to breastfeeding. During the early months of your
baby’s medical care, you’ll be interacting with your doctor more about
feeding questions and problems than any other concern. You want this
person to whom you are entrusting the care of your baby to be
knowledgeable and supportive in giving your baby the best nutritional start.
La Leche League has a medical associates program to help you locate just
such a doctor.
Talk with supportive friends. Seek out those who encourage your feeding
choices rather than sabotage your choice of parenting styles. Nothing
divides friends like differences of opinion on child rearing. The defeating
cliché “It must be your milk” is used for every conceivable problem: colic,
constipation, diarrhea, night waking, and so on. This is a damaging and
inappropriate remark. Love for your baby makes you particularly vulnerable
to any suggestion that your milk is bad, therefore you are a bad mother. In
fact, you are likely to get the most critical advice from mothers who have
never breastfed. Surround yourself with supportive friends who inspire
confidence and affirm your choices.

 OceanofPDF.com

 RIGHT-START TECHNIQUES
In a perfect world, breastfeeding would be easy: Mom gives birth, baby
latches on correctly and nurses vigorously, mom’s milk comes in by day
three, and baby thrives. No problem. Well, this scenario is possible. We do
see some of our patients get an easy start on breastfeeding without needing
any special care and instruction. These babies instinctively know how to
find the breast and how to latch on correctly without hurting mom’s nipple.
Mom’s intuition helps her to assist baby with this process. After all, moms
and babies have been doing this successfully for thousands of years.
So why don’t some mommy/baby pairs have a smooth start to
breastfeeding? Why do some babies not latch on correctly? Why do some
moms struggle with milk supply? Why do many new moms and babies need
intensive assistance from lactation consultants to get the right start?
We believe that it has a lot to do with the way a baby enters the world.
Moms and babies who are able to have a natural, unmedicated birth are
better equipped to get the right start with breastfeeding. Mom’s body
systems, hormones, intuition, and energy are not suppressed by anesthesia
and pain medications. Baby is born more alert and ready to nurse, and the
natural reflexes (rooting, latching, and sucking) that allow him to correctly
latch on to the breast and nurse are more intact and not suppressed by
anesthetic and pain medications that have passed through the placenta.

 These babies seem to simply latch on correctly with little or no help. In fact,
there’s an emerging theory among lactation consultants and breastfeeding
educators that the best way to help a mom and baby get the right start to
latching on and nursing is to not help at all. Let a baby’s instincts and
mom’s intuition lead the way, and watch and see what happens—as we
describe next.
Today’s hospital-based births, however, usually involve epidural
anesthesia or pain medication. And moms who require a cesarean section
need several more days of pain medication. An inevitable consequence of
this is that these babies and moms need more help getting the right start
with breastfeeding. Here is our guide to helping you and baby get started.
Our desire is not only to encourage you to breastfeed but, more important,
to enjoy this relationship.

OceanofPDF.com

 First Feedings

Unless a medical condition (breathing difficulties, for example) prevents it,
right after birth your baby should be draped over your chest, tummy to
tummy, cheek to breast, skin to skin (with modifications for a cesarean
birth), and covered with a warm towel. Then just relax and enjoy each other.
Don’t force or rush things. This is not a time to practice everything you
learned in the class. It’s a time to introduce baby to the breast. Most babies
take a few licks, a few sucks, pause, and then resume a few more gentle
licks and sucks. Sucking in frequent bursts and pauses is the usual pattern
for the first few hours and sometimes even the first few days.
Within a few minutes after birth most babies enter a state of quiet
alertness—the optimal behavioral state for interaction with you. When baby
is quiet and alert her eyes are open wide, attentive, and looking for another
set of eyes—and for the breast. In fact, immediately after an unmedicated
birth some newborn babies, placed on mother’s abdomen, will make
crawling motions toward the breast and can find their target with minimal
assistance. When baby makes contact with the nipple, she is stimulated to
open her mouth (the rooting reflex). She may latch on and suck or she may
just enjoy the skin-to-skin contact. She will probably latch and suck within
that first hour, before falling asleep for a long nap.

 This first interaction is important for several reasons. The first milk you
produce, colostrum, is the best food—the sooner baby starts the better.
Sucking is good for helping the newly delivered baby ease the tension that
has built up from the stress of labor and birth. Sucking is a familiar and
comforting function from the womb, so it helps baby adjust to the new
environment.

OceanofPDF.com

 Positioning and Latch-on Skills

We cannot overemphasize the importance of positioning and latch-on. Most
of the breastfeeding problems we see in our office (sore nipples, insufficient
milk, mothers not enjoying breastfeeding) are due to not using these basic
right-start techniques.

Position Yourself Correctly

Get comfortable before beginning to breastfeed. Milk flows better from a
relaxed mother. Sitting up in bed or in a rocking chair or an armchair is the
easiest position for breastfeeding. Pillows are essential for your comfort and
for baby’s positioning. Have one behind your back, one on your lap, and
another under the arm that will support your baby. If you buy a nursing
pillow, get one that works well with these positioning tips—some nursing
pillows are too bulky or too awkward (see “Resources,” here). If sitting in a
chair, use a footstool—this raises your lap so you don’t have to strain your
back and arm muscles to get baby closer to your breast (see illustration
here).

 Position Baby Correctly

Start with your baby only lightly dressed (or even undressed) for skin-toskin contact. Undressing babies who seem too sleepy to feed keeps them
from falling asleep, and skin touch helps them learn to suck better. Then
position her as follows:

1. Nestle baby in your arm so that her neck rests in
the bend of your elbow, her back along your
forearm, and her buttocks in your hand.
2. Turn baby’s entire body on its side so she is
facing you tummy to tummy. Her head and neck
should be straight, not arched backward or turned
sideways, in relation to the rest of her body. Baby
should not have to turn her head or strain her neck
to reach your nipple. (Try turning your head to
one side and swallowing a sip of water. Then try
it again with your head extended far back, then
flexed toward your chest. It doesn’t feel nearly as
comfortable as when you hold your head naturally
straight ahead.)
3. Raise baby to the level of your breasts by putting
her on a pillow on your lap and by using a
footstool. Let the pillow on your lap support your

 arm and baby’s weight. Holding your infant up
with your arm during a whole feeding will strain
your back and arm muscles. But if baby rests too
low on your lap, she will pull down on your
breast, causing unnecessary stretching and
friction. Bring baby up and in toward you rather
than your leaning forward toward her.
4. Get baby’s flailing arms and hands out of the way.
As you turn baby on her side tummy to tummy,
tuck her lower arm into the soft pocket between
her body and your midriff. If her upper arm keeps
interfering, you can hold it down with the thumb
of your hand that is holding her.
5. As you are positioning baby’s arms, wrap her
around you, tummy to tummy. This basic position
is called the cradle hold. If your baby is
premature or has trouble latching on, try the
clutch hold (see here).

 Cradle hold, showing correct head and body alignment for breastfeeding.

 Incorrect position for breastfeeding: Don’t let baby’s body dangle away
from yours.

Present Your Breast

Many babies, when they root toward the breast, don’t need any special
handling. When your baby feels your breast against his cheek, he may
simply open his mouth wide enough to move in and take in enough of the
areola. If your nipple feels pinched when baby latches, or he isn’t finding
where to latch, you can help him out.
Cup your breast, supporting the weight of your breast with palm and
fingers underneath and thumb on top. Keep your hand back toward your
chest wall so your fingers stay clear of the areola, away from baby’s latchon site. If you are very large breasted, you can use a rolled-up hand towel
under your breast to help support its weight so that it doesn’t drag down on
baby’s lower jaw and tire her out.

Latch-on—The Most Important Step

Gently brush baby’s lips with your nipple, and she will open her mouth.
Direct your nipple slightly upward toward the roof of baby’s mouth.

 Don’t lean forward, pushing your breast toward your baby; pull baby
closer in to you. Otherwise you will wind up sitting hunched over, and
you’ll have a tired, sore back at the end of the feeding. Don’t let baby slurp
just the nipple itself into her mouth; your nipple should be farther back in
baby’s mouth.

Teasing baby’s mouth open wide.

 If baby doesn’t open mouth wide enough for proper latch-on: depress lower
jaw and evert lips with your finger.

Make sure baby sucks the areola. Your baby’s gums should bypass the
base of the nipple and take in at least a 1-inch radius of the areola. After just
one or two feedings “on the nipple,” your nipples will be sore. Another
reason it is so important that baby compress the areola is that the milk
sinuses (the reservoirs for milk) are located beneath the areola (see the
diagram here). If these sinuses are not compressed your baby will not get
enough milk. Babies should suck areolas, not nipples.
Open wide! An important part of proper latch-on is getting baby to open
her mouth wide. Baby’s roofing reflex should automatically open her mouth
wide enough for a proper latch. Some babies tighten or purse their lips,
especially the lower one. Help baby open her mouth wider by using the
index finger of the hand supporting your breast to press firmly down on
your baby’s chin as you pull her on. You may need someone else to do this
for you at first. If your nipple gives you the message that your baby is tight
mouthing you, causing a pinching feeling, temporarily remove the hand
supporting your breast and use your index finger to evert (turn out) her lips
without breaking the suction. If baby does not cooperate, break the suction
by gently wedging your finger between the gums, and start again. Even if
you have to start over several times until you and baby get it right, hang in
there. This is good practice, and it helps baby learn the right moves.

 Consider this your first opportunity to discipline (which means teach and
guide), and take a deep breath and try again.

Proper latch-on. Notice baby’s lips correctly everted.
Years ago, in my hospital teaching days, I (Dr. Bill) made latch-on
rounds with interns in the maternity ward. After simply pressing down on
baby’s chin and everting the tight, inwardly turned lower lip, mothers would
exclaim, “It doesn’t hurt anymore; it feels right.” The students dubbed this
teaching session “Sears’s lower-lip rounds.”
Try the asymmetrical latch technique. Some babies will latch on
comfortably by opening wide and taking the whole nipple straight into the
mouth. Others will form a better latch using what is called an asymmetrical
latch. For this technique, point the nipple upward toward baby’s upper lip
and let baby’s lower lip come into contact with the areola first, then roll the

 nipple into baby’s mouth by pointing the nipple toward the back of the
mouth while baby’s upper lip comes over the top of your nipple. Picture
taking the first bite of a large hamburger: you put your lower jaw onto the
bottom of the burger first (with the burger tilted at a 45-degree angle or
more), then you move the top part of the burger into your mouth as you
bring your upper jaw over the top. This technique helps the beginning
nurser take the entire nipple and areola into the mouth properly and can
prevent sore nipples from the start.
Make adjustments for baby’s breathing. Don’t be afraid of blocking
baby’s nose, since she can breathe quite well from the sides of her nose
even if the tip is compressed. If baby’s breathing does seem to be blocked,
pull baby’s bottom closer to you, changing the angle of baby’s position
slightly, or if necessary use your thumb to press gently on your breast to
give her more breathing space.
Support your breast. After you have your baby correctly latched on, hold
your breast throughout the feeding so the weight of your breast does not tire
your newborn’s mouth. As baby gets older and stronger, this supporting step
will be less necessary, and you will have a free hand during most of the
feeding. To avoid trauma to your nipples, do not pull your nipple from
baby’s mouth without first breaking the suction by inserting your finger into
the corner of her mouth, wedging it between her gums.

 Incorrect latch-on. Notice baby’s lower lip is tucked in.

Try and try again. Do not let baby continue a nursing session with a
painful latch. Many well-meaning moms allow a new baby to continue
nursing through an incorrect latch because mom’s instincts insist that the
baby must nurse in order to thrive. Teaching baby the proper latch, with the
proper feel of a correctly placed nipple and areola, is more important than
how much early milk a baby gets. An incorrect, painful latch will only make
you more and more sore and lead to feeding problems in the days to come.
It is much better in the long run to unlatch baby (breaking the seal by
wedging your finger between baby’s gums) and try again, over and over,
until you get a latch that you can sit back and relax with. It’s worth the
effort.

Two Types of Sucking

 After a few weeks you will notice that your baby exhibits two types of
sucking: comfort and nutritional. Comfort sucking, the weaker suck, is most
prevalent when baby is not hungry but simply needs comforting. With this
type of sucking baby usually gets the less-filling foremilk. Nutritional
sucking is more vigorous. The muscles of her face work so hard that even
her ears wiggle during intense nutritional sucking. This type of productive
sucking soon rewards your baby with the higher-calorie and more-filling
hindmilk.

Alternative Breastfeeding Positions

In the first week it’s wise to teach baby more than one nursing position.
Two other helpful breastfeeding positions are the side-lying position and the
clutch hold. These positions are useful in the early days of recovery from a
cesarean birth.
Side-lying position. Think of this as the cradle hold, but with baby and
mother lying on their sides facing each other. Have two pillows under your
head, a pillow behind your back, another under your top leg, and a fifth
pillow tucked behind your baby. Five pillows sounds like a lot, but you
need to be comfortable. Place your baby on her side facing you and nestled
in your arm, and slide your baby up or down to get her mouth to line up
with your breast. Use the same latch-on techniques as previously described.

 Side-lying position.

Clutch hold. Try this hold with babies with latch-on problems and those
who squirm and arch their backs, detaching themselves from the breast. It’s
also useful for small, hypotonic (floppy), or premature babies. Sitting up in
bed or in a comfortable armchair, set a pillow at your side (let’s say your
right side) or wedge it between you and the arm of the chair and place baby
on the pillow. Position your baby in close along your right side and cup the
back of her neck in your right hand. Direct her legs upward so that they are
resting against the pillows supporting your back. Be sure that baby is not
pushing with her feet against the back of the chair or pillow, causing her to
arch her back. If this happens, position baby bent at her hips with her legs
and buttocks against the back pillow. Follow the same latch-on steps,
cupping your breast in your left hand, and pull baby in close to you. Once
baby is sucking well, wedge a pillow up against her back to help hold her
close.

 Clutch hold, sitting in bed. Notice how pillows help prop baby and mother
to comfortable positions.

LATCH-ON AT A GLANCE
Here’s a quick review of how to get your baby latched onto the breast:
Get comfortable with pillows behind your back and under your elbow.
Support baby at breast level on a pillow pulled in close, tummy to
tummy with you.
Massage baby’s lips with your milk-moistened nipple to tease her
mouth open wide.
When baby’s mouth opens wide, aim your nipple toward the roof of
her mouth, and quickly pull her in close as she takes the areola into her
mouth. Or use the asymmetrical latch technique.
Once baby is latched on, check the following:
Baby has 1 inch of areola in her mouth, all the way around.
Baby’s lips are turned outward. If not, pull down on baby’s lower jaw.
Baby’s entire jaw moves as she sucks.

 You can hear baby swallowing milk.
There is no pinching sensation or pain.
If baby is not latched on correctly, insert a finger to gently release the
suction, take her off the breast, and try again.
Babies with lazy latch-on and weak sucking. Some babies initially need
more support at the breast because of low muscle tone, prematurity, or weak
sucking. Try these helpers:

Position yourself comfortably, with pillows
behind your back and under your elbow on the
side you will be using to feed the baby. Use
additional pillows on your lap to bring baby up to
the level of your nipple.
Hold baby on his side, tummy to tummy in the
cradle hold (see here).
Support the breast with your hand in a U-shape,
thumb and fingers 1½ to 2 inches behind the
areola. Press in and back slightly to make an
areola “sandwich” for your baby.
Depending on the size of your breasts and your
baby’s strength and maturity, you may have to
support the breast through the entire feeding.
Watch that baby doesn’t slip down to the end of
the nipple as you do this.

 Seek hands-on help from a lactation consultant
who is knowledgeable about “suck training”
techniques.
COMMON POSITIONING AND LATCH-ON
MISTAKES
Letting baby’s body turn and dangle instead of snuggling tummy to
tummy.
Not patiently waiting for baby’s mouth to open wide enough as you are
tickling her mouth with your nipple.
Allowing the lips to be tightly pursed inward instead of loosely turned
outward.
Allowing baby to apply pressure on the nipple instead of the areolar
tissue.
Being too passive or reluctant to teach baby proper latch-on.
We encourage the first-time breastfeeding mother to seek the services of a
lactation specialist within the first several days after birth in order to get a
right start with proper positioning and latch-on before incorrect habits
develop. As a result, breastfeeding problems dramatically decrease, and we
find that mothers and babies better enjoy their breastfeeding relationship.

OceanofPDF.com

 HOW YOUR BREASTS MAKE MILK
Understanding how your breasts produce milk helps you appreciate the
“womanly art of breastfeeding” and realize why proper positioning and
latch-on techniques are so important. You will notice that your breasts
enlarge during your pregnancy, which is nature’s message that your breasts
will nourish your baby after birth just as your enlarged uterus nourished
your baby before birth. Breast enlargement occurs primarily from the
growth of milk-producing glands. It is the number of milk-producing glands
and how they function that determine the mother’s milk-producing abilities,
not the size of her breasts. Differences in breast size are caused more by the
presence of non-milk-producing fat tissue than by glands. Small-breasted
mothers do not produce less milk than do large-breasted mothers.
Inside your breast the lactation system resembles a tree (see the
illustration here). Milk is produced in the glandular tissue, which is like the
leaves of the tree; milk travels from these milk cells through the milk ducts
(branches and trunk) into the milk sinuses (roots of the tree), which are the
reservoirs where milk is stored. Located beneath the areola, these sinuses
release milk through approximately fifteen to twenty openings in your
nipple. To drain the milk sinuses effectively, your baby’s mouth must be
positioned over these reservoirs so that her tongue can compress the sinuses

 where the milk is pooled. If baby sucks only on your nipple, she will get
little milk, unnecessarily traumatize your nipple, and not gain weight well.
Here’s how this magnificent milk-producing system works. Your baby’s
sucking stimulates special nerve sensors in your nipple to send messages to
the pituitary gland in your brain to secrete the hormone prolactin, which
stimulates the glands in your breasts to produce milk. The first milk your
baby receives at each feeding, the foremilk, is thin, like skim milk. As your
baby continues sucking, the nerve sensors in your nipple stimulate the
pituitary gland to secrete another hormone, oxytocin. This hormone flows
into your breasts and causes the elastic tissue around each of the many
individual milk glands to contract like a rubber band, squeezing a large
supply of milk and extra fat from the milk glands into the ducts and sinuses.
This later milk, or hindmilk, is much higher in fat and slightly higher in
protein and, for this reason, is more filling to baby and has greater
nutritional value. Hindmilk is the growth milk.

OceanofPDF.com

 Milk-Ejection Reflex

As the hindmilk is ejected from the milk glands into the milk sinuses, most
mothers have a tingling sensation in their breasts. Because of the “letting
down” of the creamier milk, this sudden outpouring of hindmilk used to be
called the let-down reflex.
Instead of “let-down reflex,” we prefer the more accurate term “milkejection reflex,” because of an embarrassing incident that occurred in my
first year of medical practice forty years ago. One day while making
hospital rounds, I entered the room of a new mother breastfeeding her baby
and asked if she had any problems. She answered, “Yes, I haven’t yet
experienced any letdown.” Having no idea what she was really talking
about, I assumed she was referring to depression, so I began counseling her
about postpartum depression. It was only later, after asking my wife about
the term “letdown,” that I learned my patient was referring to her breasts
and not her mind. At that point I realized that in all those years of medical
training I had been taught nothing about how the breasts make milk,
perhaps because it was not considered very scientific. Later when I became
a teacher of young doctors, I resolved that this unpardonable lack of
knowledge about such a beautifully human function would not be passed on
to the next generation of physicians. Because I still find the older term “let-

 down reflex” somewhat depressing, we will use the term “milk-ejection
reflex” (MER).
A good MER is the key to good milk. Different mothers feel different
sensations when experiencing a milk-ejection reflex. Usually a mother feels
a sensation of fullness or tingling occurring thirty to sixty seconds or more
after her baby starts sucking. This feeling may occur several times during a
feeding and may be felt at different times and varying intensities from
mother to mother. First-time mothers usually experience the MER by the
second or third week after beginning breastfeeding. Some mothers never
feel it, but recognize it by the leaking that occurs during the MER. Because
your milk production is tied to your emotions, when you feel well your
MER is more likely to work well. Fatigue, fear, tension, and pain are the
usual emotional enemies suppressing milk ejection. In this case your infant
receives mostly foremilk, which is less satisfying and less nutritious.
Because of the emotional link between hormones and milk production, an
upset mother leads to upset milk production and/or delivery, leading to an
upset baby.

OceanofPDF.com

 Supply and Demand and Nipple Difference

Milk production works on the principle of supply and demand. The more
your infant sucks correctly, the more milk you produce and deliver, until
you have both negotiated the proper balance. In fact, frequent sucking
contributes more to milk production than how long your baby feeds. When
your milk supply needs boosting as baby gets older, she will ask
(“demand”) to suck more frequently for a few days.
Here’s how proper latch-on and sucking help your baby get the most
milk. Stimulated by the touch of your nipple to her lips and the scent and
taste of your milk, your baby grasps the areola of your breast with her lips,
and her sucking draws the nipple far back into her mouth. Because your
breast tissue is very elastic, when your infant “milks” the areola with her
tongue in a rhythmic motion, the tissue elongates so that milk is delivered
far back into her mouth, and she can get plenty of milk out.
But babies suck milk differently through a rubber nipple. The rubber
nipple stays the same length during feeding, so the bottle-feeding baby’s
tongue motion and suck-swallow actions are different from, and less
energetic than, a breastfeeding baby’s. The problem is that sucking on the
breast in the same way as from an artificial nipple is likely to produce sore
nipples and a reduced milk supply. This nipple difference is why
breastfeeding babies, during the early weeks or months, should not be given

 many bottles when they are still learning to suck properly. Another problem
is that a baby may figure out the rubber nipple is easier and eventually balk
at the breast.

OceanofPDF.com

 COMMON

BREASTFEEDING

QUESTIONS

AND PROBLEMS
The following questions represent only a few of the situations a
breastfeeding mother is likely to encounter or wonder about. Many more
suggestions can be found in later chapters.

OceanofPDF.com

 Starting Out

When will my milk come in?
Your true milk fully appears between the second and fifth day after your
baby’s birth, depending on whether this is your first baby, what the fatigue
level of your birthing experience was, how well your baby learns to latch on
to your breasts, and how frequently and effectively your baby sucks. Until
your true milk appears, baby is getting colostrum, the premilk that is very
rich in protein, immune factors, and other ingredients that are beneficial to
your newly born baby. For about a week you have transitional milk, a
gradual changing from mostly colostrum to mostly milk. By ten to fourteen
days after birth your milk composition has fully matured. The following
situations encourage your milk to appear sooner and more comfortably:

experiencing an uncomplicated birth
encouraging early, frequent feedings
learning correct, comfortable latch-on
avoiding supplemental bottles unless medically
necessary
consulting with a lactation specialist
having a supportive husband, friends, and health
care professionals

 How often and how long should I feed my baby?
“Watch your baby and not the clock” is the advice of breastfeeding
veterans. Breastfeeding is not a mathematical exercise; as one breastfeeding
mother put it, “I don’t count the number of feedings any more than I count
the number of kisses.” In the early weeks of breastfeeding, baby sucks in
varying intensities and durations (sometimes for long periods—even as long
as an hour). Baby often falls asleep during a feeding and wakes up in a half
hour and wants to feed again. Remember, it is the frequency of
breastfeeding more than the duration that stimulates your milk-producing
hormones.
There is no such thing as an “empty breast.” You don’t have to wait for
your breasts to “fill up” again after a feeding. There is always some milk
there for baby. In fact, waiting a long time between feedings can be
counterproductive. Lactation researchers have noticed that as the time
between feedings increases, the fat level in the milk goes down. Frequent
feedings give your baby the high-fat, high-calorie milk he needs to grow.
Lactation science also reports that babies are remarkably adept at regulating
how much milk their mothers make. Some women’s breasts have lower
storage capacities than others. (This is not necessarily related to breast size.)
Researchers have found that babies of mothers with lower milk-storage
capacity simply nurse more often to make up for the lower volume at each
feeding.

 Your nipples will not get sore from breastfeeding too frequently or too
long, provided you have correct positioning and latch-on. Ignore the advice:
“Begin with three minutes on each side and gradually increase by one
minute each feeding until your baby is feeding ten minutes on each side.
After ten minutes that is enough.” Babies did not write these restrictive
rules nor did experienced breastfeeding mothers. It can take up to two
minutes of sucking for a new mother’s MER to activate. Mellow newborns
may take thirty minutes or more to get a full meal, whereas ravenous
feeders can finish off a breast within ten minutes. After months of
breastfeeding, when mother and baby are in harmony with each other, many
babies can get all the milk they need within the first ten minutes, but most
babies still linger at the breast for more sucking. Remember, sore nipples
are caused by improper latch-on and suck, not by how long baby sucks.
Even three minutes of incorrect sucking or latch-on makes nipples sore.
Realistically, expect your baby to breastfeed an average of every two
hours around the clock for the first month to six weeks, or about ten to
twelve feeds every twenty-four hours. Then gradually the frequency of
feedings diminishes. In the early weeks when you and your baby are
establishing appropriate milk-supply levels, let your baby breastfeed as
frequently and as long as he wishes and your lifestyle permits.

OceanofPDF.com

 Sore Nipples

What if my nipples are getting sore?
At the first sign of nipple soreness, scrutinize your technique of positioning
and latch-on to be sure that you are not letting your baby apply pressure
directly on your nipple rather than on your areola. Be particularly certain
that your baby is opening her mouth wide enough and everting both lips,
especially the lower. It is often hard for the mother herself to see if baby’s
lower lip is everted. Ask an experienced breastfeeding mother to observe
your latch-on, and try the technique described earlier to evert his lower lip.
If you immediately sense less nipple soreness, then a tight latch-on is the
problem. Also, change the way baby is angled and put baby to the least-sore
breast first.

TREATING TONGUE-TIE
Tongue-tie means that the membrane (called the frenulum) that attaches the
tongue to the floor of the mouth is shorter than usual. If the tongue-tie is
interfering with breastfeeding, the frenulum can be easily clipped to release
the tongue, enabling baby to suck more efficiently. Signs that your baby’s
frenulum is tight enough to warrant clipping are:
Baby’s tongue tip does not protrude past the lower gum.
When baby cries, opens her mouth wide, or tries to suck, a dent forms
in the tip of the tongue, resembling the dip in the top of a heart shape.

 Latch-on is painful to mother. Nipples are very sore, cracked, or
bleeding.
Baby needs to feed longer, more frequently, tires easily, and often bites
or chews the nipple.
After the frenulum has been clipped, mother almost immediately notices
that latch-on is more comfortable and baby is able to nurse more effectively.
Sometimes the frenulum can look tight, but if baby has a good latch-on, is
getting milk efficiently, and the nipples are not sore during the feeding,
there is no need to clip the frenulum.
Clipping the frenulum is a quick and painless procedure that can be done
in your doctor’s office. In the early weeks, the frenulum is so thin that it’s
easy to painlessly clip, and it usually yields only a few drops of blood, or
none at all. While baby’s mouth is open (either normally open or when
crying), the doctor holds the tip of the tongue with a piece of gauze
(sometimes if the mouth is open wide enough, holding the tongue is not
even necessary) and uses scissors to clip the frenulum back to where it joins
the base of the tongue. The longer the frenulum is left unclipped, the more
muscular the tether can become and the more extensive and difficult is the
clipping procedure.
We routinely clip tight tongues in our office, and more pediatricians are
training in this simple procedure. ENT specialists can also perform it. It is
not worth enduring painful latch-on and an unsuccessful breastfeeding
experience while waiting for baby’s tongue to naturally loosen up as she
grows.
Nipple care. Be sure the surface of your nipples is free of wetness when not
“in use.” Use fresh breast pads, without plastic liners, to be sure no moisture
is in contact with your tender skin. (See here for more about breast pads.)
Before putting your bra flap up, gently blot the wetness off with a soft cloth.
It used to be recommended that you air dry your nipples, expose your
nipples to sun, or even use a hair dryer to speed drying. For some women,

 quick drying can actually make delicate nipple tissue crack more by
disturbing the moisture balance needed for skin softness and elasticity.
Transitional tenderness. Many women experience a transitional period of
tenderness as the skin of the nipple acclimatizes itself to the sucking. If you
experience this tenderness, check your latch-on techniques. Also, massage
your nipples after feeding to promote circulation to the tissues. The best
massage medium is colostrum or breast milk. Additionally, the little bumps
on the areola around your nipples are glands that secrete a cleansing and
lubricating oil to protect the nipples and keep them clean. Therefore, avoid
using soap on your nipples, since it removes these natural oils and
encourages dryness and cracking.

NIPPLE SHIELDS: YES OR NO?
These flexible plastic or silicon covers that fit over the nipple, breast, and
areola have become a common tool in hospitals to help protect sensitive
nipples during the early days of nursing. Yet well-meaning nurses may be
too quick to offer these to a new mom at the first sign of nipple pain, or if
mom’s nipples are flat or inverted, instead of first ensuring proper latch-on
and positioning techniques. We believe that nipple shields are overused and
can lead to problems such as inadequate milk supply down the road. Babies
may also become dependent on them. These shields can be a useful tool for
allowing cracked nipples to heal for a few days, for example, or for
assistance in latching on when other techniques have failed, but they should
be used only under the expert guidance of a lactation consultant.
First aid for nipples. Women with a predisposition to dry skin can develop
dry, cracked nipples even when practicing correct positioning and latch-on.
Do not use oils or creams that need to be washed off before breastfeeding,

 even if the hospital offers you one. Try Lansinoh, a pure, hypoallergenic,
pesticide-free lanolin, if cracking and fissuring develop and breast milk
alone as a massage medium is not helping. Lansinoh promotes healing by
encouraging normal tissue moisture, and it does not have to be washed off
before baby breastfeeds.
If your nipples become more sore, cracked, or fissured in spite of these
remedies, you need hands-on help from a lactation consultant. She will
work with your technique and/or your baby’s suck and will help you
manage the feeding of your baby until the problem is solved.
My baby feeds constantly, my nipples are wearing out, and I’m wearing
out. Can I give him a pacifier?
Many babies love to suck for comfort, not only for nourishment; and there
is no better pacifier than a mother suckling an upset baby peacefully off to
sleep. Realistically, however, the human pacifier may need a rest. We
discourage the use of artificial pacifiers in the early weeks while baby is
learning correct sucking patterns at your breast. After his sucking patterns
mature a pacifier can be a real lifesaver for a tired mother, and a soothing
comforter for an insatiable sucker. (See much more on pacifiers, here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Is Baby Getting Enough?

How do I know my baby is getting enough milk?
After the first month or two you will know intuitively that your baby is
getting enough milk. She will feel and look heavier. In the first few weeks,
however, it is not as easy to tell, especially if you are a first-time mother.
Here are some signs baby is getting enough milk in the first few weeks.

BREASTFED BABIES ARE LEANER
A 1992 study from the University of California at Davis compared the
growth patterns of normal, healthy breastfed and formula-fed infants.
Dubbed the DARLING study (Davis Area Research on Lactation, Infant
Nutrition, and Growth), the investigation found that the two groups showed
similar weight gain during the first three months, but that the weight-forlength scores were higher for formula-fed infants between four and eighteen
months, suggesting that breastfed babies were leaner. The breastfed infants
averaged 1½ pounds (680 grams) less weight gain during the first twelve
months.
Your doctor will track your baby’s growth chart. Current charts are
based on breastfed babies from various countries around the world and are
used as a guideline for adequate growth. Let your baby set the standard, not
the charts. If your infant is gaining weight at a reasonable rate and appears
healthy and content, he’s probably doing just fine. (Growth charts are
discussed in more detail here.)

 A baby who is getting a sufficient volume of milk
will usually have at least six to eight wet cloth
diapers (four to six disposable diapers) per day
after the initial three days of start-up time.
Enough wet diapers tell you that your baby is safe
from dehydration.
Your baby’s stool changes give you another clue
to how much milk she is getting. In the first week
your baby’s stools should normally go from sticky
black to green to brown; as soon as your rich,
creamy hindmilk appears, stools become more
yellow. Once your baby’s stool becomes like
yellow, seedy mustard, this is a sign that your
newborn is getting enough of the higher-calorie
hindmilk. In the first month or two a baby who is
getting enough high-fat milk will usually have at
least two or three yellow, seedy stools a day.
Because breast milk has a natural laxative effect,
some breastfed babies may even have a stool
during or following each feeding.
Your breasts may feel full before feedings, less
full after feedings, and leak between feedings—
all signs of sufficient milk production and
delivery. After a few months leaking usually
subsides, even though you have sufficient milk.

 Your baby’s sucking styles and level of
contentment are other guides to sufficient milk. If
you feel your baby sucking vigorously, hear her
swallowing, feel your milk-ejection reflex, and
witness your baby drift contentedly off to sleep,
chances are she is getting enough milk.
How much weight should my baby gain during the first month?
Your baby’s weight gain is another indicator of sufficient milk. After the
initial weight loss during the first week (usually 5–8 percent of your baby’s
weight, or between 6 and 10 ounces/170–280 grams), babies getting
sufficient nutrition gain an average of 4–7 ounces (115–200 grams) a week
for the first few weeks, thereafter an average of 1–2 pounds (450–900
grams) per month for the first six months, and 1 pound per month from six
months to one year. Babies usually lengthen about an inch (2.5 centimeters)
a month during the first six months. Weight and height gains depend
somewhat on baby’s body type (see here).
New mothers are zealous weight watchers. While it is not true that good
weight gain is an index of good mothering, a baby’s weight gain may be
some tangible reward for mothers for all those days and nights of
breastfeeding, especially since breasts don’t have ounce-measurement lines
mothers can refer to.

 My ten-day-old baby has plenty of wet diapers, but he has not yet regained
his birth weight. Should I be concerned?
Your baby is probably getting big enough volumes of milk, but his slow
weight gain suggests that he may not be getting enough calories to grow. If
his eyes and mouth appear moist and he is wetting six to eight cloth diapers
or four to six disposables each day, he is not dehydrated. He is getting the
fluid he needs from your milk, but he may not be getting enough fat. He
may look scrawny. When you pinch a piece of skin on an undernourished
baby, it is loose and wrinkled because there is not much fat underneath. A
baby who is not getting enough calories cries to be fed often but fusses
because he is never satisfied. Breastfed babies who are growing and gaining
well will have two to three good-size stools every day. Some will soil their
diapers at each feeding. What goes in one end quickly comes out the other.
The baby who is not gaining weight may have infrequent stools—fewer
than one per day, or several that are little more than a stain in the diaper.
The problem here is that your baby is not getting enough of the high-fat
hindmilk. The thin, watery foremilk provides enough fluid for him, but it
doesn’t have the extra calories needed for growth. Your baby is getting
“skim milk” when he needs whole milk. This doesn’t mean there’s a
problem with your milk-making ability, but you do need to improve the
delivery system. The high-fat milk is released later in the feeding, after your
milk-ejection reflex has been triggered, sending the “cream” down into the
ducts. If you automatically switch sides after five minutes or ten minutes on
one breast, your baby may get only foremilk on both sides. Encourage your

 baby to nurse longer on each side until the milk becomes more creamy and
helps him feel good and full. A good guideline for babies who nurse
actively is “finish the first breast first.” Let baby decide when to switch,
rather than following the clock or a schedule.
If your baby tends to fall asleep after only a few minutes of nursing, you
need to encourage him to nurse longer and more vigorously. When he starts
to drift off, take him off the breast, wake him up by burping him gently, and
then latch him on again. You may have to repeat this process several times
until he has nursed actively for at least ten to fifteen minutes. Longer, more
vigorous nursing stimulates more milk-ejection reflexes and puts more meat
on baby’s bones. Many of the tips on increasing your milk supply, below,
will help you get more of your high-fat hindmilk into your baby, especially
double-feeding and massaging your breasts during feedings.

Dr. Bill notes: There are babies who are normally slow weight-gainers.
They are often “banana” body-type (long, lanky) babies who put more of
their calories into height than weight, or normal petite babies from petite
parents. Unlike the failure-to-thrive infants, these babies produce the
normal number of stools, and their skin does not have a loose, wrinkly
appearance.

Does my breastfed baby need extra water and vitamins?

 Breastfed babies do not need extra water, as formula-fed babies do. Your
breast milk is very high in water, while formula is more concentrated. We
discourage extra water, not because of the water itself, but because of the
artificial nipple causing breastfeeding disharmony if babies are given water
in a bottle in the newborn period.
A healthy term baby who is getting enough breast milk does not need
multivitamin supplements, unless recommended by your doctor for your
baby’s special nutritional needs. When baby is around nine months of age,
your health care provider may recommend a multivitamin with iron if
baby’s blood count or diet is low in iron.
The American Academy of Pediatrics now recommends that
breastfeeding mothers and their babies take a vitamin D supplement from
day one. Depending on your diet and your baby’s exposure to sunshine, you
may want to discuss this supplementation with your baby’s doctor.

OceanofPDF.com

 Increasing Your Milk Supply

Our three-week-old baby doesn’t seem to be gaining as much weight as
she should, and I don’t feel I have enough milk. How can I increase my
milk supply?
Most delays in milk production are the result of one or several of the
following: improper positioning and latch-on, interference in the harmony
between mother and baby, a tired mother in a busy nest, or scheduled
feedings. Go through the following steps.
Weigh baby more frequently. Consult your doctor and arrange to bring
your baby into the office just for a weight check twice a week.
Seek assistance. Consult a lactation specialist to review your positioning
and latch-on techniques and to evaluate your baby’s suck.
Get support. Contact breastfeeding and mothering organizations such as
your local La Leche League.
Avoid negative advisers. “Are you sure she’s getting enough milk?” “I
couldn’t breastfeed either….” You don’t need discouragement when you are

 trying to build up your confidence as a new mother. Surround yourself with
supportive people. Breastfeeding is a confidence game.
Check your nest. Is your nest too busy? Temporarily shelve all
commitments that drain your energy from breastfeeding your baby. Get help
with the older children.
Take your baby to bed. Feed nestled close to each other. Nap nursing and
night nursing are powerful stimulators of milk production, since the milkproducing hormones are best secreted while you are asleep.
Undress your baby during feeding. If she is small (under 8 pounds/3.6
kilograms), you need to keep baby warm by placing a blanket around her,
but still allowing tummy-to-tummy contact. Skin-to-skin contact helps
awaken sleepy babies and stimulates less enthusiastic feeders.
Don’t swaddle baby during the day. A swaddled baby may sleep three-to
four-hour stretches. Letting baby steep “loose” will shorten the naps and
increase the nursing.

BUILDING YOUR MILK BANK
Your breastfeeding is going great. Your supply meets baby’s demand, and
the thought of ever giving your baby canned milk is foreign to you. But the
best-laid plans of breastfeeding mothers sometimes go astray. A
circumstance beyond your control, such as a sudden hospitalization, may
cause an abrupt, unplanned break in your breastfeeding. Be prepared for
this rainy day. Open an “account” in your freezer. Stockpile at least a few
days’ worth of this white gold. It’s a wise investment in your baby’s

 nutritional future (see “Expressing Milk,” here, for details on collecting and
storing breast milk).
Increase the frequency of feeding. Give at least one feeding every two
hours, and wake your baby during the day if she sleeps more than three
hours. If you have a sleepy baby, let her sleep nestled against your breasts.
This skin-to-skin contact stimulates milk flow.
Think baby, think milk. While you are feeding, stroke and cuddle your
baby, using a lot of skin-to-skin contact, a custom called grooming. These
maternal behaviors stimulate your milk-producing hormones.
Sleep when your baby sleeps. This requires delaying or delegating the
many seemingly pressing household chores. If you are blessed with a baby
who feeds frequently, you may think, “I don’t get anything done.” But you
are getting something done. You are doing the most important job in the
world—mothering a human being.
Nurse longer. Don’t limit the length of baby’s feedings to a certain number
of minutes per side. Give baby the chance to finish the first breast before
switching to the second. He needs to get the high-fat hindmilk on the first
side. This low-volume, high-calorie milk helps babies grow and rewards
them for their sucking. If you switch breasts after only a few minutes, baby
will get only the watery foremilk from both sides. This fills baby’s tummy
but may not give him enough calories to put on weight. Longer nursing
stimulates more milk-ejection reflexes and brings more fat down to baby.

 Try switch feeding. In the traditional method of breastfeeding, you
encourage your baby to suck as she wishes at one breast (usually around ten
minutes) and to complete her feedings on the second breast, reversing the
process on the next feeding. Switch feeding, also called the burp-and-switch
technique, operates as follows: Let your baby suck at the first breast until
the intensity of her suck and swallow diminishes and her eyes start to close
(usually three to five minutes). Don’t watch the clock, but watch your baby
for these signs that she is losing interest in continuing to suck on that breast.
As soon as these signs appear, remove her from the breast, burp her well,
and switch to the next breast until her sucking diminishes again; stop, burp
her a second time and repeat the entire process back to the first breast and
then to the other again. This burp-and-switch technique encourages a
creamier, high-calorie hindmilk to be released because the milk-ejection
reflex is stimulated each time you switch. This technique is particularly
effective for the sleepy baby, the “nipper-napper,” who does not feed
enthusiastically. The frequent switching keeps her awake, and the burping
makes more room in the tiny stomach for more milk.
Try double feeding. This technique operates on the same principle as
switch feeding, increasing the fat content of your milk and giving baby a
greater volume of hindmilk. After you feed your baby and she seems
content, burp her and carry her around in an upright position for ten to
twenty minutes. Then offer her the breast again. With less air in her tummy,
there will be room for more milk, and the milk that is there and ready for
her in your breasts will be high in fat. You’ll be topping her off with more

 of what she needs to grow. The longer you wait between feedings, the lower
the fat content of your foremilk.
Wear your baby. Carry baby in a sling as often as you can between
feedings. The close proximity of baby to your breast not only stimulates
more milk production but also reminds baby to feed. When she roots toward
your breast, breastfeed her in the sling. Some babies feed better on the
move. (See here for suggestions on breastfeeding while wearing baby.)
Massage your breasts before and during feedings. Gentle breast massage
before a feeding can help stimulate your milk-ejection reflex, so that the
milk is ready and flowing when baby latches on. Compressing the breast
during feedings helps move the milk down toward the nipple, mimicking a
milk-ejection reflex. You can use this technique to encourage baby to nurse
longer. When his sucking slows or he seems to be losing interest, use the
hand that is supporting the breast to massage milk down toward the nipple.
You will notice baby start to swallow and suck more actively as the milk
flows into the breast’s sinuses and out the nipple. Work your hand around
the breast so that all the ducts get this extra stimulation.
Attempt to relax during breastfeeding. The milk-ejection reflex can be
inhibited if you are physically and emotionally tense. Use the relaxation
techniques you learned in childbirth class, use pillows, have someone rub
your back, visualize flowing streams, play soothing tapes, feel confident in

 yourself. (See here for more suggestions on how to relax during
breastfeeding.)
Try herbal teas. Natural remedies to increase milk production are based
more on folklore than on real evidence. In our practice and during our own
breastfeeding we have found fenugreek tea helps milk production. Here’s
the Sears recipe: Steep 1 teaspoon of fenugreek seeds in a cup of boilinghot water for about five minutes, or until the water is mildly colored and
scented (the tea has a sweet maplelike flavor). Martha has found a few cups
of this tea to be very helpful during times when her milk supply seems to be
lagging. Some mothers report better success with Mother’s Milk tea, which
contains some fenugreek, and other teas reported in herbal literature to help
with milk supply. Whether these teas really help physically or
psychologically is irrelevant. So try them—relax and enjoy.

OceanofPDF.com

 Engorgement

What happens if I have too much milk and become engorged?
Engorgement, a pronounced filling and swelling of your breasts that causes
them to become very hard and painful, is your body’s signal that the supplyand-demand mechanism is out of balance. Engorgement is a problem for
both mother and baby. For mother, it can be very painful, and, if left
untreated, can progress into a debilitating breast infection.
This condition is also uncomfortable for baby. If your breasts are
engorged, the nipple angle flattens, preventing baby from properly latching
on. When this happens, your baby sucks your nipple but cannot get enough
of the areolar tissue into her mouth to compress the milk sinuses. As a
result, the baby stimulates more milk to enter the breast but is unable to
empty it, further aggravating engorgement and setting up a vicious circle.
As the breast tissue swells, the milk cannot flow freely. Baby gets less milk
and needs to feed more frequently; mother gets more engorged, and the
breastfeeding pair is in trouble. You can prevent engorgement by following
the right-start tips for breastfeeding, feeding on cue rather than on schedule,
and using correct positioning and latch-on techniques.

 If engorgement occurs while you are still in the hospital, use an electric
breast pump to release some of the extra milk in order to soften the areola,
so that baby can latch on and more effectively empty your breasts. Usually,
in the first week, your breasts slowly and steadily build up milk, and baby
should drain your breasts at the same rate as the milk is produced. Some
fullness is common as your milk increases during the first week, but it
should subside with proper positioning and latch-on, frequent feeding, and
lots of rest. Sometimes milk increases suddenly around the third or fourth
day, causing mothers to exclaim, “I awakened with these two painful
boulders on my chest.” Use a breast pump, preferably electric, immediately
to relieve this engorgement before it progresses. In the past, warm
compresses were recommended, but now that engorgement is better
understood, we realize that heat can actually do more harm by increasing
tissue swelling. You will need to apply cold compresses or packs of crushed
ice (use a thin cloth between your skin and the ice pack to prevent frostbite)
until the swelling subsides enough for the milk to flow. This cool therapy
will also relieve the heat and pain in your breasts.
You can keep fullness from developing into engorgement once you are
home by standing in a warm shower, soaking your breasts in warm water in
a basin, or applying warm compresses for ten minutes before expressing or
feeding. This helps trigger your milk-ejection reflex so baby will get milk
flowing sooner and empty your breasts better. If your areola is too full for
your baby to latch on correctly, then express some milk before feeding to
soften your areola enough so that your baby can grasp the areola and not
only your nipple.

 If fullness progresses to engorgement, do not sit patiently and wait for
engorgement to subside. Use continuous ice packs between feedings to
alleviate your pain and reduce swelling, and if possible rent an electric
breast pump until you can reach a lactation consultant for help with your
breastfeeding technique. If your baby is nursing well, pump only enough
milk to soften the areola so that baby can latch on. If your newborn is not
yet nursing effectively at the breast, you will need to pump every two to
three hours to keep the milk flowing and to stimulate a good milk supply. A
well-fitting bra that is not too tight for support is helpful, and rest is a must.
Above all, don’t stop breastfeeding! The breasts must be drained.
Unrelieved engorgement often leads to a breast infection called mastitis.
The symptoms resemble the flu: fatigue, fever, chills, and aches. Your
breasts may be generally engorged or you may feel a localized swollen,
tender, red, warm area. To treat, apply moist heat (warm towel or jet of
warm water in shower) to the sore area for ten minutes at least four times
daily, take ibuprofen for fever and pain and a doctor-prescribed antibiotic
(both safe while breastfeeding), and rest. Unless you are advised not to by
your lactation consultant, it is helpful to continue breastfeeding. The breast
must be emptied (either by baby or by pumping) for the infection to heal.
(For information on taking probiotics with antibiotics, see here.)
If you have enjoyed uncomplicated breastfeeding and suddenly you are
becoming engorged, take inventory of your feeding techniques, or take this
as a signal that your nest or your schedule is too busy. Listen to your body;
it is trying to tell you something.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Needs to Relax

I’m a tense person. How can I better relax during breastfeeding?
The hormone prolactin has a calming effect, yet emotional stress or physical
stress (exhaustion, pain, illness) can actually interfere with the milkreleasing hormone, oxytocin, inhibiting the MER. Then if your milk doesn’t
flow, baby comes unglued. Babies are quick to pick up on mother’s tension,
so relaxation is a valuable skill to cultivate. Try the following tips.
Think baby. Before beginning to breastfeed, set the tone for the time ahead
by focusing on the activity at hand—put aside conflicting concerns and
think baby. Imagine yourself breastfeeding; imagine the movements and
facial expressions of your baby that you enjoy most. Massage your baby.
Stroke and cuddle your baby using a lot of skin-to-skin contact. All these
images and activities get the relaxing hormones flowing, helping you to
unwind before beginning to feed.
Minimize distractions. Prior to feeding eat a healthful snack and drink
some water or juice. A hot shower, warm bath, or brief nap before feeding
time is good relaxation therapy. Try the relaxation techniques and breathing
exercises you learned during childbirth class. Play relaxing music prior to

 and during breastfeeding. Visualize a fountain flowing from your breasts.
Ask someone to stand behind your chair and massage your neck, shoulders,
and upper back. As you accomplish latch-on, with all your pillows in place,
take a deep abdominal breath and exhale slowly, just as you learned for
childbirth, letting all the tension flow away from your neck, back, and arms.
Feed in a warm bath. Water therapy helps if you are extremely tense. Sit
in a warm bath with the water level just below your breasts. Breastfeed
baby (who is also half-immersed in warm water) as you recline in the tub. A
safety tip: Don’t try to step into a filled tub while holding a baby. You may
slip. Place baby on a towel next to the tub until you are comfortably settled,
or have someone else hand your baby to you after you are reclining in the
tub.
Prepare a breastfeeding station. This idea has helped Martha relax while
feeding our babies amid all the activities of a busy family. This station is an
area in your home especially set up as a nest for mother and baby,
containing your favorite chair (preferably an armchair or a rocking chair
with arms at a comfortable height to support your arms while holding
baby), plenty of pillows, a footstool, soothing music, a relaxing book,
nutritious nibbles such as fruit bits or trail mix, and juice or water. You will
be spending a lot of time in this nest, so make it inviting and functional.
Anticipate your needs for the hour or so you may be spending there—for
instance, extra diapering supplies and baby clothes, a burping cloth, a waste
can. If you have a toddler and/or preschooler, include snacks for him and

 some favorite activities you save just for feeding time. You may need to
have one feeding station located where you can keep him contained in a
safe area. It’s hard to relax if you have to worry about what he’s getting
into. Some toddlers tolerate new baby feeding time better if you actually set
up your station on the floor. This gives the message that you are accessible.
Breastfeeding itself is a self-relaxing cycle. The more you breastfeed, the
more relaxing hormones you produce, which help you breastfeed better.

A breastfeeding station, a designated area set up with what you need for
comfort and efficiency, can help make breastfeeding more relaxed and
enjoyable.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Make Time for Toddler

We have a two-year-old and I’m nursing a new baby. Every time I sit
down to nurse he wants to play. Any suggestions?
Consider your toddler’s viewpoint. Baby is getting all the attention, the
milk, and the cuddling that he used to have. Here’s how we have learned to
juggle the needs of two children at the same time. Feed your baby in a baby
sling. This frees one or both hands to play with your toddler. Sit on the floor
and throw a ball, stack blocks, or read a book with your toddler while baby
is comfortably feeding in the sling. Next, expand the feeding-station idea to
include items for your toddler, a basket of reserved toys, favorite books, and
activities such as blocks. Sit down on the floor with your back against the
couch and as you feed your baby, play with your toddler. Your toddler will
view the feeding station as a special place for him, too. Regard the feeding
station, toys, or activities as only for breastfeeding time so that your toddler
learns that feeding time for baby is also a special playtime for him.
Eventually your toddler will realize, “Mom does special things with me that
she doesn’t do at any other time.” By sitting on the floor and feeding your
baby, you avoid the scene of your toddler trying to climb up on your lap to
be where the action is. Extending feeding time to include toddler activity

 also helps you relax. You don’t have to wonder what mischief your toddler
is getting into in the other room. Also include your toddler in the napnursing scene. While you nap nurse your baby, invite your toddler to
snuggle up next to you—for a family nap.

OceanofPDF.com

 If Baby Bites

Our seven-month-old bites during feeding, and I find this annoying. What
can I do?
Your natural inclination is to pull your baby away from the breast and
scream, “No!” You can hardly blame the mother for a violent reaction,
especially if it is a hard bite, but some babies are so bothered by a harsh
reaction to their biting that they actually stop breastfeeding for a few days—
called a breastfeeding strike.
Instead of the yank-and-yell response, when you sense baby’s teeth
coming down to bite, draw her way in close to your breast, and she will
automatically let go in order to open her mouth more and uncover her nose
to breathe. Don’t try to disengage yourself from the clenched teeth. Your
baby will lessen her bite as she realizes that she can’t both bite and breathe.
After several times of this counterinstinctive trick of pulling your baby in
close to you when she bites, your baby will realize that biting triggers an
uncomfortable position, and she will adjust it. It’s okay to say no, because
baby needs to learn that some undesirable action occurs when she bites, but
don’t frighten her.

 Keep a log of what triggers the biting and when she bites. Biting can be
baby’s way of telling you she’s finished eating. If she chomps at the end of
a feeding, interrupt the feeding before she has a chance to bite. Teething can
also create the urge to chomp. Keep some teething toys in the freezer, such
as a frozen banana or a cold washcloth, and let her chomp on these before
or at the end of a feeding. These techniques plus saying, “Ouch, that hurts
Mama!” will help teach your baby breastfeeding manners and preserve your
breasts. (For additional tips, see the discussion of the chomper, here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Breastfeeding As Child Spacing

I have heard that breastfeeding can be a natural contraceptive. How
reliable is this method?
Breastfeeding can be very effective as a natural method of child spacing.
Here’s why. The milk-making hormone, prolactin, suppresses the release of
the fertility hormones. When prolactin levels are high, women do not
ovulate or menstruate. What keeps prolactin levels high? Frequent
breastfeeding—feeding according to baby’s cues. Long stretches of time
between nursing can allow prolactin levels to fall and fertility hormones to
take over. The key to delaying the return to fertility is to keep prolactin
levels high with frequent feeding, both day and night. Breastfeeding can
provide reliable child spacing, as long as you follow the rules.
Researchers have developed guidelines for couples who want to space
their babies naturally. These rules are the basis of the lactational
amenorrhea method of natural family planning, or LAM for short. You can
rely on breastfeeding to prevent pregnancy if you can answer no to the
following three questions:

Has your menstrual period returned?

 Are you using bottles or pacifiers, or allowing
long periods without breastfeeding, either during
the day (more than three hours) or at night (more
than six hours)?
Is your baby more than six months old?
Studies have shown that mothers who follow the LAM guidelines have a
less than 2 percent chance of becoming pregnant in the first six months after
birth. This compares favorably with the protection from pregnancy offered
by artificial methods of birth control. Many mothers enjoy longer periods of
infertility and no menses, as long as their babies continue to nurse
frequently and rely on the breast for most of their nourishment. Studies
have shown that the following practices can prolong the period in which
you are unable to conceive:

Encourage unrestricted breastfeeding without
regard to daytime or nighttime scheduling.
Sleep with your baby and allow unrestricted night
feeding.
Avoid supplemental bottles or pacifiers. All of
baby’s sucking should be at the breast.
Delay solid foods for at least six months. When
introduced they should add to baby’s nutrition,
not substitute for breastfeeding.

 Mothers who follow these rules enjoy an average of 14.5 months of
amenorrhea and infertility. Every mother and baby pair, however, is
different, and periods will return sooner for some mothers and later for
others. Some women may not ovulate during their first few cycles.
Approximately 5 percent of women ovulate (and thus are fertile) before
ever having a period; the longer you’ve gone without having a period, the
more likely this is to happen. For more thorough details on natural family
planning, see “Resources,” here.

SEARS PARENTING LIBRARY ALERT
For our complete guide to breastfeeding, see The Breastfeeding Book.

OceanofPDF.com

 The Breastfeeding Mother: Choices,
Challenges

By now we hope you realize breastfeeding does make a difference—for
mother and baby. But there are medical, social, and economic situations that
may challenge this way of nurturing. Here are some ideas for making
breastfeeding easier in a variety of circumstances.

OceanofPDF.com

 EATING RIGHT DURING BREASTFEEDING
Just as your body provided the nutrients your baby needed to grow during
your pregnancy, your milk delivers the nutrients baby needs to develop
outside the womb during the first years of life. Your body uses nutrients
more efficiently while you are lactating so that there is enough for both
baby and you. It also relies on fat stores left over from pregnancy for energy
to make milk. But you are still “eating for two.” You need between 300 and
500 extra nutritious calories a day to make milk for your baby.
Your eating plan for breastfeeding should include the nutritious foods
you normally eat, but more of them. If you eat foods that are good for you,
you will have more energy and feel better as you recover from birth and
weather the stress of new motherhood. Avoiding the empty calories of highfat, high-sugar foods will also help you regain your prepregnancy weight
and figure. Candies, desserts, soda pop, and packaged snack foods offer
little nutritional value. Instead, eat nutrient-dense foods that provide a lot of
nutrition for each calorie. For balanced nourishment, include nutrient-rich
foods from the five basic food groups:

whole grain bread, cereal, rice, and pasta group
(six to eleven servings daily)
vegetable group (three to five servings daily)

 fruit group (two to four servings daily)
fish, meat, poultry, dry beans, eggs, and nuts
group (two to three servings daily)
milk, yogurt, and cheese group (two to three
servings daily)
Each day consume foods from each of these groups, portioned for balanced
nutrition into the three basic calorie groups:

Carbohydrates should supply 50–55 percent of
your total daily calories, and the major portion of
this energy source should be in the form of
healthy sugars, which give a steady release of
energy, chiefly pasta, grains, and fruit. (See the
discussion of healthy sugars, here.)
Healthy fats should make up around 30 percent of
your total daily calories. (For a list of foods that
contain healthy fats, see here.)
Proteins should make up 15–20 percent of your
daily calories. (For a list of protein-rich foods, see
here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Calcium Is Good Bone Food

You need a lot of calcium during pregnancy and lactation. To nourish
rapidly growing bones, calcium is important to baby. Don’t let the fear of
depleting your own calcium reserves scare you from breastfeeding. Recent
studies show that breastfeeding may actually protect mother’s bones against
osteoporosis. The calcium that is taken from mother’s bones during
lactation is returned during and after weaning, resulting in greater bone
density than before pregnancy.

SMART FATS FOR BABY, HEALTHY FATS FOR
MOM
Dr. Bill advises: Low-fat diets are not healthy for infants. Instead, feed baby
a right-fat diet.
Babies need fat to build brain and nerve tissue, and 50 percent of the
calories in your milk come from fat.
You can boost the levels of good fats in your milk by eating more oily
fish, such as salmon, which contains omega-3 fatty acids. (See “Go Fish!,”
here.) Omega-3 fatty acids include the “smart fat” DHA, which builds
better baby brains. A 2006 study revealed that the omega-3 DHA content of

 breast milk was highest in high-seafood-eating cultures, such as in Japan,
and lowest in the United States and Canada. The good news is, this research
also showed that breastfeeding mothers who took omega-3 fish oil
supplements had increased the content of DHA in their breast milk. Over
the past decade, research on the smartest fats for mother and baby
concluded that mothers who ate sufficient omega-3s, primarily from oily
seafood and/or fish oil supplements, during pregnancy and breastfeeding
experienced these health benefits:
feeling happier, with less postpartum depression
having smarter, healthier babies who had better visual acuity and fewer
allergies, and children with higher IQ scores
How much daily omega-3 fat should you eat? We suggest 1,000
milligrams of omega-3 EPA/DHA per day. You can achieve this by eating
12 ounces of safe, oily seafood, such as salmon, per week (this would give
you 500 milligrams of omega-3 fats per day), plus take a daily fish oil
supplement of 500 milligrams EPA/DHA.
A new and exciting area of research shows how eating the right balance
of dietary fats, such as oils, can yield a better balance of fats in mother’s
breast milk. An easy way to remember this: Give yourself an oil change. Eat
more of the best oils for breast milk: fish oil, flax oil, olive oil, and virgin
coconut oil; eat less vegetable oils, such as corn, soy, sunflower, and
cottonseed oil; and deliberately eat nothing that contains factory-made
hydrogenated oils.

SEARS PARENTING LIBRARY ALERT
If you wish to delve into the science of how smarter fats in your breast milk
help build smarter baby brains, and also the safest and most nutritious
seafood for breastfeeding mothers, see our new book The Omega-3 Effect
(Little, Brown, 2012).
You don’t have to drink milk to make milk; cows don’t! If you don’t like
milk or are allergic to or intolerant of it, you can get all of the bone-building
mineral you need from the following calcium-rich nondairy foods: sardines,

 soybeans, broccoli, beans, salmon, tofu, watercress, kale, collards, okra,
dried beans, greens, raisins, dried figs, and carrot juice. Since dairy products
are still one of the best sources of calcium, cheese and yogurt are good
sources if you dislike milk but are not intolerant of or allergic to it.

Iron—The Blood-Building Element

Sufficient iron intake is vital to the postpartum mother. Several iron-rich
foods are lean red meat, fish, poultry, prune juice, and iron-fortified cereals
(see here for more iron-rich foods). To improve the absorption of iron from
food, eat or drink vitamin C–rich foods (for example, fruit and vegetable
juices) along with it—combinations like meatballs and tomato sauce, ironfortified cereals or eggs and orange juice. As an added nutritional perk,
breastfeeding has an iron-preserving effect by suppressing your menstrual
cycles.

OceanofPDF.com

 Extra Vitamins?

Because of the extra nutritional needs of mother and baby, continue your
prenatal vitamin supplements during breastfeeding, unless your doctor
advises otherwise. To boost your vitamin D naturally, treat yourself to short,
frequent doses of sunlight.

LACTADE
To the smoothie recipe here add 1 serving of soy lecithin and 1 serving of
soy protein. Studies suggest that lecithin can improve milk duct drainage,
and extra soy protein can increase the volume of a mother’s milk.

OceanofPDF.com

 Extra Fluids

A breastfeeding mother’s best noncalorie drink is water. Enjoy a glass of
water or diluted juice just before breastfeeding. Most mothers drink at least
eight glasses of fluids a day. As a volume guide, drink as your thirst urges.
Prepare something to drink before you sit down to breastfeed. If you wait to
drink after feeding, it’s easy to put it off or forget, and then you may not
drink sufficient liquid. While extra fluids are prescribed as the universal
elixir for nearly all breastfeeding ills, don’t flood yourself. Excess fluids
may actually hinder milk production. Shun caffeine-containing coffee, teas,
and colas, and alcoholic beverages, as these may have a diuretic effect,
causing you to lose valuable minerals and fluids.

OceanofPDF.com

 Environmental Pollutants

Pesticides and other contaminants are an increasing concern. To minimize
these harmful substances entering your milk, avoid fish from waters known
to be contaminated, peel or thoroughly wash fresh nonorganic fruits and
vegetables, and cut away the fatty portions of meat, poultry, and fish, since
chemicals tend to concentrate in fat. (See here for more pesticideprevention tips.)

OceanofPDF.com

 UPSETTING FOODS IN BREAST MILK
Mother-infant dining partners can enjoy a bountiful menu. But some babies
are sensitive to certain foods in mother’s diet. Upsetting foods can enter
your milk and upset baby as early as two hours after you eat them. A clue to
food sensitivities as a cause of fussy, colicky behavior is a pattern called
twenty-four-hour colic—a definite episode of hurting that occurs within
twenty-four hours after the breastfeeding mother eats a suspect food but that
does not recur until the next time she eats the same food. Watch for these
offenders:
Dairy products. Potentially allergenic proteins in dairy products enter the
breast milk and produce colicky symptoms in baby. (This is discussed in
detail in “The Colic–Cow’s Milk Connection,” here.)
Caffeine-containing foods. Soft drinks, chocolate, coffee, tea, and certain
cold remedies contain caffeine. While some babies may be more caffeine
sensitive than others, usually a mother must consume a large amount of
these products to bother her baby.
Grains and nuts. The most allergenic of these are wheat, corn, peanuts,
and soy.

 Spicy foods. Your milk may have a distinctive taste after you eat spicy or
garlicky foods. Salads, pizzas, and a binge at your local ethnic restaurant
introduce baby to these foods. Occasionally they may evoke a gastric
protest from your baby, causing him to refuse to feed or to be colicky.
Gassy foods. Broccoli, onions, brussels sprouts, green peppers, cauliflower,
cabbage—these vegetables in the raw state can bother babies, but they are
less likely to be offensive when cooked. Our personal breastfeeding
experience validates what veteran breastfeeding mothers have known for a
long time—gassy foods make gassy babies.

OceanofPDF.com

 Tracking Down Foods That Bother Baby

This simple three-step technique for identifying foods in your breast milk
that may be upsetting your child is virtually identical to the approach to take
in identifying food allergies that may arise after baby is no longer
consuming breast milk exclusively. (See here for details.)
Step one: Make a fuss-food chart. From the preceding food possibilities,
select and list the foods in your diet that are most suspect. Cow’s milk is the
most common culprit. Across from these list your baby’s upsets, usually
fussiness, crying and colicky episodes, bloating, severe constipation or
diarrhea, a very gassy baby, unexplained night waking, or a red ring around
baby’s anus.
Step two: Eliminate foods. One by one, starting with cow’s milk (or all at
once if severe), eliminate the most suspect foods from your diet for ten to
fourteen days. Observe your baby to see if the symptoms of upset diminish
or disappear. If they do not, try eliminating a different fuss food. If they do
disappear, go on to step three.

ALMOND MILK RECIPE
If your breastfeeding baby does not tolerate cow’s milk in your diet, here’s
an alternative. (Note: Almond milk should never be given to babies in place
of standard infant formulas.) Almond milk or a prepared mix can be

 purchased in a nutrition store or a grocery health section, or you can make
your own.
½ cup blanched raw almonds
2 cups water (more as needed)
Salt, honey, maple syrup, vanilla or almond extract (optional)
Place the blanched raw almonds in a blender. Add 1 cup of the water and
blend until smooth—about five minutes in a high-speed blender. Add the
remaining cup of water to thin the milk to the desired consistency, using
more water as needed. Chill before using for best flavor. You may wish to
flavor the milk by adding a few grains of salt, a bit of honey or maple syrup,
or a touch of vanilla or almond extract. Almond milk can be used as a
beverage, on cereal, or in baking and cooking.
Step three: Challenge the result. If some or all of the troublesome
symptoms subside (this may take a week or more to happen), challenge this
result by reintroducing the suspicious food. If baby’s symptoms reappear
within twenty-four hours, temporarily scratch this food off your menu.
Though mothers are often wise detectives, the reintroduction challenge
keeps you more objective. Love for your baby and hurting when your baby
hurts make you vulnerable to quickly labeling a certain food as the culprit
of baby’s problems, which may unnecessarily deprive you and your baby of
a valuable source of nutrients. Even if you do pin the problems on a
particular food, most babies are only temporarily intolerant of certain foods,
allowing you to eventually include your favorite foods again.

OceanofPDF.com

 Other Fuss-Food Hints

Don’t overdose on any one food. While some babies are exquisitely
sensitive to drops or crumbs of an offending nutrient, others are bothered
only if mother eats or drinks larger quantities daily. Wheat products and
citrus foods are examples of this: Too much may bother baby, but a small
amount may be tolerated.
If you find yourself eating fewer foods, yet baby is fussing more, consult
a lactation consultant to be sure your breastfeeding technique is not the
problem, a nutritionist to be sure you are consuming a balanced diet, and,
most important, your baby’s doctor for non-food-related causes of your
baby’s problem. See our Fussy Baby Book (Little, Brown, 1996) for tips on
eliminating fuss foods and on comforting and coping with unhappy babies.
For food lovers, let’s dangle a final carrot. Don’t let fear of food restrictions
discourage breastfeeding. Often these intolerant babies also have serious
problems with some or all formulas. For most breastfeeding pairs, what
mother eats does not upset baby.

OceanofPDF.com

 MEDICINES FOR TWO: TAKING MEDICINES
SAFELY WHILE BREASTFEEDING
At some time during lactation, most mothers will need medicines to deal
with an illness. Besides wondering how the drug will behave in your own
body, you now have another body to consider. Most drugs taken by the
mother enter her milk, but usually only around 1 percent of the dose appears
in the milk. Here’s how to safely take most medicines while breastfeeding.

OceanofPDF.com

 General Considerations

Before taking any medication during breastfeeding, consider the following:

Will the medicine harm your baby?
Will the medicine diminish milk production?
Are there safer but equally effective alternative
treatments?
Are there ways to juggle medicine taking and
breastfeeding to lessen how much of the drug gets
into your baby?
You should be aware that advice for a mother about a medication is
sometimes based more on legal considerations than on scientific
knowledge. A physician who does not know if a drug is safe may tell the
mother not to breastfeed instead of taking the time to look up the
medication in a reference book. Pharmaceutical companies also legally
protect themselves (with package inserts and in the drug reference book
Physicians’ Desk Reference) by advising a mother not to breastfeed while
taking a certain drug. This precautionary advice is usually less expensive
than researching how much of the medicine enters breast milk and its effect
on the baby. As a result of erroneous advice given about a harmless

 medication,

babies

are

often

weaned

prematurely,

abruptly,

and

unnecessarily.

RESOURCES
The information in this section is based upon thorough research and up-todate sources. Because new information on the safety of a particular drug
may be discovered after this writing, we advise checking with your doctor
before taking any medication while breastfeeding.
Hale, Thomas. Medications and Mothers’ Milk, 14th ed. Amarillo, TX:
Pharmasoft, 2010. (See Dr. Hale’s website, infantrisk.com.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Juggling Medicine Taking and Breastfeeding

If you are advised to take a medicine, you can minimize the amount that
gets into your baby.
Ask yourself if you really need the medicine. If you have a cold, all overthe-counter cold medications are considered safe while breastfeeding.
However, can you achieve the same benefit by steam, extra fluids, and a
tincture of time? Can you get by with a single-ingredient rather than a
multiple-ingredient cold medicine?
Find out if you can delay your treatment. If you need a diagnostic
procedure (for example, X-ray studies with a radioactive material) or
elective surgery, can you wait until baby is a few weeks or months older?
An exclusively breastfed newborn may be affected more than an older
infant who has alternative sources of nutrition and whose more-mature
system is better able to handle the drug.
Choose a medicine that passes poorly into your milk. Let your doctor
know how important breastfeeding is to you and your baby and that you
don’t want to stop or interrupt unless medically necessary. Your doctor can
choose a medicine (such as an antibiotic) that passes poorly into your milk.
Also, your doctor can choose an alternative route of administration so that

 more of the medicine gets directly to the site of the problem and less gets
into your bloodstream. For example, instead of pills try locally applied
creams for skin infections, or inhalant medications for asthma or bronchitis.
Because they clear more quickly from your milk, short-acting medicines
(taken three to four times a day) are generally regarded as safer during
breastfeeding than long-acting drugs (taken once or twice a day).
Juggle feeding and medicine times. Ask your doctor when the time of
peak concentration is. (This is when the medicine reaches the highest level
in your blood—usually the same time that it’s highest in your milk.) Most
drugs reach their peak concentration one to three hours after you take the
medicine and are nearly cleared from the milk after six hours. If there is
doubt about the safety of a drug, try these tactics:

1. If possible, before beginning the medicine, pump
and store a few feedings’ worth of milk. (See
“Expressing Milk,” here, for details on collecting
and storing breast milk.)
2. Breastfeed just before taking the medicine.
3. Take the medicine just prior to baby’s longest
sleep period, usually after the last feeding at
night.
4. If baby requires a feeding within the next three to
six hours, use the “safe” milk from your storage
supply, or use formula.

 5. Pump and dump. Because most drugs leave the
breast milk as quickly as they enter it, some
authorities feel that waiting six hours is just as
effective as pumping and discarding the milk, but
pumping may help prevent engorgement. In
addition, some fat-soluble drugs are stored in the
fat of breast milk, so it may be helpful to pump
and discard a feeding’s worth of milk up to three
or four hours after taking the medication.
This timing of the sequence is a general guide and may vary according
to the type of medication and the feeding pattern of your baby. (Some
radioactive medications may take twenty-four hours to clear your system,
for example.) Check with your doctor on the best juggling schedule.
If the safety of a drug you must take is questionable, but medically your
baby must breastfeed (for example, baby is allergic to formula), besides
observing the preceding juggling tips, consult your doctor about monitoring
the amount of drug that enters your milk or baby’s blood.

OceanofPDF.com

 Most Common Medications/Substances

The following guidelines will help you when dealing with some of the most
frequently used drugs (please refer to here for each). These guidelines don’t
always apply to pregnancy.
Pain and fever relievers. Acetaminophen and ibuprofen are the safest
analgesics to use during breastfeeding; only 0.1–0.2 percent of the maternal
dose enters the milk. Several doses of narcotic analgesics (Demerol,
codeine, and morphine) after delivery or surgery may cause baby to be
temporarily sleepy, but not enough to discourage breastfeeding. Prolonged
use of narcotic pain relievers may not be safe during breastfeeding.
Cold, cough, and allergy remedies. These nonprescription medicines are
safe to take while breastfeeding, but observe the following precautions: Try
single-ingredient medications (either decongestant or antihistamine, for
example) before using combinations; short-acting medicines are usually
safer than long-acting ones. Before bedtime, cough syrup containing
codeine is all right; dextromethorphan (DM) is preferable. It is best to take
these remedies after breastfeeding and before bedtime, and to limit them to
one or two days at a time. Watch baby for hyperirritability following your
taking decongestant medications or for excessive sleepiness after an

 antihistamine, and adjust the medicines accordingly. Nasal sprays and
inhalants (cromolyn, steroids, decongestants) are usually safer than oral
medications while breastfeeding.
Antibiotics. Nearly all antibiotics are safe to take while breastfeeding,
especially if taken for the usual one- to two-week course for common
infections. Even though only a trace amount of the most commonly used
antibiotics (penicillins and cephalosporins) enter the milk, baby may be
allergic to the antibiotic (allergy-type rash) or develop oral thrush or
diarrhea from a prolonged effect of the antibiotic on the intestines. Sulfa
antibiotics should be used with caution during the newborn period. Your
doctor may take special precautions with the prolonged use of any antibiotic
such as tetracycline, with some high-dose intravenous antibiotics, or with
special antibiotics like Flagyl.
Caffeine and chocolate. No, you don’t have to give up your coffee, tea,
soft drinks, or chocolate during breastfeeding. Studies show that only 0.5–1
percent of the maternal dose of caffeine or chocolate enters the breast milk.
The occasional baby may become irritable, showing a hypersensitivity to
caffeine or the theobromine in chocolate.
Antidepressants and other psychiatric medications. These drugs are in
the use-with-caution category. Most of these drugs appear in breast milk in
greater or lesser amounts, and there is little information available about
long-term effects on infants. However, a mother who is suffering from

 serious postpartum depression may benefit from short-term medication, and
treating the mother’s depression will indirectly benefit the baby.
The most commonly used antidepressants are collectively known as
SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors). They boost the brain’s
levels of serotonin, a mood-elevating neurochemical. Zoloft (sertraline)
seems to be the safest SSRI to use while breastfeeding. Studies of infants
whose mothers are taking Zoloft have found either insignificant amounts of
the drug in the infant’s blood, or the drug has been undetectable. Paxil
(paroxetine) is the next best choice, and Prozac (fluoxetine) is also
considered compatible with breastfeeding.
In addition to medication, consider professional counseling and peer
support. Getting help at home, regular exercise, and the relaxing effects of
breastfeeding can help mothers weather a mild depression. Lifestyle
changes are important, even if you are also taking medication.
Other psychiatric medications that are sometimes prescribed for mothers
include antidepressants from the tricyclic category. Your doctor can choose
one of these that is safe to take while breastfeeding. An occasional dose of
Valium (diazepam) is considered safe while breastfeeding, but prolonged
use is not advisable. Lithium, used to treat bipolar disorder, is in the yellowlight category (that is, use it with caution) for mothers who are
breastfeeding. If treatment with lithium is necessary for mother, and
premature weaning is undesirable, the levels of lithium in the baby’s blood
should be closely monitored, approximately every two to four weeks.

 Herbs and vitamin supplements. Herbs and dietary supplements are
drugs. Use the same caution about taking these as you would about taking
any over-the-counter medication. Prenatal vitamins are fine to take while
breastfeeding, but megadoses of vitamins may not be a good idea while
breastfeeding. Herbal teas promoted as galactagogues (substances that
increase your milk supply) are harmless and may work. Herbs to be avoided
or used with caution during lactation include comfrey, sassafras, ginseng,
and licorice.
Alcohol. New research is questioning the wisdom of traditional
breastfeeding folklore that wine is good for relaxing the breastfeeding
mother and beer is good for increasing milk supply. Studies suggest two
major concerns when a mother drinks alcohol while breastfeeding. First,
alcohol enters breast milk very rapidly and in concentrations nearly equal to
that in the maternal blood. Second, the tiny infant may have a limited ability
to detoxify the alcohol from his or her system. Alcohol has also been shown
to inhibit the milk-ejection reflex, and the higher the dose the greater the
effect. Studies in animals show that alcohol reduces milk production. A
study in humans has shown that infants take less milk from the breast in
feedings following their mother’s consumption of alcohol. It’s possible that
alcohol alters the flavor of human milk, making it less appealing to babies.
In another study, the infants of breastfeeding mothers who regularly
consumed two or more alcoholic drinks daily scored slightly lower on tests
of motor development at one year. For these reasons mothers would be wise
to limit their alcohol consumption during breastfeeding or eliminate alcohol

 altogether. The occasional glass of wine with a special dinner should not be
a problem. Sip it slowly with food, and, if possible, wait an hour or two
before breastfeeding your baby.
Smoking. Nicotine passes into a mother’s milk, into the baby, and causes
colicky symptoms. Secondhand smoke irritates a baby’s nasal and
respiratory passages, causing frequent colds, runny noses, and difficulty
breathing. Studies show that mothers who smoke have a delayed milkejection reflex and a decreased milk supply, and they tend to wean earlier
than nonsmoking women. Mothers who smoke also have lower prolactin
levels.
Clearly, there are plenty of reasons to quit smoking before you become a
parent and even more reasons not to smoke around your baby. (See here,
“Smoking and Babies Don’t Mix.”) If you smoke, we encourage you to
seek help if quitting is difficult for you. If you cannot quit, do not smoke
around your baby and do not smoke while breastfeeding. If you must
smoke, have one cigarette immediately after feeding your baby, allowing
the nicotine to clear from your body before the next feeding.
Recreational drugs. The problem chemical in marijuana, THC, appears in
the breast milk of users, and marijuana has been found to lower the levels of
prolactin in the mother. Animal studies have shown structural changes in
brain cells of breastfeeding infants after their mothers were exposed to
marijuana. These experimental hazards, in addition to the possibility that

 marijuana can lower a mother’s attentiveness to her baby, dictate, by
common sense, that mothers avoid marijuana.
Cocaine, a more dangerous and powerful drug, enters the milk of the
breastfeeding mother and agitates the baby’s nervous system, causing
irritability, sleeplessness, and colicky symptoms. This drug, as well as
depressing and addicting drugs such as heroin, should obviously be
completely avoided.

OceanofPDF.com

 BREASTFEEDING HELPERS
There once was a time when a baby, a breast, and an experienced
grandmother were all that was needed to breastfeed successfully. As
families drifted apart and breastfeeding declined, the supply of
knowledgeable breastfeeding helpers dwindled. If problems arose, well,
there was always someone eager to give the baby a bottle. Commitment
runs high among today’s breastfeeding mothers, and because more women
are now breastfeeding in a variety of medical situations and life-styles, a
variety of ingenious aids and resources are now available to make
breastfeeding easier and more enjoyable. (See “Breastfeeding,” in
Resources, here.)

GREEN LIGHT: GO AHEAD!
Common Medications and Ingredients That Are Safe While
Breastfeeding
The safety of the following medications is established for short-term use
only. Consult a physician before taking prescription drugs or if using an
over-the-counter medication for more than two weeks.
acetaminophen
acyclovir
anesthetics, local (e.g., for dental work)
antacids

 antibiotics (cephalosporin, erythromycin, penicillin, sulfa,* tetracycline, †
trimethoprim)
anticoagulants
anticonvulsants
antihistamines
aspartame
asthma medicines (cromolyn, inhalant bronchodilators)
barium
chloroquine (antimalarial)
cortisone
decongestants
digitalis
diuretics
ibuprofen
insulin
Kaopectate
laxatives
muscle relaxants
naproxen
pinworm medications
propranolol
propylthiouracil
silicone from implants
thyroid medications
vaccines
vitamins

YELLOW LIGHT: USE CAUTION!
Drugs That Are Compatible with Breastfeeding but Need Careful
Monitoring by a Physician
Whether these drugs and medications are safe to take while breastfeeding
depends on many factors: the dosage, age of infant, duration of therapy, and
timing of dosage and breastfeeding. Consult a physician knowledgeable

 about drugs during breastfeeding if you need to take any of the following
medications long-term.
alcohol
antidepressants
aspirin
codeine
Demerol
ergots
general anesthetics*
indomethacin
isoniazid
lithium†
metoclopramide
metronidazole (Flagyl)
morphine
oral contraceptives (progestin-only)
Paxil
phenobarbital
Prozac
Valium
Zoloft

RED LIGHT: STOP!
Drugs That Must Not Be Used While Breastfeeding
amphetamines
antimetabolite drugs (anticancer drugs)
cocaine
cyclosporine
heroin
lindane
marijuana

 methotrexate
Mysoline
Parlodel
PCP

OceanofPDF.com

 What to Wear

Your breastfeeding wardrobe should include the following:

bras for breastfeeding (at least three)
breast pads
clothes in which you can breastfeed discreetly if
you wish to
a baby sling

Selecting the Right Bra

Special bras for nursing are designed with a flap on the cup that is opened
for feedings. Here’s how to choose and use the right bra:

Before birth, purchase one or two bras that are
one numerical size and one cup size larger than
what you’re wearing while pregnant, to allow for
breast enlargement when your milk appears.

 When your milk is established and your breasts
reach postengorgement size (usually around the
second week), purchase three bras (one to wear,
one in the laundry, one on standby).
Be sure your bras fit comfortably enough in the
cups to accommodate the change in breast size as
your breasts fill before a feeding; tight-fitting bras
encourage breast infections.
Select a bra that fastens and unfastens easily with
one hand, so that you don’t have to put the baby
down when you open or close the cup. Look for a
style that opens via a self-closing slit along the
inner edges of the cups. Avoid bras that have a
row of hooks down the front, which give no
support to either breast when open. Bras with a
hook at the top of each cup offer more support
and easier access, letting you uncover one breast
at a time.
When the flap is down, the cup of the bra should
support the entire lower half of the breast in its
natural position.
Choose a 100 percent cotton bra cup. Avoid
synthetic fabrics and plastic liners that are not
absorbent and do not allow the skin to breathe.

 Avoid bras with underwires, since these wires
may compress the breast, leading to plugged
ducts.

Breast Pads

Disposable or washable cotton cloth pads can be worn inside the bra to
absorb leaking milk. Here are a few tips for using these breast pads:

Avoid synthetic fabrics and plastic-lined pads,
which prevent air circulation, retain moisture, and
encourage bacterial growth.
Make your own breast pads by placing a folded
all-cotton handkerchief in each cup of your bra, or
cut out 4-inch circles from cotton diapers.
Change pads promptly after leaking, and if the
pad sticks to your nipple, moisten with warm
water before peeling it off. Leaking is usually a
problem only in the early weeks of breastfeeding.

Breastfeeding Fashions

 After the birth of our first baby I, Dr. Bill, went clothes shopping with
Martha. When I protested that she was taking too long, Martha explained,
“For the first time in my life I have to consider the needs of another
person.” Then there was a first-time mother in my office in her one-piece
dress, frantically trying to disrobe to comfort her screaming baby.
Somewhere between a pile of clothing and a half-stripped mother nestled a
breastfeeding baby. We both laughed, and the mother acknowledged, “Next
time I’ll dress for the occasion.”
Consider the following when selecting a wardrobe for breastfeeding:

Patterned fabric won’t reveal milk that might leak
through; avoid solid colors and clinging materials.
For discreet feeding, a patterned, loose sweatertype top that can be lifted from the waist is best.
Your baby will cover your bare midriff during
breastfeeding.
Blouses especially designed for breastfeeding
women have slits hidden with pleats over the
breasts.
Front-buttoned blouses allow easy access;
remember to unbutton the blouse from the bottom
up, using the unbuttoned flap of the blouse to
cover baby for modest feeding.

 To accent the limited designs available, drape an
attractive shawl or scarf over your shoulder and
use it to cover baby for discreet feeding.
In cold climates, even a little bit of bare midriff
can be a chilling experience. A letter in La
Leche’s bimonthly magazine New Beginnings has
this solution for cold climates: Wear an old T-shirt
with the top front cut away, tucked in at the waist
under your loose top. The T-shirt completely
covers mother from icy northern air when baby
needs your nice warm breast.
Off-the-rack one-piece dresses are impossible for
convenient and discreet breastfeeding. Look for
dresses designed especially for nursing mothers in
maternity shops or look on-line by searching for
“breastfeeding fashions.”
Two-piece outfits and warm-up suits are practical,
as are pullover sweaters. The top should be loose
and easily lifted from the waist.
Don’t try to squeeze into your prepregnancy
clothes too soon. Tight tops rub against your
nipples, are uncomfortable, and can trigger an
untimely milk-ejection reflex.

 A suggestion for new mothers sensitive about breastfeeding in public:
Choose your breastfeeding wardrobe carefully and practice breastfeeding in
front of the mirror. It’s all a matter of tucking your baby’s face inside your
clothing rather than bringing your breasts out.

Use a Baby Sling

Breastfeeding mothers for centuries have fabricated sling-type carriers as an
extension of their native dress, wearing their baby in this sling very near
mother’s breast. A baby sling is an indispensable item, making life easier
and breastfeeding more enjoyable for mother and baby. The sling-type
carrier is much more practical for the breastfeeding pair than either a front
or hip carrier or a backpack. It allows baby to breastfeed discreetly in public
and can be used in a variety of feeding positions. Don’t leave home without
it. We recommend the Balboa Baby Sling, an infant carrier that has been
designed with the breastfeeding mother and infant in mind. (See Chapter
14, “Babywearing,” to learn how to breastfeed in a sling. To obtain the
Balboa Baby Sling, visit AskDrSears.com or balboababy.com.
Using creative apparel with the breastfeeding baby in mind, Martha has
been able to carry on a busy lifestyle while breastfeeding our babies. Four
times she has breastfed a baby on national television. The babies were calm,
and she was calm. Because she was dressed for the occasion no one on the
set or in the audience was astonished at having a breastfeeding pair on
camera.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Alternatives to Supplemental Bottles

For breastfeeding an adopted baby (see here), a premature baby (see here),
or in any circumstance in which the newborn is unable to get enough
nutrition from mother alone, we advise using cups, breastfeeding
supplementers, or syringes in lieu of supplemental bottles during the first
few weeks when baby needs to learn to suck properly from mother’s breast.
Cup Feeding. Cup feeding is a safe, low-tech method for supplementing a
breastfed baby while avoiding the use of artificial nipples. Cup feeding has
been used with newborns and even with premature infants. When a medical
situation temporarily delays breastfeeding, or if baby must be supplemented
during the first few days of life while learning to nurse effectively, cup
feeding is an easy alternative to bottles. It may also work for the older baby
who refuses bottles offered by dad or a substitute caregiver.
Use a small cup that holds just 1 or 2 ounces of human milk or formula.
(Flexible plastic cups designed especially for feeding babies are available
from lactation consultants and La Leche League International.) Fill the cup
at least half full. Support baby upright on your lap, with a cloth diaper,
towel, or bib under her chin to catch any drips. Swaddle her in a receiving
blanket if her hands get in the way. Hold the cup to baby’s lips and tilt it so
that the liquid touches her lips. Allow baby to lap and swallow the milk.

 Don’t pour it into her mouth. Let baby set the pace. Refill the cup as needed
or fill two or three before you start the feeding. (For more on cup feeding,
see here.)

Breastfeeding Supplementers

A supplementer consists of a plastic container to hold breast milk or
formula, connected to a feeding tube to deliver it. The supplementer is
suspended by a cord around mother’s neck and rests between her breasts.
Tiny flexible tubings extend from the supplementer and rest over mother’s
nipple. (Some supplementer systems, such as the Medela Supplemental
Nutrition System, or SNS, have two tubings, one for each breast). While
sucking at mother’s breast baby draws the breast milk or formula from the
supplementer through the tubing. Any milk present in the breast also comes
to baby through mother’s nipple.

 Use of a supplementer such as the Medela SNS (Supplemental Nutrition
System) makes it possible to breastfeed in circumstances in which baby
cannot get enough nutrition from mother alone.
Supplementers have the advantage of teaching baby to suck only from
mother’s breast, so as not to confuse him by presenting a variety of artificial
nipples. As an added benefit, mother gets hormonal stimulation as baby
sucks at her breast. One disadvantage is that, because the milk flows more
easily, baby doesn’t have to suck as vigorously and may become lazy at the
breast. This can diminish mom’s milk supply if used long-term. A
supplementer should be used under supervision of a lactation consultant,
who can oversee the progress of the baby.

 Martha notes: In the early weeks of fumbling with plastic tubing I had a
love-hate relationship with my supplementer. I needed it and Lauren needed
it, but I still missed the naturalness of breastfeeding without gadgets. But
after four weeks, life with the supplementer became easier, as I realized that
this gadget was a tool that let me have, as closely as possible, a
breastfeeding relationship with our adopted daughter.

Syringes

Syringes are helpful to supplement a breastfeeding newborn. In our practice
we use a periodontal syringe, which has a long, curved tip from which
supplemental milk (either breast milk or formula) is syringed into the
baby’s mouth during breastfeeding (see picture, above) or during finger
feeding if baby has trouble at the breast.

 Syringe feeding at the breast.
The syringe-and-finger-feeding method is especially helpful for fathers
to supplement the primarily breastfed infant. Let baby suck on 1½ inches of
your index finger, pad up (most fathers and women with large fingers can
use the pinkie finger), and slide the tip of the syringe inside the corner of
baby’s mouth alongside your finger, squirting in the supplemental milk as
your baby sucks and swallows. You can use a supplementer in similar
fashion, placing the tubing along the tip of your finger, so that when baby
sucks he also gets milk or formula from the tubing. Once again, supervision
from a lactation consultant is strongly recommended.

OceanofPDF.com

 Breast Shields

Also called breast shells or milk cups, breast shields are two-part plastic
cups that fit over mother’s nipple and areola and are held in place by her
bra. The pressure of the shell on the breast encourages the nipple to
protrude through a hole in the inner part of the cup. Meanwhile, the outer
part of the cup protects the nipple from contact with the bra fabric.

A breast shield, perforated to allow air circulation.
Lactation experts used to recommend that mothers with flat or inverted
nipples wear breast shells prenatally and postnatally between feedings to

 encourage the nipples to stand out. However, research on breast shells has
not shown that they are helpful. Lactation consultants have found that a
baby who knows how to latch on properly can shape any kind of nipple to
deliver milk, since the baby latches on to not just the nipple but the areola
as well.
Breast shields can be used to protect sensitive sore nipples from rubbing
against clothing. The pressure from the shields encourages leaking, so milk
may collect in the shells between feedings. Follow directions on the
packaging.

OceanofPDF.com

 Footstools

A footstool makes life easier for the mother by lifting her lap to the correct
and most comfortable height for breastfeeding. The nursing stool is
especially designed for the breastfeeding mother and eliminates stress on a
mother’s back, legs, shoulders, and arms. (See illustration here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Nursing Pillows

Pillows designed especially for the breastfeeding mother provide support
for the baby in her lap and raise baby to breast height. They fit snugly
against mom’s middle, and encourage a position that helps mom relax her
back. Nursing pillows are especially handy for mothers who are juggling
twins at the breast and for babies who need extra support because they are
premature or have low muscle tone. (See “Resources,” here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Getting

It

Together:

Working

and

Breastfeeding
Are working and breastfeeding compatible? Yes! It boils down to
commitment—how serious you are about giving your baby the best
nutritional start. I, Dr. Bill, was a Harvard intern when our first baby, Jim,
was born. We couldn’t live on an intern’s meager salary, so a few weeks
after Jim’s birth Martha returned to part-time work as a nurse. Determined
to give Jim her milk, yet facing the financial realities of life, Martha found a
way. Doctor and nurse would shuttle their precious baby between
workplace, home, and the substitute caregiver. We juggled. Some folks
would say this wasn’t ideal parenting, but at the time we could not achieve
the ideal. We did the best we could under less-than-perfect circumstances.
Here are some ideas for blending breastfeeding and working.

BENEFITS OF CONTINUING TO BREASTFEED
WHILE WORKING
Once you realize the benefits of extended breastfeeding for baby, mother,
and family, you will find a way to do it.
Mothers miss fewer workdays. Because breastfed babies are
healthier, mother (or father) will need to stay home less often with a
sick baby.

 Breastfeeding saves money. Even considering the cost of a high-grade
breast pump, breastfeeding is cheaper than buying formula. Also,
because breastfed babies are healthier, you will need to spend less on
medical care.
Breastfeeding helps you feel connected. Pumping and storing your
milk helps you feel connected to your baby even while you are apart.
This is a special relationship that no other caregiver will have with
your baby.
It’s the modern thing to do. Years ago breastfeeding while working
was considered unusual. Now most mothers do it, and workplaces are
becoming more breastfeeding friendly.
Basically, you have three challenges to consider: how to feed baby while
mother is gone, how to keep up mother’s milk supply when she’s away
from baby, and how to minimize the amount of time mother and baby spend
away from each other. Many mothers choose to pump their breasts every
two to three hours during the time that they are away from their babies. This
helps to maintain their milk supply, and the expressed milk is stored and
given to baby while mother is away at work. When mother and baby are
together—nights, weekends, holidays—mother encourages baby to nurse
often, so that they can continue to enjoy their breastfeeding relationship. As
baby gets older and starts to eat a variety of foods, mother can pump less
often at work but continues to breastfeed her baby when they are together.
(For more information on expressing milk, and on getting a breastfed baby
to take a bottle, see below.)
We have seen mothers come up with the most creative plans for
minimizing their time away from their babies while working. They find
ways to enjoy longer maternity leaves, work from home, commute with

 their babies, or even bring baby to work. Here are some possibilities to keep
in mind as you plan your working and breastfeeding lifestyle.

OceanofPDF.com

 Plan Ahead—But Not Too Much

Over the years we have become increasingly concerned about new mothers
dwelling on “the day I have to go back to work.” They are so concerned
with all of the what-ifs: “What if he won’t take a bottle?” “What if he won’t
settle for the babysitter?” “Should I get him used to the bottle and start
leaving him right away so he won’t get spoiled?” Mothers confide that their
preoccupation with leaving baby dilutes their attachment to their newborn.
This subconscious detachment does not seem right, to us or to our patients.
Mothers should have the joy of being absorbed into mothering, at least for a
few weeks! Focus completely on your baby for the first few weeks; it will
do both of you good. (For a fuller description of this principle, see
“Shortening the Distance,” here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Work and Wear

If you have the kind of job that allows you to take your baby with you, get a
sling-type carrier and wear your baby to work. Many mothers in our
practice do this. (See here and here for tips on working and wearing.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Your Schedule, Baby’s Schedule

Enjoy a happy departure and a happy reunion. Breastfeed your baby at the
caregiver’s before leaving for work and as soon as you return. Ask your
caregiver to hold off feeding your baby within an hour before you leave
work. An eager baby and a full mother make for a happy reunion. It
depends on your work hours, but you can usually get in an early morning
feeding at home, one at the caregiver’s, a late-afternoon feeding after work,
a couple of evening feedings, and a before-bed feeding. An alternative if
you live close to your workplace is for your caregiver to bring baby to you
for a feeding once or twice during the day or for you to return to the baby
during your lunch break. With work-based day care, some mothers are able
to totally breastfeed their baby during lunch and coffee breaks. Return to
full-time breastfeeding on weekends, holidays, and days off, as periodic full
breastfeeding days are necessary to keep up your milk production. Your
breasts will be fuller than usual on Monday if you have been full-time
breastfeeding over the weekend.
Expect baby to wake up and want to breastfeed more often at night after
you return to work. Experienced mothers who have successfully managed
breastfeeding while working accept this nighttime attachment as a natural
part of working and mothering. Nestling together and breastfeeding at night
give baby and mother the touch time they both miss during the day and help

 compensate for the time apart. Many mothers who have achieved nighttime
harmony with their baby report they sleep better, possibly due to the
relaxing effects of breastfeeding helping mothers unwind from a busy day.
As an added family benefit, this nighttime arrangement gives daytime
working fathers extra touch time with baby, too. (For additional
information, see Chapter 17, “Working and Parenting.”)

OceanofPDF.com

 Store Up a Milk Supply

Some babies either refuse to take formula or are allergic to all the
commercial formulas and only thrive on your breast milk. To avoid being
caught empty-handed, you will need to express and stockpile a supply of
your milk before returning to work. (See the section “Expressing Milk,” on
the next page.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Introducing the Bottle

Present the bottle around two weeks before going back to work. After baby
has had his first bottle, he doesn’t need one every day. Two bottles a week
should be enough practice to prevent a cold turkey experience for baby.
Encourage dad or your substitute caregiver to offer your baby the bottle.
Baby may be more willing to experiment if he is not desperately hungry—
try when he is happy and alert. It is usual for babies to be rather selective in
their eating behavior and refuse to accept a bottle from mother. This is not
in their nursing mind-set. The box here offers additional details on
bottlefeeding.

OceanofPDF.com

 EXPRESSING MILK
At some time in your breastfeeding career you will almost certainly
encounter medical or lifestyle circumstances for which you need to express
milk. Whether by hand, by pump, or a combination of both, the methods of
expressing milk are a matter of personal choice. Experiment with the
following techniques, modifying them in ways that work for you.

OceanofPDF.com

 How to Hand Express Your Milk

The advantages of using a manual technique rather than a mechanical pump
include the following:

Some mothers find pumps uncomfortable or
ineffective.
Mothers often feel put off by the gadgetry and
prefer the natural approach.
Skin-to-skin stimulation can actually produce the
milk-ejection reflex better.
Your hands are “handy”—convenient, portable,
always available, and free!

Martha notes: The techniques for manual expression of breast milk can be
very individual. I learned how to do it in 1975 when our third baby was
born. When he was one month old I was back at work several afternoons a
week, and I wanted to leave breast milk for him. I found that I could express
between 6 and 8 ounces [180–240 milliliters] of milk in about twenty
minutes during a midafternoon break. I learned to do this first at home, so

 my trial-and-error practice was more relaxed. A week or two before going
back to work, I started to build up a supply by expressing just an ounce or
two in the morning when my breasts were the fullest. So I had several 4ounce bottles in the freezer—a little stockpile to give me some leeway in
learning how the routine would work away from home.
Here’s how I did it at work. I locked the washroom door to ensure
privacy, washed my hands, then got relaxed and comfortable. A big drink of
water helped me “prime the pump,” so to speak, and I thought of my little
Peter as he was at my breast just a few hours earlier, feeding just before I
left him. Before I actually began to express milk, I massaged my breasts
(both at once), which helped to relax me even more and sometimes even
activated the MER (milk-ejection reflex) so that the milk began dripping. I
had a clean plastic bottle as my only tool, and I simply directed my nipple
into the opening. This was rather awkward, but it worked fine after I got the
hang of it.
I started with the fullest, drippiest breast and learned how to press with
my forearm against the other nipple to stop the leaking (no sense wasting
any of this liquid gold!). Holding the collecting bottle with one hand, I held
my breast with the other. I started with the hand on the same side as that
breast and then switched hands later on to get different angles so as to
empty all the sinuses around the “clock” (that is, the thumb and fingers at
twelve and six o’clock and then at ten and four, then switched to the other
hand for two and eight). As the MER activated, the milk would often spray
out on its own. When the spraying stopped, I went back to the firm rhythmic
movements and continued until the flow of milk was just dribbling. Then I

 changed to another position with that hand and released more milk, then
proceeded to change hands and went to yet another hand position on the
areola “clock.” The Marmet technique (see here) of manual expression is
the one I use now with my babies and teach as a lactation consultant.

BOTTLEFEEDING THE BREASTFED BABY
When part-time bottlefeeding becomes necessary, expect the breastfed baby
to be less than enthusiastic about the new container and its contents. Try
these suggestions on your little connoisseur. (Additional bottlefeeding
suggestions are here. See also “Combo Feeding: Breast and Bottle,” here.)
If baby is a confirmed breastfeeder, enlist an experienced bottlefeeder
such as grandmother or another bottlefeeding mother. A breastfeeding
mother normally feels a bit awkward in offering her baby a bottle, and
the baby may smell his mother’s milk and sense her ambivalence.
After baby has learned to accept the bottle from an experienced feeder,
father is next in line to bottlefeed his baby.
Don’t confuse your little gourmet. Some babies accept a bottle while
being held in the breastfeeding position; others reject the bottle if
given in the situation or position that reminds them of breastfeeding. If
baby is baffled by the cradle hold, expecting the bosom to mean more
than a cushion, try holding baby at a less suggestive angle, sitting in
places different from the ones used during breastfeeding, or putting
baby in a sling carrier and walking around while offering the bottle.
Use nipples that resemble the real thing. Choose a nipple that has a
wide, areola-like reservoir beyond the tip. Avoid nipples that offer only
a nubbin to latch on to. The slow-flow nipple that baby really has to
suck on is less likely to be rejected than the quick-gush type that
overwhelms the eager feeder, causing choking. (See nipple
suggestions, here.)

 Encourage baby to latch on to the artificial nipple using the same
techniques employed with his favorite nipples: mouth wide open, lips
everted, and gum pressure at least an inch beyond the tip of the nipple.
(See the illustration here.) If baby learns lazy latch-on habits on the
bottle nipple, making daily transitions to your nipples may be a
confusing (and possibly painful) experience.
To further entice the discerning feeder, warm the bottle nipple in warm
water, making it more supple, like the breast. Try changing the
temperature of the nipple for the changing needs of the baby. A chilled
nipple may be more inviting to a baby who is teething.
Instruct the caregiver to interact with your baby during bottlefeeding
much the way you do when breastfeeding. Advise the caregiver to
undress baby and wear a short-sleeved blouse to promote skin-to-skin
contact. Maintaining eye contact during the feeding is important;
feeding is not only giving milk but enjoying social interaction.
Avoid bottle propping. It is unsafe to leave baby unattended in a crib or
infant seat to take his own bottle.

OceanofPDF.com

 OceanofPDF.com

 Choosing and Using a Breast Pump

Breast pumps are convenient and often necessary for expressing milk to
relieve engorgement, to preserve a mother’s milk supply when baby cannot
nurse, and to collect milk when mother and baby are separated because of
the mother’s employment. Here are some general considerations for
choosing the right breast pump for you, as well as some ideas for more
efficient and comfortable pumping:

Unless you must frequently pump in an area that
does not have an electrical outlet, consider a highquality electric pump. These are best at
mimicking a baby’s natural sucking pattern. You
can pump both breasts at once, which saves time.
Some electric pumps can also be used as manual
pumps.
If you are pumping to keep up your milk supply
because your baby is premature or ill and is not
nursing, use a hospital-grade electric pump. These
are the most effective pumps and the most
convenient to use, which really makes a
difference if you are pumping six to ten times a

 day. Studies have shown that pumping both
breasts at the same time with a hospital-grade
electric pump produces higher prolactin levels
than pumping with a manual or battery-operated
pump. Maintaining your milk supply for the day
when your baby can breastfeed is an important
job. It takes good tools to do it well.
Cost varies widely. Hand pumps are the least
expensive, and hospital-grade electric pumps
(usually rented) are the most expensive. Some
insurance companies reimburse the cost of renting
an electric pump, provided you submit a doctor’s
prescription (with baby’s name on it, not yours).
If your nipples become sore during pumping,
massage an emollient, such as Lansinoh, on your
nipples prior to pumping.
Before pumping, look at a picture and think
motherly thoughts of your baby. In some mothers,
just anticipating breastfeeding or pumping can
stimulate the milk-producing hormones to flow.
There are many breast pumps for different
occasions and lifestyles. Because breast-pump
technology is rapidly improving to meet the
varying demands of today’s mothers, we
recommend contacting your lactation consultant

 for the most up-to-date information on selecting
the right breast pump and accessories for you.
OceanofPDF.com

 Different Types of Breast Pumps

Ask your local breastfeeding support person or lactation consultant for
advice on choosing the best breast pump to suit your needs. Here are the
various options:
Hand pump. This inexpensive, portable, hand-powered pump is great for
moms who need to give baby only an occasional bottle of expressed milk.
Electric or battery-operated pump. This type is perfect for a mother who
wants to pump milk for occasional separation from her baby but finds the
hand pump too tiring. Medela makes two types of this pump.
Portable electric pump. This is used by moms who pump every day away
from home. It is portable and lightweight, and many come with tote bags,
battery packs, car adapters, and other accessories. Brands include Medela,
Playtex, and Ameda.
Hospital-grade full-size automatic piston pump. Mothers who routinely
pump several times or more each day at home in order to establish or
maintain a milk supply and provide baby with several bottles of expressed
milk daily should rent this type of pump from a lactation consultant or
breastfeeding supply store. This is the most efficient and comfortable type

 of pump and will produce the most milk in the least amount of time. Brands
include Ameda and Medela.

OceanofPDF.com

 What It’s Like When You Begin Collecting Milk at Work

When you begin pumping your milk, don’t be discouraged if you initially
obtain only a small amount. With practice most mothers are able to pump at
least several ounces within ten to fifteen minutes. It is normal for you to
experience high-production and low-production days. Don’t expect your
relationship with the mechanical pump to be love at first sight. It will take
time to warm up to the metal and plastic when you’d rather be holding your
soft baby. While pumping your milk, think baby and look at a picture of
your baby. This stimulates your milk-producing hormones and activates
your milk-ejection reflex, which gets your milk flowing. Pump as much
milk as you can at least every three hours and store it in a refrigerator or use
a portable cooler (see here). If you are unable to take time off during your
regular schedule to pump your milk, collect your milk during coffee breaks,
lunch breaks, or more frequent bathroom breaks. Choosing an electric pump
that uses a double (both breasts at once) pumping system should cut your
pumping time in half.

 Large electric breast pump with double-pumping system.
At first your breasts may leak milk, perhaps when you think about your
baby or during usual feeding times. To deal with this tug from your
hormones, nonchalantly fold your arms across your chest, applying pressure
directly to your nipples for a minute or two. Also during the first week after
going from full-time to part-time breastfeeding, expect your breasts to fill
up periodically at feeding times as a reminder to pump. After the first two
weeks your body will naturally make biological adjustments to adapt to this
change in routine.

NEWS FLASH! The Affordable Care Act of 2010 requires employers to
provide a private location (not a bathroom!) for mothers to express their
milk for one year following their child’s birth. Most states have additional

 breastfeeding laws providing further protection for nursing mothers. For
more information, see dol.gov/whd/nursingmothers.

OceanofPDF.com

 Storing and Transporting This Liquid Gold

Stockpiling a supply of nature’s most valuable nutrient is an investment in
the future nutrition and health of your baby, especially as a reserve when
you return to work, during a major illness, or in any other situation that may
temporarily separate mother and baby. Here’s how to take care of this
valuable product.

Use Fresh Milk as Much as Possible

While frozen breast milk is the next best thing for baby, it does lose a bit of
its live properties during the freezing, thawing, refrigerating, and reheating
process. If you routinely feed baby pumped breast milk, it is best to keep
the milk in a clean container on the kitchen counter (away from heat and
sunlight) and feed it to baby fresh, without refrigerating and reheating. This
best preserves the live immune and enzyme properties in mom’s milk. As
long as your home or office isn’t too warm (72 degrees or less), you can
safely leave this milk out on the counter for as long as ten hours. During hot
weather (hotter than 85 degrees in your home), if you don’t have airconditioning, milk can safely stay on the counter for about four hours.

 Storing Expressed Milk

Reusable items involved in the collection and storage of breast milk need to
be thoroughly cleaned. Rinse all milk containers, bottles, and accessories
with cool water, then wash them well with soap and hot water. A dishwasher
with a water temperature of at least 180°F/82°C adequately sterilizes these
items. (For an alternative approach, follow the directions given here. Follow
the manufacturer’s directions for sterilizing breast-pump parts.)
To safely store the milk, follow these suggestions:

Wash your hands well before collecting your
milk.
Use BPA-free hard plastic or glass containers.
If you find disposable plastic storage bags the
easiest to store and transport, be sure to double
bag in case the outside bag tears.
Use 4- to 6-ounce containers, a few of them filled
with only 2 ounces (1 ounce equals approximately
30 milliliters). This makes thawing easier and
wastes less.
Freezer bags sold through the La Leche League
catalog are especially designed for freezing and
storing
breast
milk
(self-sealing
and
presterilized).

 Leave space in the container at the top of the
milk, allowing for expansion as it freezes.
Date each serving, placing the oldest in front, and
note anything that you’ve recently ingested that is
not routine—for example, any unusual food,
medication, even aspirin.
You can add to milk that is already frozen, but be
sure to chill the new milk first in the refrigerator,
as adding warm milk can defrost the top layer of
the frozen milk.
Breast milk may be safely kept unrefrigerated in a
clean container for four to ten hours (the cooler
your home, the longer it can be kept). However,
we advise refrigerating milk as soon as possible
after it is expressed if it is not going to be used
that day.
Breast milk may be stored in a refrigerator for up
to eight days before use, after which it should be
frozen. Fresh breast milk is better for baby than
frozen, so if you know you will be using it within
a few days, store it in the refrigerator.
Milk can be stored in:

 • the freezer section of a one-door refrigerator for two weeks
• the freezer of a two-door refrigerator/freezer for three to four
months
• a deep freeze at constant 0°F (–18°C) for six months or
longer

Using Stored Milk / Warming Refrigerated Milk

Freshly expressed breast milk can be given to baby without any special
storage. Milk that has been frozen, however, requires special care.

To defrost milk, place the container of frozen
milk upright in a bowl of warm water.
As you warm the milk, turn the container around
and around to mix the separated cream and milk,
and swirl the bottle of milk again before feeding.
Don’t heat beyond body temperature, as heat
destroys enzymes and immune properties.
If you do not use all of the milk in the container,
you can refrigerate the remaining milk and use it
again within the same day. Don’t refreeze thawed
milk.
Do not:

 • Thaw frozen milk on top of the stove; overheating may
result.
• Heat breast milk or formula in a microwave oven. The
uneven heat may cause hot spots and valuable nutrients may
be destroyed; also, microwaving weakens the infectionfighting factors in breast milk.
• Refreeze thawed breast milk; this may allow bacterial
growth.

Transporting Expressed Milk

In making the milk run from work to home, take great care to protect your
precious cargo. An insulated bag filled with ice packs is best for
transporting milk. Special insulated milk-transport tote bags and containers
are available from lactation consultants and La Leche League. Try Playtex
Breast Milk Storage Kit or Medela Breastmilk Storage Pack.

OceanofPDF.com

 What’s in It for You?

Is all this paraphernalia, pumping, leaking, storing, and making the milk run
really worth it? A resounding yes! Mothers in our practice who are juggling
breastfeeding and working have seen their investment pay off. We have
even had several flight attendants who are away from their babies two or
three days at a time, but have managed to continue part-time breastfeeding
for two years. Their testimony: “We feel closer and more sensitive toward
our babies.” As an added benefit, working mothers notice the relaxing
effects of breastfeeding. Susan, who has an executive sales job, reports, “I
have a very stressful job and I’m very tense when I return home. I settle
down and breastfeed my baby. She feels better and I feel better. What a
happy reunion!”

OceanofPDF.com

 “NURSING

NUISANCES,”

CHALLENGES,

AND FUNNY THINGS THAT HAPPEN ON THE
WAY TO THE BREAST
We have gathered from our gallery of breastfeeding pairs the most common
challenges and nuisances that occur during breastfeeding. You will see that
the recipe for a successful breastfeeding relationship is large doses of
commitment and a pinch of patience all mixed together with an untiring
sense of humor.

OceanofPDF.com

 Breastfeeding Personalities

One evening a group of veteran breastfeeding couples were sharing stories
about their babies’ nursing nuisances. Amused by the survivors’ accounts,
one father quipped, “Let’s give names to these little suckers.” And we did.

The Marathoner

How many times have we heard mothers complain, “All he wants to do is
eat”? In the early months expect your baby to have frequency days, when he
wants to feed continuously and you feel that you are getting nothing else
done. Your baby is going through a growth spurt, which occurs typically
around three weeks, six weeks, three months, and six months, with smaller
spurts in between. Your baby is obeying the law of supply and demand: The
more he sucks, the more milk you produce, and the better he grows. Also,
your baby may be going through a high-need period in which he needs a
day or two of frequent feeding and holding. Here are some survival tips:

PRACTICAL POINTERS FOR PUMPING
Buy or rent your pump from a lactation consultant who can instruct
you in how to use it and can answer your questions about pumping. If
you’re not sure about how to assemble and use the pump, or if you are

 not able to pump much milk, talk to your lactation consultant. There
may be a problem with the pump that is easily solved, or you may need
to use a better pump.
Don’t select a pump based on cost alone. Good pumps are expensive,
but if you are pumping several times a day at work or pumping at
home to maintain a milk supply for a baby in the hospital, the ease and
convenience of a better-quality pump are well worth the money.
Renting a pump is cheaper than buying formula. Insurance may cover
part of the cost if you have a prescription in your baby’s name.
Pump parts do wear out. If you are not able to pump as much milk as
you once did, the problem may be the pump, not you. Talk to your
lactation consultant or contact the pump manufacturer. Note that all but
the hospital-grade pumps are made to be single-user products. A used
pump may not work as well as a new one.
Follow a set routine. As often as possible, pump in the same place, in
the same chair, with the same “get ready, relax, and pump” routine.
This conditions your milk-ejection reflex and you’ll be able to pump
more milk. Have a picture of your baby to look at if away from him.
Use breast massage before and during pumping to help you relax and
bring more milk down to the nipple. (See “Assisting the Milk Ejection
Reflex,” here.)
Take some slow, deep breaths and let go of the day’s worries. Visualize
flowing water, fountains of milk—whatever helps to get your milk
moving down into the pump. Picture yourself nursing your baby in a
quiet, comfortable place.
Use a portable stereo with headphones to enjoy your favorite music or
background sounds from nature.
Pumping should not make your nipples sore. Be careful that the nipple
doesn’t rub against the side of the breast shield when the pump is
operating. Adjust the suction level if your nipples are hurting.
Pumping calls for clothing that makes it easy to get at your breasts.
Dresses and blouses designed for discreet breastfeeding also make
pumping more convenient. Some of the companies that make and
market nursing fashions specialize in sophisticated clothes for
breastfeeding working moms.

 Network with other breastfeeding mothers at your workplace. Perhaps
you can pump at the same time and enjoy each other’s company. If you
are the only breastfeeding mother at your workplace, you may have to
educate co-workers about breastfeeding and why you are pumping. Be
patient and tolerant of others’ opinions, while remaining confident that
you are doing what’s best for your baby and yourself.

During high-need days, temporarily shelve all
outside commitments that may drain your energy.
Your baby is a baby only a very short time, and
no one’s life is going to be affected if the
housework doesn’t get done on time. In our
experience, mothers become burned out, not so
much because of the demands of their baby, but
because of too many other family expectations
and commitments and because they are not being
nurtured themselves.
Attempt to get more of your hindmilk into your
baby to satisfy her longer. Allow baby to finish
the first breast before switching her to the other
side. Try double feeding and other techniques
discussed earlier for improving your milk supply.
Wear your baby in a baby sling. Babywearing not
only makes breastfeeding easier and more
accessible, but it may be that your high-need baby

 wants the comfort of your closeness and not
always the breastfeeding.
Periodically offer your baby your finger as a
pacifier. This satisfies her need to suck when she
is not hungry. Call in the reserves, letting your
husband or a trusted caregiver comfort your baby.
Avoid the filler-food fallacy. You may be advised
to give your baby a supplemental bottle or cereal
with the implication that you don’t have enough
milk. This is rarely necessary; but if your baby is
truly hungry, it may be necessary in order to
satisfy baby if all the other measures are not
working. Most of the time your baby is simply
signaling that she needs to suck more in order for
you to increase your level of milk to meet her
level of need. If your doctor is advising a
supplement, you need to be aware that this could
lead to a gradual cessation of breastfeeding as you
and baby come to depend more and more on the
bottles. Supplementation can be done in such a
way that it does not have to jeopardize your
breastfeeding relationship. This would be an
important time to obtain the services of a lactation
consultant. She can help you get your baby’s

 weight gain back on track and maximize your
milk supply.
Sleep when your baby sleeps and don’t be
tempted to “finally get something done.” You
need to recharge your own system to cope with
these high-need periods. Nap nursing and night
nursing are very effective for a persistently
hungry baby and tired mother.

Mr. Suck-a-Little, Look-a-Little

Sometime between two and six months of age, expect your baby to suck a
minute, pull away, suck another minute, and pull away again. The
development of your baby’s visual acuity accounts for this common
breastfeeding nuisance. By this age baby is able to see things clearly across
the room, notice passersby, and is so distracted by all the goings-on in his
interesting environment that he stops eating to look. Sometimes baby will
be so into his meal, yet interested in someone who walks by, that he may
suddenly turn his head and seem to take a bit of your breast with him.
You’ll laugh only once at this antic. Your nipple can stretch just so far.
Experienced mothers have handled this with the strategy of sheltered
feedings. Several times a day take your baby into a dark, quiet,
uninteresting room (such as the bedroom with drapes drawn) and get him

 down to the business of eating. Lie down in a quiet dark room and nap
nurse, drawing baby’s attention to you as his close nap partner. Covering
baby with a shawl or placing him in a sling during feeding also shelters Mr.
Suck-a-Little, Look-a-Little. This is a passing nuisance that creative feeding
techniques and a bit of humor will solve. Your baby will soon discover that
he can eat and look at the same time.

The Nipper-Napper

While many babies feed at least twenty minutes every three hours, the
nipper-napper likes to eat and sleep continually. He sucks a few minutes,
sleeps awhile, sucks again for a few minutes, and then drifts back into sleep.
This temporary nuisance occurs in the early weeks when some babies prefer
sleeping to eating—and prefer small packages of each. If your baby is
gaining enough weight and you have the time to luxuriate, put your feet up,
turn on soothing music, and enjoy these prolonged feedings. This stage
soon passes. If your sleepy baby is not gaining enough weight, try switch
feeding (see here) to keep her alert long enough to fill her tummy at the
breast.

The Gourmet

 This baby prolongs the meals as if savoring every drop and touch of
breastfeeding. He relishes not only the taste of the milk, but the whole
ambience of a gourmet meal at a fine restaurant. Enjoying every minute of
this fine cuisine, baby licks, sucks, fondles, nestles, and goes to great
lengths to draw out the feeding time. As another ploy to stall the end of the
meal, he will turn away as if finally finished, only to smack his lips, stretch
a bit, and reposition himself for another course. If you have the time and
baby has the desire, cherish every lingering meal, as breastfeeding is a
phase of life with your baby that passes all too quickly.

The Yanker

This close relative of Mr. Suck-a-Little, Look-a-Little frequently pulls his
head away while feeding, but occasionally forgets to let go. Ouch! To save
your nipples, use the clutch hold (see here) to secure the back of baby’s
neck in your hand. Feed baby in the cradle hold in the sling (see here) to
steady his head. Finally, be ready to insert your index finger into baby’s
mouth to break the suction just as baby begins to pull away.

The Chomper

 A baby with this nursing nuisance is often dubbed “Jaws.” You are
comfortably into a feeding, beginning to nod off into the sea of tranquillity,
when suddenly Chomps clamps down, and your tender nipples become a
human teething ring. This uncomfortable nuisance occurs when baby is
around five to six months old as he begins to experience preteething gum
pain. If baby gets an attack of sore gums while feeding, he may regard your
breasts as a source of teething comfort as well as milk. Letting your baby
gum your finger or a frozen teething ring before and after feeding will
usually pacify Chomps. Also, as you feel the gums gripping, put your finger
between gums and nipple or use your index finger to depress baby’s lower
jaw—a reminder to respect the breast that feeds him. (If he evolves into the
biter, see here.)

The Intruder

You have been feeding your infant all day long, chasing a busy toddler
around the house, and carpooling children. By the end of the evening you
have had it with kids, and you and your husband are comfortably nestled
together in bed. The lights are out, lovemaking begins. Suddenly from outer
space comes the familiar cry for milk. Your pulse goes up, your milk lets
down. Your husband feels foiled again. These intrusions will soon pass.
There is sex after birth, and certainly after baby has been resettled. All good
things are worth waiting for.

 The Twiddler

Between six and nine months babies love to use their top hand to pinch your
breast, which can be annoying, or play with your face, which can be
amusing. One antic you want to discourage immediately is the twiddling of
your other nipple. It often starts with just touching or holding, as though
baby wants to be sure it will be there when needed. It may seem very sweet,
but the escalated version we call twiddling can be very irritating.

The Gymnast

Just as you and your baby are quietly nestled into a comfortable position,
baby starts kicking his upper leg, as though keeping time with his sucking
rhythm. Babies try all sorts of contortions while feeding, even flipping
around nearly 180 degrees without letting go. Here’s how to corral the
gymnast: Contain both the young and the older baby in a baby sling to
prevent him from flinging his head back to explore his environment and
taking your breast with him. Try the “toddler tuck,” wedging your baby’s
legs between your arm and body while baby is in the cradle hold. Also,
babies don’t like the feeling of dangling or falling while feeding; hooking
his top leg over your arm gives him a feeling of security. Containing your
baby during breastfeeding is baby’s first lesson in mealtime manners. As
motor skills mushroom, babies like to try out their body during situations in

 which they seem most relaxed, like during feeding. They may even try a
somersault without missing a suck.

The Snacker

The snacker likes to eat on the run. When your toddler becomes too busy to
enjoy prolonged gourmet meals, expect two-minute feedings to become
common. Toddlers often go through periods during which they want to suck
as often as they did as a tiny baby. Your toddler gets into these fast-food
habits due to the need for frequent pick-me-ups, a sort of pit stop for
emotional refueling as the busy baby races around the house exploring new
adventures, but routinely needs to return to a familiar home base.

The Pouncer

A cousin to the snacker, the pouncer is a frequent nuisance to mothers of
breastfeeding toddlers. You are sitting on the couch treating yourself to a
well-deserved rest, and you open your favorite book. Suddenly your toddler
descends and pounces; he’s maneuvering across your lap and under your
blouse. Picture this scene from his point of view. You are sitting in his
favorite place to feed, which triggers in baby’s mind a replay of his favorite
memories nestled comfortably in mother’s arms at this very same place—

 sort of déjà vu. Here’s how one mother, working on gradual weaning, tamed
her pouncer. “As soon as he made advances I became a moving target,
remembering not to sit in places that reminded him of feeding.”

OceanofPDF.com

 Other Breastfeeding Behaviors

Over time, your baby is likely to exhibit several of the “personality traits”
described above. Similarly, don’t be surprised if you encounter one or more
of the following behavior patterns at one time or another during the course
of breastfeeding.

Breastfeeding Strike

Some babies abruptly refuse to breastfeed for several days, then with
coaxing resume their previous breastfeeding routine. Called a breastfeeding
strike, this behavior is usually caused by physical upsets, such as teething,
illness, or hospitalization, and emotional upsets, such as a recent move,
illness in the mother, family discord, or the busy-nest syndrome (too many
visitors, too many outside responsibilities, holiday stress, and so on). Our
first baby, Jim, refused to breastfeed after a trip to the emergency room for
stitches following a fall at eight months of age. Being young parents, we
interpreted this as his time to wean. After all, he was eight months old,
taking solids, and drinking well from a cup, and in those days nearly all
babies were weaned by eight months. We made no attempts to encourage

 him back to the breast. Now we know that Jim was on a breastfeeding
strike.
Here’s how to negotiate with a striker. First, spot this as a temporary loss
of interest and not a sign that your baby is ready to wean. Rarely do babies
under nine months of age want to wean from the breast. Try to pinpoint the
possible physical or emotional upset that triggered the strike. Then woo
your striking baby back to your breast. Pretend you are just beginning to
breastfeed your baby as a newborn. Get reacquainted. Temporarily shelve
all obligations that take you away from baby. Explain the breastfeeding
strike to your husband and other family members, telling them why you
need to focus intently on your baby over the next few days. Take the phone
off the hook, relax at a comfortable feeding station (see here for how to
prepare one), soak in a tub together, and turn on soothing music and just
hold your baby skin to skin most of the day. Wear your infant in a sling as
much as possible to keep baby close to your breast. Nap nursing and night
nursing are proven ways to woo baby back to the breast; babies who resist
the breast when awake often suck when falling asleep, or even in their
sleep. Snuggle up with your baby at night. Sometimes re-creating the
ambience of breastfeeding reminds baby of what he is missing. If baby
continues to withdraw from the breast, don’t force-feed. Let your baby fall
asleep, skin to skin, with his head nesting on your breast. Remember,
“nursing” means comforting, not just feeding. Sometimes babies need to go
through a few days of holding or comfort feeding before they resume
breastfeeding.

 Try to relive the feeding environment that you and baby enjoyed before
the strike: your baby’s favorite feeding position, rocking chair, location in
the house, or cuddle position in bed. With creative mother-infant
attachment, most strikes are over within a few days. But we have known
babies who refused to breastfeed for nearly a week and then gradually
resumed. These mothers persevered, made themselves superavailable,
pumped to maintain milk supply, offered this milk to baby in a cup, and
followed their intuition that baby was not ready to wean. In this case,
support from a mother who has gone through this helps—call La Leche
League. If after all these negotiations baby does not resume breastfeeding,
be reassured that this truly is baby’s idea, and your infant is, in fact, ready to
move on to the next level—weaning.

Dr. Bob notes: Our third child went on strike around one year of age after
Cheryl cried out in pain when the baby bit her while nursing. Little Joshua
was so startled and upset that he refused to nurse for three long days.
Cheryl had planned to nurse him for about three years, so she was
heartbroken over the thought that this might be the end of her precious
breastfeeding relationship. Seeing her devastation made me realize how
important this part of her mothering life was. Fortunately, we successfully
got him back on the breast and he continued until after his third birthday.

 Band-Aid Breastfeeding

To a baby, breastfeeding is a source of nourishment and comfort. Expect
your toddler, even after you thought he had weaned, to run to you and climb
into your arms to be nursed following a fall, a scrape, or a cut. So vivid in
your baby’s mind is the memory of breastfeeding that he automatically
clicks in to the mind-set of breastfeeding as a quick fix to repair the leaks in
his “fragile” body.

The One-Sided Baby

If baby prefers one breast over the other, or will feed only on her favorite,
don’t worry. Some babies quickly learn which breast works better and stay
with the easier side. And babies usually grow well from the nourishment of
only one breast. Twins do. You may feel a bit lopsided for a few months, but
your body is never going to be the same after birth anyway.

Rather Fight Than Switch

Finally, to make life even more challenging for the breastfeeding family,
there is the baby who refuses to take a bottle. You worry if you return to
work, you worry when you go out. Yet the little food critic waits for his

 favorite meal and waitress to return, and rejects schemes to sell secondclass service. Some babies also refuse to take a bottle (even with breast milk
in it) from the breastfeeding mother. It’s like walking into your favorite
restaurant, sitting at your favorite table, hearing familiar music, being
served by the waitress of your choice, and being presented the wrong menu.
For babies who are hooked on breastfeeding, any alternative cuisine may
not be in their program. You can feel flattered that your baby is so
discerning!
We frequently tackled this problem on our live call-in radio program,
“Ask About Your Baby.” One day a father called and offered his advice on
substitute bottlefeeding. “I’m a policeman, and I enjoy our baby while my
wife’s at work. I take my shirt off and let her nuzzle against my fuzzy chest.
Then I hold the bottle under my arm like I am used to holding my flashlight
while I walk the beat. I hold the baby very much like my wife does at the
breast while baby drinks from the bottle between my upper arm and chest.
We both seem to get a kick out of this innovation.” Chalk up one for
father’s intuition.
If you’ve already tried the suggestions for bottlefeeding the breastfed
baby given here and baby still refuses to accept a bottle, relax; there are
other strategies in your feeding repertoire. Try cup feeding your baby using
a small, flexible plastic cup. (See here for instructions.) If baby likes
sipping milk, try a trainer cup with a drinking rim on the top instead of a
nipple. Avoid cups with spouts, since the spout can be sucked on.

 Fortunately, all of these nursing nuisances have one thing in common—they
soon pass. Then comes more growth and development, and you are blessed
with a new set of challenges. But babies are like that.

OceanofPDF.com

 BREASTFEEDING

SPECIAL

BABIES

IN

SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES
Breastfeeding is even more important for babies with special needs and
their parents. Breastfeeding gives you a higher level of maternal hormones,
which increase your intuition and perseverance to meet the needs of your
special baby. Because of its physical, psychological, and medical benefits,
breastfeeding is even more important for these babies. Over our many years
in medical practice we have witnessed a phenomenon for which we have
coined the term “need-level concept.” A baby has special needs. Parents
develop a style of caring for their baby and in so doing elevate their level of
intuition and sensitivity toward their baby to match the level of baby’s
needs. Let’s discuss the most common situations in which babies with
special needs in unique situations bring out a special kind of parenting.

SEXUAL FEELINGS WHILE BREASTFEEDING
The same hormones that make milk and make women feel motherly
(prolactin and oxytocin) are also a normal part of female sexuality. They
promote feelings of relaxation and pleasure and help mother bond to her
baby. Breastfeeding is supposed to be pleasurable. The human race would
not have survived if breastfeeding were not enjoyable.
Some women become alarmed at the intensity of the feelings that are
generated when a baby sucks at the breast. Especially once the baby is
older, women worry whether these feelings are normal. They are! La Leche

 League International advises: “Women do experience physical sensations
during breastfeeding. Depending on the time and context, these feelings will
be interpreted differently—as physical arousal, as an overall sense of wellbeing, or as warm and loving feelings towards the child. All are a natural
part of a woman’s experiences and her relationship with her child.”

OceanofPDF.com

 The Cesarean-Birthed Baby

Following a surgical birth a breastfeeding mother has a double job: healing
herself and nurturing her baby. Here’s how to do both:

Ask the lactation consultant in the maternity unit
to show you the side-lying position and the clutch
hold for breastfeeding. These positions keep
baby’s weight off your incision. (See here for a
description of these positions.)
If you would rather sit up to nurse your baby, sit
in a straight-backed armchair rather than in your
hospital bed. This is easier on your abdominal
muscles. Use pillows along your side to bring
baby up to breast height and to protect your
incision.
Be sure that dad observes how the professionals
help you position yourself and your baby for
comfort and for correct breastfeeding technique
so that he can take over this role when you go
home. Ask them to instruct dad on holding baby’s
lower jaw down and everting baby’s lip outward,

 since it may be uncomfortable for you to bend
over to see how baby is latching on.
Take whatever pain medications you need to be
comfortable. Pain suppresses milk production and
interferes with your milk-ejection reflex. The
usual medications used for post-op pain are safe,
since very little goes into your milk.
If
post-operative
complications
prevent
breastfeeding for a day or two, father or a nurse
can give baby formula, but preferably not by
bottle. Cup feeding or finger feeding with a
syringe or a supplementer (see here for an
explanation of these techniques) is better than
using a bottle, which can lead to nipple confusion.
Breastfeed your baby frequently, night and day.
Studies have shown that it may take longer for a
mother’s milk to come in after a cesarean birth.
Frequent feeding will build up your milk supply
more quickly. If baby is not breastfeeding yet,
you need to begin pumping your breasts as soon
as possible so that your baby can benefit from
your colostrum produced during this time, and so
you will have an ample milk supply when baby
does start breastfeeding.

 Baby should room-in with you as soon as
possible. Because of post-operative sedation this
is usually discouraged for cesarean mothers. We
still advise rooming-in if someone can stay with
you to help care for the baby.
Be patient. It takes more time, support, and perseverance to achieve a
successful breastfeeding relationship following an operation. Some of the
energy that would otherwise go toward breastfeeding is shared with healing
your own body. Breastfeeding harmony will come, though not as easily or
quickly. (See related section on bonding with the cesarean baby, here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 The Premature Baby

These special babies have special needs for extra nutrition and comfort.
Here is where the breastfeeding mother shines. The recent advances of
newborn intensive care have increased the chances of taking home a healthy
baby, but the same technology that is saving more babies has, by its very
definition, displaced the mother. But you are an indispensable part of the
medical team.
Sue and her baby, Jonathan, were a mother and a premature baby we
cared for in the hospital. During most of the day, she lived at the side of her
baby’s incubator. As a participating witness in Jonathan’s progress, Sue
exclaimed, “It’s like he’s in an outside womb, and I have the opportunity of
seeing him grow.”

Supermilk!

A premature baby has an even greater need for mother’s milk. Premature
babies need more proteins and calories for catch-up growth. Researchers
have discovered that the milk of mothers who deliver preterm babies is
higher in proteins and calories—a vivid testimony to how the milk of a

 species changes to ensure the survival of the young of that species.
Supermilk for early babies—how exciting!
While the nutritional benefits of breastfeeding are important for
premature babies, the immunological benefits are even more critical. Breast
milk protects these babies against bacteria and viruses that their own
immune systems cannot cope with. In addition, human milk is the perfect
first feeding for immature gastrointestinal tracts. Human milk offers
protection against necrotizing enterocolitis, a life-threatening bowel disease
that affects premature babies. Your baby’s neonatologist may order that
baby’s diet of human milk be fortified or supplemented with a commercial
product. This is because in order to grow as they did in the womb, very
young preemies may need larger amounts of some nutrients than mother’s
milk can provide. But this does not mean that mother’s milk should not be
used also. Human milk provides premature babies with important health
and developmental benefits unavailable in commercial formulas and
fortifiers.
It used to be the policy in most newborn intensive care units not to let
premature babies breastfeed until after baby was able to tolerate
bottlefeedings. Research has shown that premature babies actually do better
with breastfeeding than bottlefeeding, and that the ability to breastfeed
precedes the ability to bottlefeed. Researchers found that a breastfeeding
baby sucks and swallows in a burst-and-pause rhythm that uses less energy
than the less rhythmic bottlefeeding. They found that breastfeeding babies
actually grew better and had fewer stop-breathing episodes and tired less

 during breastfeeding than with bottlefeeding. Not only is breast milk
superior for premature babies, so is the way it is delivered.

What Mother Can Do

To understand your important role in the care of your premature infant, let’s
go through the usual case of the premature baby whose breathing is stable
but who is in the intensive care unit for “growing.” Here are some care-bymother steps to consider.
Practice kangaroo care. One way that a breastfeeding mother can join the
medical team is through an innovation called kangaroo care—an
affectionate nickname derived from the method’s similarity to the kangaroo
pouch and the easy self-feeding of the premature baby kangaroo. Research
by Dr. Gene Cranston Anderson at Case Western Reserve in Cleveland has
shown that preemies receiving kangaroo care gain weight faster, have fewer
stop-breathing episodes, and experience a shorter hospital stay.
Using a baby sling or wrap, mother wears her diaper-clad baby skin to
skin on or between her breasts. The combination of mother’s warm body,
warm blankets, and mother’s clothing keeps the premature baby toasty.
Many premature babies initially react to this comfortable environment by
falling asleep and sleeping more peacefully than in their high-tech cribs.
When baby awakens, the closeness to mother’s breasts stimulates baby to
feed as his little stomach requires—a system called self-regulatory feeding.

 Live at the side of your baby’s incubator and sit in a rocking chair with
baby wrapped skin to skin at your breasts. Unless your baby must be
attached to medical instruments, walk around while wearing your baby.
Even more than rocking in the chair, the rhythm of walking helps baby
breathe more regularly because, presumably, this is a pattern he had been
used to in your womb. (See discussion of the vestibular system, here.)
Kangaroo-cared-for babies cry less. Because it wastes oxygen and energy,
excessive crying can keep premature babies from growing optimally.
Breastfeeding, kangaroo care, holding and rocking, and wearing your baby
lessen crying and speed growth.
Besides being good for babies, there is something in kangaroo care for
mothers, too. The closeness of baby nestling on the breasts triggers the
mothering and milk-producing hormones. Mothers who are invited to
participate in kangaroo care are more inclined to breastfeed, produce more
milk, and breastfeed longer. They develop a deeper attachment to their
infants, feel more confident about their mothering skills, and feel a valuable
part of the newborn intensive care team.
Newborn specialists believe that one main reason kangaroo care helps
premature babies thrive is that mother acts as a breathing pacemaker for her
premature infant. Preterm babies have frequent stop-breathing episodes,
called apnea, which contribute to these babies’ slow growth and even
slower departure from the hospital. You probably never thought of yourself
as a breathing machine, but picture this: Baby is snuggled comfortably
against your chest, his ear over your heart. You have a rhythm in your
breathing and your heart rate, and your baby senses it. The rhythm of your

 breathing, your heartbeat, your voice, which baby was accustomed to
hearing in utero, and even the warm air flowing from your nose onto baby’s
scalp at each breath are translated into breathing stimuli for your baby, as if
reminding the forgetful premature to breathe. Attached babies catch the
rhythm of their parents.
Pump your milk. Rent an electric breast pump and start pumping your
milk as soon as possible after birth. Store this milk and begin giving your
baby your milk as soon as baby is medically able to take it by whatever
method works best.
Ask for help. Seek assistance from a lactation consultant who will show
you special techniques to help your premature baby latch on correctly and
suck efficiently.
Avoid the bottle. Ask the nursing staff to feed your baby with a cup,
syringe, or a finger-feeding system (see here) instead of with bottles and
artificial nipples. Another alternative is to continue tube feeding while your
baby learns to nurse at the breast. Some premature babies do not experience
nipple confusion and eagerly advance from bottle to breast. Others are
prone to nipple preference, so avoid the bottle stage unless medically
necessary. When you take your baby home from the hospital, you may need
to continue to offer supplements for a week or two.
Ease baby on. Instead of pulling your baby in very close (see here), as you
would to latch a term baby onto your breast, it’s better to ease the breast

 into the premature baby’s mouth. Use the compress-and-stuff technique.
With your hand shaped like a C (thumb on top and fingers beneath the
breast), cup your breast well behind the areola. Compress the breast, tease
baby’s mouth open wide, and gradually ease the “areola sandwich” into
baby’s mouth.
Forget the clock. The concept of schedule has little meaning for term
babies and none for prematures. Expect your baby to suck weakly, feed
slowly, tire quickly, and fall asleep frequently during the feedings. (They do
this with bottlefeeding, too.) Preterm babies tire more easily, need more
calories for catch-up growth, and have small tummies. This is why they
need small, frequent feedings. Premature babies have more bizarre sleepand-wake cycles, so that every mother-baby pair must work out a feeding
pattern that gets the most milk into the baby without tiring him out.

NO MORE, PLEASE. I’M TIRED!
It is important not to jostle and tire premature babies, and others with
medical problems, by becoming too enthusiastic and vigorous with
feedings, lest babies burn more energy than they take in during feeding and
consequently grow too slowly. Watch for cues (flutter-type sucking and
drifting off to sleep) that baby has had enough. Ease baby off your breast,
but be ready to feed again in an hour or two, or even sooner.

SEARS PARENTING LIBRARY ALERT
For more information on premature babies, see The Premature Baby Book.

OceanofPDF.com

 The Ill or Hospitalized Baby

Breastfeeding is good medicine. Besides helping preemies thrive, the
breastfeeding mother is a valuable part of the medical team if her baby is ill,
particularly if he is hospitalized. When one of our patients is in the hospital,
it has always been our practice to encourage care by parents. We have
noticed that babies get better more quickly, and parents feel involved as part
of the team. The more involved they are, the better they understand the
nature of the illness and the methods of treatment.
Breastfeeding is particularly valuable to infants who are hospitalized for
breathing problems such as croup or bronchitis. In these conditions, the
more upset baby is, the more the breathing is upset. Relaxing baby also
helps relax the breathing. Let me, Dr. Bill, share with you the story of oneyear-old Tony and his breastfeeding mother, Cindy. Early one morning Tony
awakened barking like a seal and having difficulty breathing. I hospitalized
Tony for treatment of croup, but his condition worsened. Tony was in a
vicious cycle—the more difficulty he had breathing, the more anxious he
got, which further aggravated his breathing. I told Cindy that unless Tony
relaxed, his condition would deteriorate, and we would have to do a
tracheostomy (surgically open his windpipe below the inflamed vocal cords
so that he could breathe more air). Without taking a breath Cindy
volunteered, “I’ll relax him,” and she did! Through the opening in Tony’s

 oxygen tent came Cindy’s breast, along with soothing words of
encouragement and a familiar touch from someone who cared enough to
give her child the very best. Tony listened, looked, and sucked. Immediately
he relaxed and breathed better. I relaxed, mother relaxed, and so did the
surgeon, waiting with his lifesaving instruments. Tony got the ultimate
pacifier.
During an illness babies often regress to a more primitive and familiar
pattern of self-comforting, such as thumb-sucking and curling up like a
fetus. Being breastfed while sick lessens the anxiety of being in the hospital
by helping the infant latch on to a comfortable and pleasurable pattern that
he has learned to love and trust.
Breastfeeding is also valuable for the infant who has a diarrheal illness
from inflamed intestines (called gastroenteritis). These infants may not
tolerate commercially prepared formula, but they generally can tolerate
breast milk. In our practice we have seen many infants with gastroenteritis
continue to breastfeed without aggravating the diarrhea or getting
dehydrated; whereas their formula-feeding friends with the same illness
often wind up in the hospital with dehydration and need intravenous
feedings. Chalk up another bonus for mother’s milk. And the very act of
sucking is very comforting to a baby who doesn’t understand why she feels
so crummy.

OceanofPDF.com

 Breastfeeding Helps Hearts

Babies who are born with heart defects (called congenital heart disease, or
CHD) have one of two problems: They may have too much blood flowing
to their lungs, causing overload on the heart and resulting in heart failure.
Or they may not have enough blood flowing to their lungs, resulting in
cyanosis (blueness); a baby with this condition is termed a “blue baby.” In
both of these conditions babies with CHD tire easily during feedings and
grow more slowly. Years ago, breastfeeding a baby with CHD was
discouraged because it was erroneously thought that breastfeeding would
tire these babies out. As we discussed for premature babies, research has
shown the opposite. These babies may actually use less energy and breathe
more efficiently during breastfeeding than bottlefeeding. Breast milk
contains less salt than formula, so it is better for babies who are prone to
heart failure. The same suggestions recommended for feeding premature
babies apply to feeding babies with CHD: small, frequent feedings, often
with a supplementer system, and large doses of patience.

OceanofPDF.com

 Babies with Down Syndrome

Our seventh child, Stephen, has Down syndrome. As a lactation consultant,
nurse, and mother, and as a pediatrician and father, Martha and I both
wanted to give Stephen the best start. We went through a checklist of the
most common medical problems we could expect in Stephen. While
certainly no panacea, breast milk could help each one of these problems:

Babies with Down syndrome are prone to colds,
especially ear infections; breast milk provides
extra immunity.
Babies with Down syndrome are prone to
intestinal infections; breast milk promotes the
growth of friendly bacteria in the intestinal tract, a
factor that lessens infections.
Babies with Down syndrome are prone to
constipation; breast milk has a laxative effect.
Babies with Down syndrome are prone to heart
problems; breast milk is lower in salt and is more
physiologic.
Babies with Down syndrome may have a weak
suck; breastfeeding has an energy-sparing rhythm

 (see here).
Babies with Down syndrome have delayed mental
and motor development; breast milk is good brain
food, and breastfeeding optimizes oral-facial
development and socialization.
Babies with Down syndrome tend to become
obese children, primarily because of lack of
appetite control. Many of them suffer from the
complications of obesity, such as diabetes,
arthritis, and cardiovascular disease. Breastfed
babies tend to be leaner, and we wanted to give
Stephen a lean start.
There is a lot we don’t know about babies with Down syndrome; there
are a lot of valuable nutrients in breast milk yet to be discovered. We had a
special baby who needed special parenting. After Stephen’s birth, as we
held each other and cried together, we vowed that he would have it—
beginning with breastfeeding.
Typically, babies with Down syndrome have a hypotonic (low tone,
weak) suck requiring lots of support, training, and patience until mother and
baby get the hang of it. Not until he was two weeks old did Stephen open
his eyes and become more receptive to breastfeeding. Until then Martha did
what she could to get him latched on. This was a very scary time for us, as
we feared he might never breastfeed well. Martha had to initiate most of the
feedings. All our other babies were demand feeders. But if we had waited

 for Stephen to “demand,” he would never have gained weight. He was what
we call a happy-to-starve baby, and lost nearly a pound.
For two weeks she pumped several times a day and syringe and finger
fed Stephen 1 ounce before each breastfeeding to “suck train” him. It was
amazing to see how well he finally made up for lost time—some days
gaining 2 ounces.
Though most babies with Down syndrome have a more difficult
breastfeeding start and need to be taught to breastfeed, they do eventually
learn these skills. The profound benefits make the extra work worthwhile.
Be sure to contact a lactation consultant who has experience working with
babies with Down syndrome.
All of the tips for attachment parenting have magnified benefits for
babies with special needs. We found that constant contact through sharing
sleep, breastfeeding, and babywearing gave us the boost we needed for
bonding with Stephen. We joined a support group that helped us get excited
about our baby. As he began to gain weight and breastfeed, we found that
we could stop worrying about him and begin enjoying him. Martha still
remembers the day she discovered that he responded to that magic highpitched baby talk from her—worry had kept her from relating to him in a
normal way. It felt so good to see the many ways he was similar to our other
babies rather than focus on how he was different. Now we cannot imagine
life without Stephen. Our world is a better place because of Stephen. He has
taught us how to value every person, no matter what his or her difference
might be.

 OceanofPDF.com

 The Baby with Cleft Lip or Palate

Babies with a cleft lip or palate pose a special challenge to the breastfeeding
mother, but the benefits of breastfeeding are worth the investment. The
location and severity of the cleft will determine whether baby can learn to
breastfeed effectively and which positions and techniques you should use.
Mothers of babies with a cleft lip or palate should obtain professional help
from a lactation consultant by the second day after birth. Choose a lactation
consultant who has some experience helping babies with clefts breastfeed.
A baby with a cleft lip may or may not have difficulty forming a seal on
the breast. If baby does have trouble, mother’s soft breast tissue will fill in
some of the space at the cleft, and mother’s thumb can close off the rest of
the gap, allowing baby to suck normally. Clefts are repaired in stages in the
early months. Some surgeons feel that breastfeeding immediately after the
surgery does not interfere with healing; others may insist that you pump
your milk and feed it to your baby with a special device until the repair has
healed.
A baby with a small cleft of the soft palate may be able to nurse with
few problems, but a baby with a more extensive cleft may not be able to
breastfeed at all. Because of the opening in the palate, a baby with a cleft
palate cannot use suction to keep the breast in his mouth, and with part of
the hard palate missing, it is difficult for baby to milk the breast with

 pressure from his tongue. Milk may run into baby’s nose and ears. A
lactation consultant can help you evaluate the problems your baby has with
breastfeeding and suggest solutions. Even if your baby is unable to
breastfeed, you can still pump milk and feed it to him in other ways.

OceanofPDF.com

 The Adopted Baby

Where there’s a will, there’s a way. Yes, you can breastfeed your adopted
baby; it takes high doses of commitment, a few special tools, and
professional breastfeeding help. Martha was breastfeeding our adopted
baby, Lauren, when we were writing the first edition of this book. We have
counseled many adopting mothers who have successfully breastfed their
babies, using a technique called induced lactation. These are the steps to go
through:

Seek advice and support from mothers who have
successfully breastfed their adoptive babies. You
can locate adoptive breastfeeding mothers
through your lactation consultant or La Leche
League, or ask your pediatrician for names of
adoptive mothers in his or her practice who have
breastfed their babies.
Consult a lactation consultant as soon as you
know you are getting a baby. The ideal situation is
to know before the baby is born. A month’s
preparation is best, but not absolutely necessary.

 Here are the tools you need: Rent an electric
breast pump, preferably one with a double
pumping system, and simulate sucking at the
breast by pumping your breasts as often as you
would feed a newborn, around every two to three
hours. Your lactation consultant will show you
how to use the pump and work out a schedule.
You will also need a breastfeeding supplementer,
which is described here. (An adopting mother in
our practice was so thrilled at breastfeeding her
baby and used the supplementer so much she had
it bronzed.) You may begin to produce drops of
clear or opaque fluid and then actually get small
amounts of milk even before you have your baby,
especially if you have previously or recently
breastfed. Lactation is a very individual system,
dependent on each individual’s levels of milkproducing hormones. (It does not depend on your
reproductive hormones.)
Choose a pediatrician who is experienced in
counseling adoptive breastfeeding mothers.
Make arrangements if possible to be present at
delivery so baby can begin bonding with you. In
this way your baby knows right away to whom he
or she belongs. You, baby’s mother, will be the

 first one to feed your baby. (See here for making
hospital arrangements.)
While baby is in the hospital try to be present for
as many feedings as you can. With the help of
your lactation specialist, begin feeding baby
formula at your breast with a supplementer. If
you’re not able to be present for all the feedings
(and few mothers are), instruct the nurses to use
the finger-and-syringe method of feeding or to
use the SNS for finger feeding (see here). Try to
avoid bottlefeeding in the early days and weeks
while baby is learning to feed at your breast. This
method of feeding takes no longer than
bottlefeeding.
Remember, it is the frequency of sucking that
stimulates milk. The frequent sucking at your
breasts induces your own milk-producing systems
to click in. Most mothers will begin producing
some milk within three to four weeks. (In addition
to pumping and using a supplementer, wear your
baby a lot, sleep with your baby, and massage
your baby. All these ways of just being close to
your infant also increases your milk supply. See
here for safety guidelines for sleeping with baby.)

 Do not focus on how soon you will produce milk
or how much. Even after your milk appears do
not establish milk supply expectations; the
quantity of milk produced is not the ultimate goal.
The close bonding that breastfeeding helps you
achieve is the main benefit of breastfeeding your
adopted baby.
Breastfeeding is ideal for the adoptive baby, and it does good things for
mothers, too. The sucking at your breast stimulates the flow of your
mothering hormones, giving you an added boost to become attached to your
baby. In breastfeeding the adopted baby, you give the best start to baby;
baby gives the best start to mother.

OceanofPDF.com

 Twins (Even Triplets)

Twice the investment, twice the return. Here’s how to both survive and
thrive while breastfeeding your twins.
Get the right help early on. In the latter weeks of pregnancy, consult other
mothers who have breastfed twins. Your local La Leche League or Mothers
of Twins affiliate (see here and here for more information) can help you
find some. Prenatally, attend La Leche League meetings to become
acquainted with support persons that you are really going to need. Arrange
for a lactation specialist experienced in helping mothers breastfeed
multiples to help you within a day or two postpartum and teach you rightstart techniques.
Get the right start. As an extra challenge to breastfeeding, many twins are
premature and tend to be sleepy, not sucking well for a week or two. With
the help of your lactation specialist, learn the right positioning and latch-on
techniques immediately, before your babies develop poor sucking habits,
your nipples get sore, and you don’t produce sufficient milk. Proper
positioning and latch-on techniques are important enough for single babies;
double that for twins.

 Breastfeed the babies separately, then together. In the first week or so
most mothers find it easier to feed one baby at a time, giving undivided
attention to teaching each baby proper latch-on. Once both babies have
learned to latch on correctly, you may find simultaneous feeding easier,
especially if both babies have similar feeding needs and temperaments. To
give each one some individual attention, try mostly simultaneous feedings
and give individual feedings once or twice a day, especially when one twin
is hungry and the other is asleep. Simultaneous feeding works best if babies
are on a similar sleep schedule. As an added boost, research has shown that
mothers who breastfeed twins simultaneously have higher elevations of the
mothering hormone prolactin than those who nurse one baby at a time.
Many twins have similar birth weights and nutritional needs, but
oftentimes one wombmate robs the other of placental nutrition, so that one
twin shows obvious signs of having been nutritionally shortchanged. This
baby is likely to need more-frequent feedings for catch-up growth.
Sometimes one twin is a high-need baby, the other easy; and one may
simply be hungrier than the other. Let the hungrier and more frequent feeder
set the pattern. As you are about to feed the hungrier baby, periodically
wake the less demanding baby for feeding to ensure that you get at least
some simultaneous feedings during the day. Otherwise you may find that
you are always (literally) feeding one or the other.
Holding patterns for twins. Experiment with all these positions to find
which combination works best for you and your babies.

 Unless sitting in bed, use a footstool to elevate
your lap to better contain both babies. The double
clutch hold allows you to control the babies’ head
movements in case one or both tend to throw their
heads back during breastfeeding (see here for a
description of the clutch hold). When
breastfeeding in this position, be sure to support
yourself and the babies with lots of pillows, or
purchase a specially designed nursing pillow.
For the cross-cradle position, put one baby in the
cradle hold, then put the other baby to the other
breast in the cradle hold—they’ll have their heads
apart and their legs and feet crisscrossing. Again,
use lots of pillows for support.
In the parallel position, one baby is in the cradle
hold and one is in the clutch hold so that their
bodies are lying in the same direction. The
cradled baby is on your arm (on a pillow) and the
clutched baby is on a pillow, the back of his neck
held by your hand.

Dad as the second mother. Father should be involved in the breastfeeding
relationship with any baby. With twins it’s an absolute must. In parenting

 twins the mother-father roles are not so well defined. It is true that only
mom can make milk, but dad can do everything else. Fatigue is what does
most breastfeeding mothers in. Mothers we have counseled who have
successfully breastfed twins have mastered the art of becoming armchair
household executives directing traffic and delegating responsibilities to any
friend or family member they can draft. Father can give supplemental
feedings, bring babies to the “executive” for feeding (especially at night),
and do or delegate household chores. One father of twins in our practice
proudly described their shared parenting: “Our babies have two mothers;
she is the milk mother, and I’m the hairy mother.” Breastfeeding twins:
double the commitment, double the sense of humor. (For more about
parenting twins, see Chapter 18.)

Breastfeeding twins: the double clutch hold.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Breastfeeding While Pregnant

Yes, you can! Mothers are often cautioned not to breastfeed during
pregnancy. Here’s the reason. Breastfeeding stimulates the release of the
hormone oxytocin into your bloodstream. In theory this hormone could
stimulate uterine contractions, possibly inducing a miscarriage. We have
interviewed experts knowledgeable about the hormonal system during
pregnancy and have received the following go-ahead: The uterus is not
receptive to hormonal stimulation by oxytocin until around twenty-four
weeks of gestation. And with a healthy uterus and cervix, this oxytocin is
not sufficient to bring on labor unless your pregnancy is term and your
cervix is ripe. Many mothers breastfeed during part or throughout all of
their pregnancy without doing any harm to themselves or their preborn
baby. If, however, you have a history of miscarriages or experience unusual
uterine contractions during breastfeeding, or if your doctor advises against
breastfeeding because of your individual obstetrical situation, it is wise to
stop. If you are at risk for preterm labor, any and all stimulation of your
nipples (even showering your nipples) must be avoided beginning at around
twenty weeks of gestation, when the oxytocin receptors in the uterus begin
to activate.

 Breastfeeding twins: the cross-cradle position.
If your doctor gives you the green light, here’s what to expect. You may
experience nipple tenderness, making breastfeeding rather uncomfortable.
You can negotiate with an older toddler, or enlist father’s help to carry
around and distract a younger one, to get the frequency and number of
minutes of breastfeeding to a level you can tolerate. Some of the ideas in
the following section on weaning will be helpful. In the final trimester or
earlier, expect your milk to develop a different taste, and in the middle
trimester expect your supply to diminish.
Some mothers begin to resent breastfeeding one while carrying another,
as though not only your breasts but also your mind is telling you it’s time to
wean. Like so many things in parenting, if it isn’t working, change it. This
is usually the time at which a toddler will naturally wean, although a few

 hardy souls (very giving mother, very high-need toddler) continue through
the pregnancy.

Martha notes: One day during my pregnancy with Erin, our high-need
daughter, Hayden, announced, “I don’t like the milk anymore. I’ll wait until
after baby is born when it will be good again, then I’ll nurse.” When Erin
was breastfeeding through my pregnancy with Matthew, I quizzed her one
day: “Why do you want to nurse? There’s no milk, is there?” Her reply was
“I don’t care”—with a big grin on her face. Obviously there was something
there she wanted that couldn’t be measured in ounces or drops.

OceanofPDF.com

 WEANING: WHEN AND HOW
All good things come to a timely end. While timely weaning is the ideal, we
realize that the ideal is not achievable for many families. Nevertheless we
feel obligated to present the ideal and then offer alternatives that make
allowances for lifestyles. We have taken many pages to portray one of
parenting’s most beautiful relationships, breastfeeding. Now here’s how to
guide it to a graceful finish.

OceanofPDF.com

 What Does “Weaning” Really Mean?

“Weaning” is not a negative term. Weaning does not mean a loss or
detachment from a relationship, but rather a passage from one relationship
to another. Our first three infants were weaned before their time. We were
young and uninformed parents. We misread our babies’ cues, lacked
confidence in our own intuitions, and yielded to the norms of the
neighborhood. We were able to give our later babies their rightful heritage.
In the process of our discoveries, we researched the real definition and
history of weaning, and here’s what we found.
In ancient writings the word “wean” meant “to ripen”—like fruit
nourished to readiness, its time to leave the vine. When a child was weaned
it was a festive occasion, and not because of what you may think—“Now I
can finally get away from this kid….” Weaning was a joyous occasion
because a weaned child was valued as a fulfilled child; a child was so filled
with the basic tools of the earlier stages of development that she graduated
to take on the next stage of development more independently. A child who
is weaned before his time enters the next state of development more
anxiously and is consequently less prepared for its challenges and less ready
for its independence.
An insightful description of weaning is found in the writings of King
David: “I have stilled and quieted my soul; like a weaned child with its

 mother, like a weaned child is my soul within me.” The psalmist David
equates his feeling of peace and tranquillity with the feeling of fulfillment
that a weaned child has with his mother. In ancient times, and in many
cultures today, a baby is breastfed for two or three years. Our Western
culture is accustomed to thinking of breastfeeding in terms of months. We
wish to challenge this mind-set.

OceanofPDF.com

 When to Wean

We have a sign in our office, “Early weaning not recommended for babies.”
If you view parenting as a long-term investment, why sell your options
short? Timely weaning occurs when the sucking need dissipates—sometime
between nine months and three and a half years. Medically speaking,
nutritionists and physicians advise breastfeeding for at least one year, and
they acknowledge that the unique nutritional properties of breast milk are
important for optimal growth and development for two years and beyond.
Weaning is a personal decision. Basically, when one or both members of the
mother-infant pair are ready, it’s time to wean.

Weaning Before Baby’s First Birthday

Does weaning under a year mean you have failed Parenting 101? No! There
may be life-style choices, circumstances beyond your control, and medical
situations that require premature weaning. Also, the occasional baby will be
filled and ready to wean before a year, though not as a rule.

Breastfeeding After the First Year

 If you breastfeed longer than a year, you may wonder if you are spoiling
your child, being possessive, or making him too dependent. Spoiling is what
happens when you leave something (or some person) alone on the shelf—it
spoils. As any breastfeeding veteran will attest, a breastfeeding baby is
anything but left alone. Possessiveness means keeping a child from doing
what he needs to do because of some need you have. Then comes the myth
of overdependency. Be prepared for well-meaning advisers to shake your
confidence a bit by exclaiming, “What! You’re still breastfeeding?” This
statement shows a lack of appreciation of a toddler as a little person with
big needs. Both experience and research have shown that extended
breastfeeding does not foster dependency. The opposite is true. As we stated
in Chapter 1, securely attached babies (those who are not weaned before
their time) eventually grow to be more independent, separate more easily
from their mothers, move into new relationships with more security and
stability, and are, in fact, easier to discipline.
If breastfeeding in terms of years sounds strange to you, ask yourself
this: Who gets horrified at the sight of a two-year-old still having a bottle?
The need to suck can be an extended need for many babies, breastfed or
bottlefed. A need that is filled goes away. A need that is not filled may
surface later to cause trouble.

OceanofPDF.com

 How to Wean

The American Heritage Dictionary defines “wean”: “To withhold mother’s
milk… and substitute other nourishment.” There are two phases in weaning
—withholding and substituting. As you gradually withhold your milk,
substitute solid foods, alternative milks, and other forms of emotional
nourishment. Here’s how.

HOW LONG TO BREASTFEED—OPINIONS
FROM THE EXPERTS
It used to be that few physicians openly advocated extended nursing, and
the mothers who breastfed babies past a year or two years (or longer) kept
mum about their child’s continuing to nurse. Long-term breastfeeding may
not yet be universally accepted, but it is getting more backing from health
professionals and other scientists. The American Academy of Pediatrics
stated in 1997 that breastfeeding should continue “for at least twelve
months, and thereafter for as long as mutually desired.” The World Health
Organization, which concerns itself with public health issues in developing
nations as well as in the developed world, recommends breastfeeding for at
least two years. Perhaps these statements from respected organizations will
usher in an era when more babies will get to breastfeed longer and more
mothers will learn how much easier it is to mother a toddler when that
toddler is still nursing.

Wean from Person to Person, Not from Person to Thing

 Don’t rely on a fluffy teddy bear or plastic toys to bribe your baby from the
breast. Babies are not like that. As baby begins to wean from comfort at
mother’s breast, you begin to substitute other forms of emotional
nourishment. Also, another person, ideally the father, takes on a more
significant role in comforting.

Wean Gradually

Avoid weaning by desertion—leaving baby to go on a getaway vacation.
Sudden detachment from mother’s breast and from the whole mother all at
once may be a combined stress that is too much for baby to handle. The key
to healthy weaning is that it must be gradual. Some mothers purposefully
start skipping the least favored feeding, for instance the midmorning time
when mom and baby would really rather go to the park or read a book or
have a snack. Other mothers find they are doing this without actually
planning it. It just happens. After a while they make another adjustment,
then another, either intentionally or just as life unfolds, so that months (and
months) later they find they are down to just one or two feedings, usually
nap time and bedtime. (In Chapter 15, “Nighttime Parenting,” we discuss
how to wean at sleep times.)
The time-honored weaning method of “don’t offer, don’t refuse” seems
to work the best for most mothers and babies. Don’t offer a feeding unless
baby asks, and don’t refuse when he does. Weaning means releasing, not

 rejecting. Minimize situations that encourage breastfeeding (for example,
sitting down in the familiar, inviting rocking chair), but be open during
needful periods of the day. It is quite normal, as babies are naturally
weaning into other relationships, for them to use mother as their home base
for nutritional and emotional refueling. Be prepared to back up a step or two
if you see negative behavior (tantrums, anger, sadness) cropping up, telling
you that you are going too fast. During illness the frequency of
breastfeeding will pick up, becoming an important comforting tool, as well
as supplying needed disease-specific antibodies.

Be Prepared for “Regressions”

Between eighteen months and two years baby may have occasional spurts
of marathon breastfeeding, as if it were newborn time again. Here’s why: As
your budding explorer comes across new situations, it is necessary for him
to check into home base frequently for a brief boost, reassuring himself that
it is okay to resume exploring unknown territory. Breastfeeding, like a
familiar friend in a strange crowd, helps the child to progress from the
known to the unknown, from dependence to independence. A problem can
develop here if mother is too busy to accommodate these brief but frequent
pit stops. Baby may then insist on lengthy hour-long feedings, as though
once he gets you to where he needs you, he knows he better hang on for
dear life.

 It’s Okay to Say No

In day-to-day dealings with their toddlers some mothers feel trapped by a
breastfeeding contract without an escape clause. They think “don’t offer,
don’t refuse” means they can never say no. There are many creative ways to
say no that will not be regarded as “Mama is hardening her heart.”
“Don’t offer, don’t refuse” can evolve into “Don’t offer, and distract
baby with other things.” When your child asks to nurse, say, “Okay, but
mommy’s going to get a drink of water first.” After your drink, walk outside
to get the mail or check out some other distraction. Come back inside and
find a game to play. Eat some lunch together. Your child may forget she
even asked. Sometimes nurse when asked, and sometimes say yes, but
distract. If you say no, baby will protest. By saying yes but creatively
moving on to other things, you avoid battles and hurt feelings. You will
have to settle down to nurse from time to time, but this approach will move
you toward weaning more quickly and with less fuss.

Develop Creative Alternatives

If you are comfortable letting your child take the lead in weaning, realize
she may be two or three (or older if you have a family history of allergies)
before she decides to wean. Although this is not part of our culture, there
are definite benefits to those children who need a prolonged weaning

 process. On the other hand, if you feel it is time to wean (a clue is that you
chronically resent continued breastfeeding), you can take the initiative.
There is a unique book we recommend that thoroughly explores the benefits
of longer-term breastfeeding and includes two chapters on nudging the
weaning process along a bit: Mothering Your Nursing Toddler, by Norma
Jane Bumgarner (La Leche League, 2000).
If your child resists weaning, picture what is going on in her mind. In
what we call our deep groove theory of child development, we believe the
developing memory is like a big, blank phonograph record; experience cuts
grooves in this record. The breastfeeding groove is probably one of the
deepest your child will ever cut, and this is why she returns to it frequently
until alternative grooves are etched into her memory record. Your goal is to
encourage these alternative grooves at a pace that is neither too fast for your
child nor too slow for you. One key is to keep your child busy. Nothing
triggers the desire to breastfeed like boredom. Next, minimize scenes that
remind her of breastfeeding. Many mothers relate, “As soon as I sit down in
the rocking chair, she pounces.” Expect nap nursing and night nursing to be
the last to go. Many toddlers retain a desire to be breastfed to sleep well into
the second or third year. When one (or both) of you is ready to drop
breastfeeding as the ultimate sleep inducer, you will have to come up with
something equally convincing. You should already have a bedtime routine,
or nap routine, which includes quieting activities. Reading bedtime stories
(over and over), a sling ride through the house saying night-night to
everything and everybody, or a back rub accompanied by a lullaby can be

 the finishing touch to the standard fare of healthful snack, bath, and
pajamas. (See also the suggestions here.)
Plenty of exercise earlier in the day sets your little one up for the
sandman. Wind-down, mood-setting tools can be thrown in: Turn off
stimulating TV programs, turn on relaxing music, dim the lights, or draw
the drapes. A variation of the bedtime story is to sit together and watch a
classic, low-key video such as Winnie the Pooh. The favorite in our house is
to tell a story from when we were children (or make one up using the
current favorite fictional hero) and weave in a lot of lulling repetition and
counting. The main feature of all these routines is that dad or anyone other
than mother can do the honors. And remember, if your toddler has not had
much time with dad, he will resist sleep just because of father hunger. So
dads, don’t try to shortchange this necessary contact time.
Finally, weaning is easier if you gradually develop creative alternatives
to breastfeeding when your baby needs comforting. If you automatically
offer the breast as a solution to every cry and setback in your baby’s life
(because it works so well), it will be more difficult for your baby to settle
for anything else as he gets older, and it will be more difficult for you to get
out of the rut, so to speak, of your limited comforting resources. Stories,
toys, games, songs, outings, projects, may be just the reserves you need.
Consider weaning as broadening your relationship with your baby, not
losing it. As with all parenting styles there is a balance. Some mothers are
overly attached to their babies, so that their total relationship revolves
around breastfeeding. Consequently it is the only form of relating that their
babies know. If you begin to feel that you are resenting so much

 breastfeeding, it’s time to slow it down and consider other ways of relating
to your child. As you develop more playful interactions as alternatives to
breastfeeding, your child will gradually learn to be content with them and
actually prefer them as a substitute.

LONG-TERM BENEFITS OF BREASTFEEDING
Breastfeeding, like all the other Baby B’s of attachment parenting, is a wise
long-term investment. For an account of our experience in attachmentparenting kids, as well as the latest scientific studies on the long-term
effects of attachment parenting, see our books The Successful Child: What
Parents Can Do to Help Kids Turn Out Well (Little, Brown, 2002) and The
Attachment Parenting Book (Little, Brown, 2001).

OceanofPDF.com

 Our Experience—Our Recommendations

Life is a series of weanings for a child: weaning from your womb, weaning
from your breast, from your bed, and from your home to school. The pace at
which children go from oneness to separateness should be respected in all
of these weaning milestones. To hurry children through any of these
relationships before their time increases the risks of what we call diseases of
premature weaning: anger, aggression, habitual tantrumlike behavior,
anxious attachment to caregivers, and less ability to form deeper and more
intimate relationships. We have studied the long-term effects on thousands
of children who had timely weanings and have observed that these children

are more independent
gravitate to people more than things
are easier to discipline
experience less anger
radiate trust
Ideally, try to give your baby the best physical, emotional, and mental
start—a gradual and timely weaning. In the normal process of oneness to
separateness, it is not the mother who weans the baby, but the baby who
weans from the mother. In our many years as baby watchers, studying the

 long-term effects of long-term breastfeeding, the most secure, independent,
and happy children we have seen are those who have not been weaned
before their time.

OceanofPDF.com

 10

OceanofPDF.com

 Bottlefeeding with Safety and Love

While human milk is certainly best for human babies, there may be a
medical reason for needing to feed your baby formula. Or perhaps your
lifestyle requires you to both breast- and bottlefeed your baby, dubbed
“combo feeding.” If you regard feeding as a time to interact with your baby,
not just deliver food, and if you understand the subtle differences among
formulas, together with your baby’s doctor you can, using the following
information, make the right choice of the right formula and style of feeding
for your baby.

OceanofPDF.com

 FORMULA FACTS
The more you know about how infant formulas are made and marketed, the
better equipped you will be to make an informed choice.
How formulas are made. Using human milk as the nutritional gold
standard, formula manufacturers follow a basic recipe that combines
proteins, fats, carbohydrates, vitamins, minerals, and water in similar
proportions to those found in human milk. The basic nutritional building
blocks of proteins, fats, and carbohydrates are taken from cow’s milk,
soybeans, or other vegetable (corn syrup or sugar cane) sources.
Commercially made vitamins, minerals, and other nutrients are then added
to the milk-based or soy-based formula.
How formulas are marketed. Once upon a time parents relied only on
their baby’s doctor to choose the right formula. It was generally felt that
advertising infant formulas directly to the consumer was unethical. Both the
American Academy of Pediatrics and the World Health Organization have
strongly discouraged marketing formulas directly to parents and bypassing
the baby’s health care provider. Unfortunately, this nutritional code of ethics
is not followed by all formula companies.

 How formulas are regulated. Don’t be confused by the parade of formula
cans on the supermarket shelves. You’ll notice that the amounts of all the
nutrients in each brand are about the same. That’s because by law they have
to be. The Infant Formula Act mandates that the FDA tightly regulate infant
formula manufacturers so that all formulas contain all the nutrients that
babies need. In fact, the FDA so tightly regulates infant formulas that all
formulas are nutritionally equivalent. A formula manufacturer cannot make
any nutritional changes in their formula without FDA approval.
How formulas differ. Although the nutritional content of infant formulas is
tightly regulated, formulas differ in three ways: packaging, digestibility, and
cost.
Packaging: Commercial formulas are packaged in three forms:

powdered formula, with directions for how much
water to add
liquid concentrate, to be mixed half-and-half with
water
ready-to-feed liquid, to be put directly into the
bottle
Your choice of packaging is mainly a question of time and economics.
Powdered formulas are the least expensive but the most time-consuming to

 prepare; ready-to-feed formulas are the most expensive but the easiest to
use, especially while traveling or when you are too busy to prepare formula.
Digestibility: With different food sources and processing methods, formulas
can be more or less allergenic and easier or harder to digest. While all
formula makers claim superiority when it comes to intestinal tolerance,
your baby’s individual digestive system will be the final judge.
Cost: Because the FDA so tightly regulates formula composition, parents
don’t need to worry that a less expensive formula is nutritionally inferior to
a pricier one. Formulas are nutritionally equivalent, though they may differ
in cost. Organic formulas have become more popular but may cost a bit
more. If your baby needs a special hypoallergenic formula, expect to pay
considerably more.

 The bottlefeeding interaction.

OceanofPDF.com

 Types of Formula

Reading the labels on formula cans may leave you feeling like you need a
Ph.D. in biochemistry to make an intelligent choice. There are three basic
categories of infant formulas: milk-based formulas (also known as standard
infant formulas), soy-based formulas, and hypoallergenic formulas.
Milk-Based Formulas. These formulas use cow’s milk as the food source
of the protein and sugar (lactose). Cow’s milk–based formulas enjoy a much
longer history of experience and research and are well tolerated by most
infants. Unless recommended otherwise by your baby’s doctor, use a
standard milk-based formula. Around 70 percent of formula-fed American
babies consume this type of formula.
Soy-Based Formulas. As an alternative for infants who are allergic to or
cannot tolerate milk-based formulas, soy formulas use soybeans as their
protein source. However, we share the opinion of the Committee on
Nutrition of the American Academy of Pediatrics that soy formulas should
not be used as the starter formula for most infants for the following reasons:

30–50 percent of infants who are allergic to cow’s
milk protein are also allergic to soy protein.

 Where there is a family history of allergies,
formula-feeding parents are sometimes advised to
begin feeding their baby a soy formula in hopes
of preventing later allergies. Research does not
support this practice. Starting a newborn on a soy
formula does not decrease the later incidence of
allergy. Nor does the use of soy formula lower the
risk of infant colic. For these reasons, the
American Academy of Pediatrics’ Committee on
Nutrition recommends against the use of soyprotein formulas in the routine management of
colic or routinely in potentially allergic infants.
Instead of soy, hypoallergenic formulas (see
below) are recommended.
Giving an infant soy at a young age, when the
intestines are more permeable to allergens, may
predispose the child to soy allergies later on, even
as an adult. Baby may then be unable to tolerate
many foods, since soy is present in a wide range
of foods, often as a hidden filler.
There is some evidence that soy has some
estrogen-like properties, which may not be good
for babies.
The wisdom of using lactose-free formulas, as
most soy formula labels now boast, is

 questionable. Lactose is the sugar in human milk,
as it is in the milk of all other mammals. Why
tamper with nature’s oldest nutritional
experiment? Lactose enhances calcium absorption
and helps colonize babies’ intestines with
favorable bacteria. The substitute sugar in some
soy formulas is corn syrup, itself a potential
allergen.
Most soy formulas contain more minerals than the
infant needs—adding extra work for little kidneys
and possibly shaping tiny tastes to prefer salty
foods.
The bioavailability of the added iron and zinc in
soy formulas may be less than in other formulas.
The Committee on Nutrition of the American
Academy of Pediatrics recommends that soy
formula be reserved for term infants only and that
it not be used for preterm or small-for-date
infants.
At present, we only recommend soy formula for:

temporary use in formula-fed infants who have a
severe diarrheal illness (such infants may

 temporarily have difficulty digesting cow’s milk–
based formula until their intestines heal)
temporary relief of cow’s milk–based formula
intolerance while other formula options are
explored under the guidance of your doctor
partial supplementation of a breastfed baby who
does not tolerate most other formulas (the soy
formula is only a small part of the infant’s diet)
short-term use for a month or two if a breastfed
infant is weaned close to twelve months of age
and does not tolerate other formulas
If you believe your baby is allergic to cow’s milk formulas, always consult
your physician before switching to a soy formula.
Hypoallergenic Formulas. The terms “hypoallergenic” and “hydrolyzed
protein” on the formula label mean that the potentially allergenic protein
has been pre-digested, that is, broken up into tinier proteins that are
theoretically less allergenic. Infants who are allergic to protein in milkbased formulas may better tolerate these formulas—but at a higher price.
Another disadvantage in some of these formulas is the absence of lactose as
a carbohydrate source and the substitution of corn syrup and modified
cornstarch. A third problem is their unpalatable taste.

OceanofPDF.com

 Choosing a Formula

You’re staring at the dazzling array of formula choices on the supermarket
shelves, understandably confused by which formula to choose. Here’s how
to make the right choice for your baby:

Consult your baby’s doctor before selecting a
formula for your baby. If you have a formula
preference based upon experience with a previous
formula-fed baby, share it with your doctor.
Begin your baby on a milk-based formula unless
advised otherwise by your doctor. If your doctor
gives you a choice of several formulas, purchase a
small amount of each. Try each formula to see
which one is best tolerated and most eagerly
accepted by your baby. An organic brand is also a
good option.
If one of your children was allergic to milk-based
formula, don’t assume subsequent children are
also allergic to it. Try a milk-based formula first.
Choose a DHA- and ARA (or AA)-enriched
formula. Beginning in February 2002,

 docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and arachidonic
acid (ARA), the brain-building fats that are found
in breast milk, were added to some infant
formulas made in the United States. These fats,
which are so important for optimal development
of the central nervous system, have for many
years been added to infant formulas in over sixty
other countries. Multiple studies have shown that
infants fed a DHA- and ARA-enriched infant
formula enjoyed increased visual and central
nervous system development compared with
infants fed a formula without these added fats.
Since many researchers attribute the intellectual
advantage that breastfeeding babies enjoy to the
fact that breast milk contains lots of these omega3 fats, it stands to reason that formula-fed infants
should receive DHA- and ARA-enriched formula.
Look for “DHA/ARA-enriched,” or a similar
notice, on the label.
OceanofPDF.com

 OceanofPDF.com

 OceanofPDF.com

 Switching Formulas

During the early months you may join the formula parade, experimenting
with different formulas before choosing the one that baby enjoys the most
and that is least upsetting. Sometimes it’s a matter of taste. Sometimes it’s a
matter of preparation: Your baby may show a preference for the liquid or
powdered form of the same formula. Here are the signs that your baby may
be allergic to or intolerant of a particular formula:
• bouts of crying after feeding
• vomiting immediately after nearly every feeding
• persistent diarrhea or constipation
• colic with a distended, tense, painful abdomen after feeding
• generally irritable behavior and/or frequent night waking
• a red, rough sandpaperlike rash, especially on the face and/or around the
anus
• frequent colds and/or ear infections
If your child persistently has one or more of these features, change the
formula in consultation with your doctor.

OceanofPDF.com

 HOW MUCH? HOW OFTEN?
How much formula your baby takes depends upon your baby’s weight and
rate of growth, metabolism, body type, and appetite. The following
guidelines on feeding volumes are meant to satisfy your infant’s basic
nutritional requirements. Your baby’s individual desire may change from
day to day and sometimes may be more or less than the average
recommended volumes.
You may use the following rule of thumb for how much formula to feed
your infant from birth to six months of age: 2 to 2½ ounces of formula per
pound per day (125–150 milliliters per kilogram per day). If your baby
weighs 10 pounds, for example, he may take 20 to 25 ounces per day. Don’t
expect your baby to drink this much immediately after birth. Many
newborns need and take only an ounce or two (30–60 milliliters) at each
feeding for the first week. Use the following as a general guide:

 Rule of thumb for formula feeding: 2–2½ ounces per pound per day (125–
150 milliliters per kilogram per day)

• newborns: 1–2 ounces at each feeding
• one to two months: 3–4 ounces per feeding
• two to six months: 4–6 ounces per feeding
• six months to a year: up to 8 ounces per feeding
Small, more frequent feedings work better than larger ones spaced farther
apart. Your baby’s tummy is about the size of his fist. Take a full bottle and
place it next to your baby’s fist and you’ll see why tiny tummies often spit
the formula back up when they’re given too much at one time.

 Sometimes baby is thirsty and not hungry. Offer a bottle of water if you
think baby may be thirsty. Because formulas are more heavily concentrated
than breast milk, we advise parents to give their baby at least 4 to 8 ounces
of water a day (breastfed babies do not need extra water).

OceanofPDF.com

 Scheduling the Bottlefeeding Baby

Formula-fed babies are easier to schedule than breastfed babies. Because
formula is digested more slowly (the protein curds are tougher) the interval
between feedings is usually longer for bottlefed babies.
There are two types of infant feeding practices: demand feeding (we
prefer the term “cue feeding”), in which baby is fed every time his little
tummy desires, and scheduled feeding, when baby is fed at certain fixed
times during the day, usually every three hours, and when awakening during
the night. Cue feeding is for infant satisfaction; scheduling is for your
convenience. (We prefer the term “feeding routine” rather than the more
rigid-sounding “feeding schedule.”) Your overall infant-care routines,
especially feeding, are challenging negotiations between baby’s needs and
yours. Tiny babies have tiny tummies. Most babies do best on smaller,
more-frequent feedings. Giving your baby a bottle every three hours (rather
than every four hours) is most in keeping with a balance between baby’s
satisfaction and parents’ life-style. Most bottlefeeding parents arrive at a
compromise, or semidemand type of schedule, giving baby one or two
feedings at specified times each day, interspersed with cue feedings.
During the first few weeks, awaken your baby for feeding if he sleeps
longer than four hours during the day. Allowing baby to sleep longer than
four hours between feedings during the day may result in the exhausting

 day-sleeper-and-night-feeder routine. Try to arrange for the longer stretches
of sleep to occur at night. More frequent feedings during the day and bottles
at 7:00 P.M. and 10:00 P.M. generally seem to be the most comfortable
feeding routine for most parents. This allows parents some free time in the
later evening; and giving baby a bottle before you retire will often satisfy
baby until 3:00 or 4:00 A.M., requiring just one waking for you.

OceanofPDF.com

 Reading Your Baby’s Cues

Tempting as it is to give your baby a bottle every time he cries, using
formula as a pacifier may lead to overfeeding. Learn alternative ways of
comforting rather than automatically reaching for formula at the first
whimper. Baby may need only holding, a playful interaction, a bottle of
water when thirsty, a diaper change, or simply a change of activity.
Bottlefeeding mothers actually need more of a variety of baby-comforting
techniques than do breastfeeding mothers. Using breastfeeding as a pacifier
is less likely to result in overfeeding (for an explanation, see the discussion
of breastfeeding and obesity, here).

OceanofPDF.com

 PREPARING FORMULA
Always remember to wash your hands thoroughly before preparing formula
and baby food, and be sure all the equipment used in preparing formula is
clean (see instructions on sterilizing, below). The feeding supplies you will
need include bottles, nipples, and miscellaneous utensils.
Bottles. Start with four 4-ounce (120-milliliter) bottles, and after you and
your baby have decided on the favorite type of bottle and baby is taking
more than 4 ounces a feeding, you may need as many as eight to ten 8ounce bottles. Glass is easiest to clean, but breakable. Besides traditional
bottles there are plastic nursers, holders with presterilized disposable bags
that hold the milk and collapse as baby feeds, lessening air swallowing. For
older babies there are clever bottles designed in a loop for baby to hold
during self-feeding. We do not advise the use of these self-feeding bottles
because they encourage baby to walk around holding a bottle and deprive
baby of valuable social interaction during feeding.
Nipples. Latex and silicone nipples come in a variety of shapes and flow
rates that are designed to deliver expressed breast milk, formula, or milk in
a way that is most comfortable for your baby. For the full-time
bottlefeeding baby, experiment with various types of nipples to see which

 one works best for your baby. If baby is both breastfeeding and
bottlefeeding, see “Combo Feeding: Breast and Bottle,” opposite.
To avoid baby’s choking on a nipple, follow carefully the
manufacturer’s caution advice on the package. If the nipple becomes
cracked or torn, discard it. Some nipples come with a variety of hole sizes
to fit the type of liquid and the age of the baby. The nipple hole should be
large enough for formula to drip at one drop per second when you hold a
full, unshaken bottle upside down. Larger nipples and nipple holes are
available for older babies.

Wide-based nipple encourages proper latch-on, especially if both breastand bottle feeding.

IS BABY GETTING TOO LITTLE OR TOO MUCH
FORMULA?
Signs that your baby may be getting too little formula are:

 • slower-than-normal weight gain
• diminished urine output
• a loose, wrinkly appearance to baby’s skin
• persistent crying
Signs that your baby is being fed too much at each feeding are:
• a lot of spitting up or vomiting immediately after the feeding
• colicky abdominal pain (baby draws his legs up onto a tense abdomen
immediately after feeding)
• excessive weight gain
If these signs of overfeeding occur, offer smaller-volume feedings more
frequently, burp baby once or twice during the feeding, and occasionally
offer a bottle of water instead of formula.
If your baby is not getting enough liquid through the nipple, you can
enlarge the nipple opening by using a needle approximately the same
thickness as the hole size you desire. Holding the needle with a pair of
pliers, heat the tip of the needle until red hot and insert the needle through
the hole from the inside of the nipple. Pull the needle out of the nipple hole
with a quick, straight pull. Repeat if the hole is not large enough. Attempt to
enlarge the nipple hole in latex nipples only. Do not attempt to enlarge a
hole in silicone nipples, as this may cause tearing.
Utensils. To prepare formula, have the following items on hand:

 • punch-type can opener (for canned formula)
• bottle brush
• large pot (with a cover) for sterilizing
• clean towels or dishcloth

COMBO FEEDING: BREAST AND BOTTLE
Because of the health benefits of extended breastfeeding, many employed
mothers choose to continue part-time breastfeeding. Here are some helpful
tips on the art of “combo feeding” by both breast and bottle:
Choose a breastfeeding-friendly nipple. Try nipples that resemble, as
much as possible, the shape of your areola and nipple. Use a nipple that has
a wide base and gradually tapers down to the nipple, much like the shape
your breast takes in your baby’s mouth. Also, to ease the transition between
breastfeeding and bottle feeding, choose a nipple with a slower flow, which
baby is used to during breastfeeding.
Encourage proper latch-on. Be sure baby latches on to the bottle nipple
the same way she latches on to your breast. Encourage her to open her
mouth wide and to suck on the wide base and not just the top of the nipple.
To prevent your nipples from getting sore while breastfeeding, don’t let
your baby learn lazy latch-on techniques while bottlefeeding. (See the
illustrations here.)
Get the gas out. When making the transition from breast to bottle, some
babies swallow more air. To minimize this nuisance, try using a
bottlefeeding system that minimizes air swallowing, such as bottles with
collapsible liners that keep the air out as baby feeds.
Ease the combo feeding transition. While most babies can switch back
and forth between breastfeeding and bottlefeeding, some get very set in
their ways of feeding. So, instruct baby’s caregiver to feed your baby in a
way that most resembles your baby’s preferred pattern of breastfeeding.
Warm the bottle nipple in warm water to make it more supple. Instruct the

 caregiver to interact with your baby during bottlefeeding in much the same
way you do when breastfeeding. Let her watch you breastfeed while you
show and tell her how to make eye contact and relate with your baby during
the feeding. Remind your caregiver that feeding time is a time for social
interaction. “Nursing” implies both comforting and nurturing, whether by
bottle or breast.

OceanofPDF.com

 Sterilizing

A dishwasher with a water temperature of at least 180°F (82°C) will
adequately sterilize bottles and accessories. If not using a dishwasher, try
the following sterilization process. (Sterilize six bottles, or a daily supply, at
one time.)
• After a feeding, thoroughly rinse the bottle and nipple under warm water
and leave them on a clean towel by the sink, ready for your next
sterilizing session.
• Wash all the bottles and nipples in hot soapy water using a bottle brush
and rinse thoroughly in hot water.
• Pad the bottom of a large pan with a towel or dishcloth. Immerse open
bottles and nipples in the pan (place bottles on their side to be sure that
they are filled with the sterilizing water) and boil for ten minutes with the
pan covered. Allow to cool to room temperature while still covered.
Place the bottles upside down on a clean towel with the nipples and caps
alongside. Let the equipment dry.

OceanofPDF.com

 Mixing Formulas

Use the following procedure to prepare liquid concentrate or powdered
formula. Ready-to-feed formula can be poured directly into a sterile bottle
with no mixing (before opening the can, thoroughly clean the top).
• Boil the water for five minutes, then let it cool.
• Align the six sterilized bottles in a row and pour the prescribed amount
of cool boiled water into each bottle. (Theoretically, hot water could
damage some of the nutrients in the formula.) Add the prescribed amount
of liquid or powdered formula. For example, if using liquid concentrate
in 8-ounce bottles, pour 4 ounces of boiled water in each bottle and add 4
ounces of liquid concentrate.
• Put nipples and caps on each bottle, shake well (especially for powdered
formula), then place in refrigerator.
• Use refrigerated formula preferably within twenty-four hours, or a
maximum of forty-eight hours.

OceanofPDF.com

 The Right Mix

Never mix the formula in greater strength than the directions state. Always
add the specified amount of water. Adding too little water makes the
formula too concentrated for your baby’s immature intestines and kidneys
to handle, causing baby to get dehydrated. Sometimes your doctor may
recommend overdiluting the formula during a vomiting or diarrheal illness.
Overdiluting should not be done for more than a few days without your
physician’s advice, as overdilute formula does not provide enough calories
for your baby.

TIPS FOR QUICK AND EASY STERILIZING
AND FORMULA PREPARATION
• Use disposable presterilized nurser bags to hold the formula in a plastic
holder; this is convenient and minimizes air swallowing, as the bag
collapses during the feeding.
• Use a dishwasher to sterilize bottles and nipples, and use ready-to-feed
liquid formula. No water to boil, no extra sterilizing or measuring
needed.

OceanofPDF.com

 BOTTLEFEEDING TIPS
To make feeding time pleasant for you and baby, here’s how to get the most
milk in and the most air up, and to do it safely.

OceanofPDF.com

 Giving the Bottle

• Most babies enjoy their formula slightly warmed; run warm tap water
over the bottle for several minutes. Shake a few drops on your inner wrist
to check the temperature.
• To minimize air swallowing, tilt the bottle, allowing the milk to fill the
nipple and the air to rise above the formula.
• Keep baby’s head straight in relation to the rest of the body. Drinking
while the head is turned sideways or tilted back makes it more difficult
for baby to swallow.
• To lessen arm fatigue and provide symmetrical stretching to neck
muscles, switch arms at each feeding or after burping midway through
the bottle.
• Watch for signs that the nipple hole is too large or too small. If baby gets
a sudden mouthful of milk and sputters and almost chokes during a
feeding, milk flow may be too fast. Turn the full bottle upside down
without shaking. If milk flows instead of drips, the nipple hole is too
large; discard the nipple. If baby seems to be working hard and tires
easily during sucking, and the cheeks cave in because of a strong suction
vacuum, the nipple hole may be too small (as previously mentioned,
formula should drip at least one drop per second).
• Know when to quit. Babies know when they’ve had enough. Avoid the
temptation to always finish the bottle. If baby falls asleep near the end of
the feeding, but has not finished the bottle, stop. Often babies fall into a
light sleep toward the end of the bottle, but continue a flutter type of
sucking. They have had enough to eat, but enjoy a little “dessert” of
comfort sucking. Remove the bottle and allow baby to suck a few
minutes on your fingertip.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Burping Baby

Besides the relaxing pat on the back, effective burping requires two actions:
holding baby in an upright position and applying pressure on baby’s tummy
(parents often forget this latter step). With baby seated on your lap, lean her
weight forward, with the heel of your hand against her tummy; firmly pat or
rub baby’s back. Or drape her up over your shoulder and firmly pat or rub
her back.
If at first you don’t succeed, try again in a while. If after a minute or two
no burp appears, put baby down or carry her upright and go about your
business. If baby is content, she doesn’t need to burp. If, however, baby is
not content after a feeding (squirming, grimacing, and groaning when you
lay her down, or refusing to complete a feeding), take these signals to mean
that baby needs to try again. Snack-type feedings often skip a burp; big
meals usually merit patience until baby burps. Some babies need to burp
halfway through a bottlefeeding, or after finishing one breast, dubbed “burp
and switch.”

 Two positions for burping baby.
For nighttime burping, one or two minutes of sucking may not warrant a
burp but a big feeding usually does. If you are not in the mood for nighttime
burping, try putting baby down immediately after feeding. If she is content,
no burp is needed. If she squirms as if uncomfortable, a trapped air bubble
is probably causing discomfort. To avoid sitting up and going through the
whole burping ritual, continue lying down but drape baby over your hip as
you would over your shoulder. The need to burp lessens as baby gets older.
Try the one-arm burp. If you don’t have time to sit and wait for your
baby to burp, drape baby over your forearm so that your wrist presses
against his tummy. Carry baby in this position while you stroll around the

 house. The only drawback is that spit-up may dribble onto your arm or the
floor. (See the illustration of the colic carry hold here and here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Safe Feeding Tips

• If you question the safety of your tap water, use bottled water.
• Do not microwave formula; there is too great a risk of heating unevenly.
• It is all right to reuse leftover formula within a few hours if it is
immediately refrigerated after the first use. Cap the bottle to keep the
nipple clean. For maximum safety, however, do not reuse leftover
formula, because bacteria may have been introduced through baby’s
saliva.
• If you are traveling and refrigeration is not readily available,
presterilized, ready-to-feed 4-ounce cans of formula are the safest and
easiest. Powdered formula takes up less space, but use only if clean water
is available. If taking along home-mixed formula, store it in insulated
containers with a small ice pack.
• Do not bottle prop. Don’t let your baby lie in a crib feeding himself with
his own bottle. Leaving a baby unattended during feeding is potentially
dangerous if the baby chokes and needs your help. Also, lying down
during feeding allows milk to enter the middle ear through the eustachian
tube which can trigger ear infections. (This is less true for breastfeeding.)
Bottle propping deprives both you and your baby of the valuable social
interaction that occurs during feeding.
• Lessen the number of nighttime bottles once baby has teeth. (See
“Nightweaning Toddlers,” here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 WEANING BABY FROM THE BOTTLE
Like weaning from the breast, there is no rush. It is not unusual or abnormal
for baby to still want a bottle at two years of age. Bottles bother adults more
than toddlers. If you wean your baby to a cup early, be prepared to let him
continue to use a pacifier to meet his sucking needs. The nighttime bottle is
the most difficult to part with. Wean baby from nap and night bottles by a
trick we call watering down (see here).
Continued use of bottles beyond eighteen months to two years can lead
to two problems:
1. Tooth decay. If your toddler falls asleep with a bottle in his mouth, the
unswallowed milk will remain on his teeth. The milk sugar can begin to
cause tooth decay. To prevent this, remove the bottle before he falls
asleep.
2. Overbite. Using a bottle beyond two years can begin to reshape the
upper gum line and palate. This can lead to an overbite and buckteeth.
If your toddler is still using a bottle, ask your doctor to check his teeth for
these changes. There is no set time that is best to wean every child off the
bottle. Here are some suggestions to help you choose what time is
appropriate for your child:

 • When transitioning your baby from formula to whole milk, try giving
whole milk in a cup only. This way, when baby is off formula, he’s also
off the bottle.
• Remember the toddler mind-set: Just try weaning a two-year-old off the
bottle! Many parents find it easier to wean an infant between twelve and
eighteen months before the stubborn streak sets in.
• If your toddler is a picky eater and not yet skilled in cup drinking, allow
daytime bottles of milk or formula (a maximum of four 8-ounce bottles,
about 1 liter) to ensure enough nutrition. When he is cup skilled and
consistently eating a balanced diet of solids, gradually wean from bottle
to cup.
• Have a “you can’t walk around with your drink” policy. Discourage baby
from walking around with a bottle. Some juice addicts cling to this sticky
companion. Not only will there be trails throughout the house, but this
habit, bad for nutrition and harmful to teeth, is hard to break.
• If baby has a love affair with the bottle and needs it for a pacifier,
gradually “lose” the bottle and substitute other “pacifiers,” preferably
human ones.

OceanofPDF.com

 A PERSON AT BOTH ENDS OF THE BOTTLE
The term “nursing” means comforting and nourishing, whether by breast or
bottle. Feeding time is more than just a time for nutrition. It is also a time
for special closeness. The mutual giving that is a part of breastfeeding
should also be enjoyed during bottlefeeding. Besides giving your infant a
bottle, give him your eyes, your skin, your voice, and your caresses. Baby
will return to you more than just an empty bottle.
The special warmth of skin-to-skin contact can be accomplished by
wearing short sleeves and partially undressing yourself and your baby when
feeding. Hold the bottle alongside your breast as though it were coming
from your body, and look into your baby’s eyes. Interact with your baby
during a feeding. You want your baby to feel that the bottle is part of you.
Most babies, breastfed and bottlefed, feed better if you are quiet while they
suck, but babies enjoy social interaction during pauses in the feedings.
Watch your baby for signals that he wants to socialize during the feeding.
Eventually you will develop an intuitive sense of your baby’s feeding
rhythm. Baby should feel that a person is feeding him, not just a bottle.

MORE BOTTLEFEEDING INFORMATION
For updates on bottles, nipples, breast pumps, and other infant feeding
tools, visit AskDrSears.com.

 OceanofPDF.com

 11

OceanofPDF.com

 Introducing Solid Foods: When, What,
and How

During a four- or six-month checkup, we expect the question, “Doctor,
when should I start solid food?” One day we decided to take the initiative
and ask an experienced mother of six, “How do you know when to begin
giving your baby solid foods?”
“When he starts mooching!” she replied.
“Mooching?” we asked, a bit surprised.
“Yes,” she went on to explain. “I wait for signs that he is interested. I
watch him watch me eat. When his eyes follow my food as I move it from
my plate to my mouth, when his hands reach out and grab my food and he
is able to sit up in a high chair and join us at the table, I know it’s time for
the fun of solids to begin.”
By her own experience, this wise mother discovered a basic principle of
introducing solid foods—feed babies according to their own developmental
skills rather than a preset calendar or clock. Babies’ appetites and feeding
skills are as individual as their temperaments. Let’s feed them that way.

 Shape young tastes. These are the three magic words in early infant
feeding. Parents, the main nutritional problem in today’s children is that
they have lost their taste for “real” food, believing that food needs to be
artificially colored, sweetened, and flavor-enhanced. You have a window of
opportunity in those early years of taste-shaping to instill in your child
lifelong healthy eating habits toward preferring real food.
We have put the latest nutritional research on infant feeding together
with what we have learned throughout forty years of practice, and our own
experience in feeding our babies. In this and the next two chapters we wish
to present a style of infant feeding that will help you become more nutrition
savvy, better enjoy feeding your infant, and have happier, healthier babies.

OceanofPDF.com

 WHY WAIT?
You and your three-month-old are comfortably breastfeeding, and baby
certainly seems to be getting enough to eat. Now comes the daily phone call
from the family nutritionist—your mother. “What is he eating now, dear?”
Silence. You’ve been caught! The jars of baby food that grandmother
bought are still unopened. Baby has not seemed interested, and you do not
feel he is ready. You smoothly change the subject, defending your choice
not to enter the race for solids just yet. (When this confrontation happens in
our practice, we advise parents, “Make your doctor the scapegoat. Tell
grandmother that Dr. Sears advised you to wait a while longer.”)

OceanofPDF.com

 OceanofPDF.com

 Baby’s tongue movements and swallowing skills are the first clues to
delaying solid foods. In the early months, babies have a tongue-thrust reflex
that causes the tongue to automatically protrude outward when any foreign
substance is placed upon it. This may be a protective reflex against choking
on solids given too early. Between four and six months this tongue-thrust
reflex diminishes. Also, prior to six months of age many infants do not have
good coordination of tongue and swallowing movements for solid foods. An
added sign that babies were not designed for early introduction to solid
foods is that teeth seldom appear until six or seven months, further evidence
that the young infant is primarily designed to suck, rather than to chew.
Not only is the upper end of baby’s digestive tract not designed for early
solids, neither are baby’s insides. A baby’s immature intestines are not
equipped to handle a variety of foods until around six months, when many
digestive enzymes seem to click in. Pediatric allergists discourage early
introduction of foods especially if there is a strong family history of food
allergies. Research shows that starting solids before six months increases
the risk of allergies. Maturing intestines secrete the protein immunoglobulin
IgA, which acts like a protective paint, coating the intestines and preventing
the passage of harmful allergens (cow’s milk, wheat, and soy are common
examples of foods causing allergies when introduced early). This protective
IgA is low in the early months and does not reach peak production until
around seven months of age. As the intestines mature, they become more
nutritionally selective, filtering out offending food allergens. Babies whose
systems tend to be allergy-prone actually may show delayed willingness to
accept solids—a built-in self-protective mechanism.

 HOW OLD DOES BABY HAVE TO BE TO EAT
CERTAIN FOODS?
Classical opinion holds that babies should begin with the smoothest,
blandest foods first, move on to more textured and flavorful foods after age
one, and delay the most allergenic and spicy foods until age two. Our food
chart here reflects this commonsense approach. Research, however, has not
held up this belief, and many cultures around the world expose their babies
to foods that our Western culture might typically wait on. The reality is that
babies can eat almost anything that is soft enough and nonchokable at any
age. Our chart is only a guideline; it isn’t set in stone. Younger babies can
sample items on the “12 to 18 months” list if you feel baby is ready. If in
doubt, use common sense. There are several foods that definitely should be
delayed until baby turns one year of age: nut butter, cow’s milk, shellfish,
and honey. The bottom line is, if it’s on your plate, soft enough for baby to
eat, and not one of these four “no” foods, baby is welcome to it.

OceanofPDF.com

 FEEDING SOLIDS: SIX TO NINE MONTHS
Breast milk or commercial formula with iron or a combination of the two
contains all the essential nutrients your baby needs for the first six to nine
months. Consider solid foods as an addition to, not a substitute for, breast
milk or formula. For a breastfeeding baby, it’s best to start solid foods
slowly so they don’t replace the more nutritious breast milk.

OceanofPDF.com

 Ready-to-Eat Signs

Baby may start mooching—reaching for the food on your plate, grabbing
your spoon, looking at you hungrily, and mimicking feeding behaviors such
as opening her mouth wide when you open your mouth to eat. Sometimes
babies are more interested in the utensils than the actual food. If your baby
shows interest in watching you eat, try offering her just a spoon to play with
(preferably a sturdy plastic spoon—they make less noise when banged). If
baby is content with the spoon, then the toy is desired more than the food.
When baby continues showing interest, it’s time for the fun to begin. Also,
the ability to sit up in a high chair and pick up food with thumb and
forefinger are other signs that baby is ready for solids.

OceanofPDF.com

 First Feeding

Start with solids that are the least allergenic (see list here). Examples of
favorite first foods include mashed ripe bananas, avocados, pears, or
unsweetened applesauce.

FIRST SPOON
We advise that baby’s first “spoon” be your finger. It is soft, at the right
temperature, and by this stage baby is very familiar with its feel. Your finger
also knows if food is too hot. Few babies like to begin their feeding life
with a silver spoon in their mouth. Metal holds the heat in, so each bite
takes longer if you have to blow to cool food that is too hot. A hungry baby
finds this infuriating! A coated baby spoon is a good starter utensil. Use
shatterproof plastic bowls that can survive battering on the high-chair tray
and numerous tumbles to the floor.

 By age six months, many babies are ready to start taking strained or pureed
solid foods from a spoon.
Place a fingertipful of food (mashed to soupy) on baby’s lips, letting her
suck your finger as she usually does. Once she is introduced to the new
taste, gradually increase the amount and thickness of the food, placing a
glob toward the middle of baby’s tongue. Watch baby’s reaction. If the food
goes in accompanied by an approving smile, baby is ready and willing. If
the food comes back at you accompanied by a disapproving grimace, baby
is not ready.
If baby spews the glob back at you, don’t take this first impression
personally. Your infant has not yet learned the developmental skill of
sealing the mouth shut, sweeping the food from front to back, and then
swallowing. If your baby just sits there confused, her mouth open, with a
glob of food perched on her tongue, her persistent tongue-thrust reflex is
giving the developmental clue to shut the door and come back later.

OceanofPDF.com

 Progressing with Solids

Beginning with a test dose, progress from a fingertipful to ½ teaspoon to 1
teaspoon, then a tablespoon, then around 2 ounces, or half a jar. It should
take a week or two to build up to this amount. Advance from soupy to pasty
to lumpy consistency. Remember, your initial goal is to introduce baby to
the new taste and touch of solids, not to stuff baby. Gradually vary the
texture and amount to fit the eating skills and appetite of your baby. Some
like solids of thinner consistency and want a larger amount; some do better
with thicker solids and smaller amounts. Expect erratic eating habits. Your
baby may take a whole jar one day, but only a teaspoon the next.

Keeping a Favorite-Food Diary

We have found it helpful to make a food diary with four columns on a page.
In the first column list the foods that baby seems to like; in the second
column, foods that you have found by trial and error that baby does not like;
in the third column, possibly allergenic foods and the signs of allergies; and
in the fourth column, the techniques you have learned to get more food into
your baby with the minimum of hassles. The food diary helps you learn
your baby’s food preferences and capabilities at each stage of development

 and is another way of getting to know and enjoy your baby. In case your
baby may be intolerant of or allergic to a certain food, space each new food
at least a week apart and keep a diary of which foods baby may be sensitive
to or simply doesn’t like. Also, the timing and progression of solids is much
slower in the allergic baby. (Food allergies are discussed in detail beginning
here.)

FAVORITE FIRST FOODS
bananas
pears
avocados
peaches
applesauce
carrots
squash
sweet potatoes

How Much to Feed

Remember that tiny babies have tiny tummies, about the size of their fists.
So don’t expect baby to take more than one fistful of food at one feeding.
Expect erratic eating patterns. Baby may eat a whole jar one day and only a
tablespoon the next.

When to Feed

 Offer solids at the time of the day when your baby seems hungriest, bored,
or when you both need a change of pace. Choose a time of the day that is
most convenient for you, since a little mess is part of the feeding game.
Mornings are usually the best time for offering solids to formula-fed babies,
because you have the most time with your infant and usually do not have to
worry about preparing a meal for the rest of the family. If breastfeeding,
offer solids when your milk supply is lowest, usually toward the end of the
day. Start with one meal a day and progress according to baby’s level of
interest. If you have an eager eater, move up to three meals a day after the
first few days. If not, once a day is fine. It is preferable to have baby eat
during your own mealtime so that baby learns to enjoy the social aspect of
eating. Time the breast- or bottlefeedings to be about one to one and a half
hours prior to mealtime so baby is hungry enough for food but not starving
enough to be cranky. Don’t worry about the precise timing of the next
breast or bottle after the meal; baby will let you know when it’s time to
nurse again.
Grazing. Since babies have no concept of breakfast, lunch, and dinner it
makes no difference whether they receive vegetables for breakfast, or cereal
and fruit for dinner. If you have a mental picture of your baby sitting still in
a high chair eating three square meals a day, forget it! Babies don’t sit still
very long in one place even to play, let alone to eat. If your baby’s appetite
doesn’t coincide with your usual mealtimes, allow your baby the fine art of
grazing. Remember, tiny eaters have tiny tummies. Nibbling throughout the

 day is nutritionally better than eating three big meals. Three squares a day is
more of an adult pattern, and, for that matter, even for us it is not as healthy
as more frequent, smaller meals. (See “Try the Nibble Tray,” here.)
Forget fast feeding. Try to time baby’s feedings for when you are not in a
hurry. Infant feedings are very time-consuming. Babies dawdle, dabble,
spew, spatter, smear, drop, and fling.

CONSTIPATION WHEN STARTING SOLIDS
Many infants become constipated when solid foods are introduced.
Interestingly, the most popular starter food—rice cereal—may cause
constipation in most infants. So why start baby off on a food at a time when
constipation is already a risk? Tradition. Rice cereal has always been
recommended as baby’s first food. Other starters such as bananas, pears,
and applesauce may also plug baby up. If your baby begins to show signs of
constipation when starting solids, back off on whatever food you began
with, and give strained or pureed prunes or peaches. When the problem
resolves, slowly reintroduce other foods, while continuing with the fruit.
You will learn what your baby needs to keep her regular. For more
constipation-relieving foods, see here.

OceanofPDF.com

 FEEDING STRATEGIES
To get more food into your baby than onto the floor, mix together your
child’s developing skills with a large pinch of patience and sprinkle in a few
laughs. Here are some tips we have learned for getting more food into our
babies with fewer hassles.
Enjoy table talk. Eating is a social interaction. As you offer your baby
solids, consider that he may be thinking, “Something new is coming from
someone I love and trust.” Talk about both the food and the procedure so
that baby learns to relate the words with the type of foods and the
interactions that follow. Here is an example from the Sears family table:
“Stephen want carrots… open your mouth!” as I would approach Stephen’s
mouth with the solids-laden spoon. As I asked Stephen to open his mouth, I
also opened my mouth wide, and he mimicked my facial gestures. Eager
eyes, open hands, and open mouth are body language clues that baby is
ready to eat.
Show and tell. To entice the reluctant eater to eat, model enjoyment.
Capitalizing on baby’s newly developing social skill—mimicking her
caregivers’ actions—feed yourself in front of baby, but in an exaggerated
way, slowly putting a spoonful of baby’s food into your mouth. With big

 wide-open eyes showing how much you enjoy the taste, overreact, saying
“Mmmmm, good!” Let baby catch the spirit and want to do likewise.
Open mouth, insert spoon. Wait for a time when baby is hungry and in a
mood for facial gestures and interaction. As you engage your baby face-toface, open your mouth wide and say, “Open mouth!” Once your baby opens
the “door,” put the food in.
Use lip service. Try the “upper lip sweep.” As you place a spoonful of
solids in your baby’s mouth, gently lift the spoon upward, allowing the
upper lip to sweep off the food.
Observe stop signs. Pursed lips, closed mouth, head turning away from the
approaching spoon, are all signs that your baby does not want to eat right
now. Perhaps at this time baby wants to play, sleep, or simply is not
interested or hungry. Don’t force-feed. Some babies eagerly take solids by
six months, while others show little interest as late as nine to twelve
months. You want your baby to develop a healthy attitude toward both the
food and the feeding.
Avoid nighttime stuffing. Cereals are often advised as fillers, something to
feed your baby to lengthen the intervals between breastfeeding or bottles
and to encourage baby to sleep through the night. Not only does this filler
fallacy seldom work, it may create problems in appetite control at an early
age, thus contributing to eventual obesity. Baby may need other forms of
interaction between bottlefeedings, not just to be filled up. Remember that

 milk, either breast or formula, is still the most important nutrient at this
stage. Avoid the urge to fill your baby up with solids before bedtime in a
desperate hope that baby will sleep through the night. As tired parents, we,
too, have considered this temptation. Controlled studies have shown,
however, that infants who are fed solids before bedtime do not sleep
through the night any sooner than infants who do not get the before-bed
stuffing.

This baby is obviously not wanting to eat right now. Don’t force the issue.

Encourage self-feeding. Around six months babies begin to develop two
exciting skills that, when perfected, will make feeding much easier: the
ability to sit up well in a high chair or on your lap and the ability to reach
for food in front of them. Some babies simply hate having food come at
them on a spoon and resist solids until you figure out that Mr. Independent

 wants to do it himself. Place a bit of mashed banana within grabbing
distance on his table or high-chair tray. Around six months babies pounce
on anything of interest placed in front of them. You will notice your baby
capture this enticing material in his fist and gradually zero in on his mouth.
By nine to ten months baby will be using his thumb and index finger to pick
up small tidbits. In the beginning stages of finding his mouth, baby may
have more misses than hits, resulting in much of the food being splattered
over his cheeks or on the floor. As one mother of a messy self-feeder put it,
“The floor has a more balanced diet than my baby does.” It helps to
remember that at this stage baby doesn’t need the solid food—feeding is
still in the explore category.
Get the messy feeder to clean up his act. To keep baby from grabbing at
the spoon, sending the contents flying, give him something to hold on to,
another spoon or even a toy. Don’t ever punish him for making a mess or
wanting to be part of the action. If you are really intent on getting
something into your baby, gently hold both his hands in your free hand
while you “chat him up” or even sing his favorite ditty to distract him from
wanting to “help” too much. Expect baby to treat solids as toys. He’s
feeding his intellect while you are more intent on feeding his body. Don’t
fret! Your breast milk has all the nutritional bases covered. When the
flinging and spitting escalate, simply take the food away. When he’s really
hungry, instinct will take over, and he’ll realize the food will do wonders to
satisfy that big empty spot in his tummy.

 Help your baby develop an interest in solids. Capitalize on a new social
skill that develops between six and nine months—baby’s desire to mimic
the actions of her caregivers. Let your baby watch you eat and enjoy food.
Teach by example: Prepare a small amount of infant food, such as rice
cereal or mashed bananas, and take a bite yourself as you exclaim,
“Ummmmmm gooooood!” Some babies at this age are somewhat reluctant
to try anything new. Take a few bites of any new food yourself. Let baby
catch the spirit by watching you enjoy this new food.
Rotate foods. Infants become bored with too much of the same food.
Expect your baby to refuse previous favorites periodically. Take this as a
sign that baby needs more variety in the menu.
Avoid mixed foods. During the first few months of feeding introduce one
new food every few days. In case baby is allergic to or dislikes a food,
offering a single food makes it easier to identify the culprit. Once you know
certain foods are okay, you can combine them in one meal. In fact, a little
dollop of fruit on the tip of a spoonful of meat or vegetables can sometimes
get the less favored taste past the sentry.
Pass on the salt; skip the sugar. Parents, you are the taste makers of the
next generation. If your infant grows up accustomed to sweetened and
salted foods, it may be difficult to kick this taste later on.

OceanofPDF.com

 FEEDING

SOLIDS:

NINE

TO

TWELVE

MONTHS
The previous stage was mainly to introduce your infant to solids—to get
baby used to the transition from liquids to solids, from sucking to mouthing,
and chewing food. Most beginning eaters dabble a bit with foods, eating
only a small amount of a few select solids. Breast milk and/or formula make
up about 90 percent of their diet.
In the later part of the first year, baby’s swallowing mechanism greatly
matures. The tongue-thrust reflex is nearly gone, the gag reflex diminishes,
and swallowing is more coordinated. This allows a gradual progression
from strained or pureed foods to mashed and coarser and lumpier foods.
Advance the texture of solid food—but not too fast. Going too slowly
deprives baby of the chance to experiment with different textures and
prolongs the strained baby food stage. Advancing too quickly causes baby
to retreat from new foods and new textures for fear of choking.
Don’t fret if baby barely eats. Breast milk or formula is adequate for
baby’s nutritional needs up through twelve months.

OceanofPDF.com

 New Skills—New Foods

At this stage babies enjoy more variety and volume of solids. Solid foods
become a major component of the infant’s diet, often making up around 50
percent of baby’s nutrition after one year of age. (This is an average; many
breastfed babies are still at the 80–90 percent milk level at one year.)
During this stage new developmental milestones bring about new feeding
patterns. The thumb-and-forefinger pincer grasp, more highly evolved now,
allows baby to pick up small morsels. Babies often show a preoccupation
with any newly acquired developmental skill. Consequently, babies develop
a fascination for small objects. Pick up on this new desire by presenting
your baby with baby-bite-sized morsels. The fun of finger foods begins.

Finger Foods

To encourage picking up and eating rather than messing and smearing,
place a few pieces of O-shaped cereal, cooked diced carrot, rice cake, or
baby-bite-sized pieces of soft fruits on the high-chair tray. Babies also enjoy
firmer finger foods for teething, such as teething biscuits. Harder foods,
especially teething foods, should have a melt-in-the-mouth texture,
dissolving easily while being gummed. We noticed that our babies were

 fascinated with a pile of cooked spaghetti placed within easy reach. The
ability to pick up with thumb and forefinger enables baby to pick up one
strand, shell, or elbow at a time. Pasta picking holds baby’s meal attention
longer than most foods. Some of the pasta may even make its way to the
mouth. If worried about allergies, wait until one year to introduce wheat
products such as zwieback, bagels, and pasta. If you know your baby tends
toward allergies, you can buy wheat-free teething biscuits and pasta made
with rice.

As baby’s manual dexterity develops, finger foods take on greater appeal.
The ability to pick up food also has its hassles. Food and utensils
become interesting objects to bang, drop, and fling. This does not
necessarily mean rejection of the food or the feeding but reflects baby’s
natural and normal need to explore new ways to use the newly developed

 skills of picking up, dropping, and throwing. When it gets too messy for
you, simply end the feeding.

Pointing and Dipping

Besides developing thumb-and-forefinger pickup, around ten months babies
are using their index finger for poking and social directing—giving cues to
their caregivers. Baby is likely to poke into a new food as if dipping in and
tasting it. Capitalize on this skill by making dip. Avocado or guacamole dip
(without the salt and heavy spices) is a nutritious favorite at this stage.
Remember, each new developmental skill has its nutritional benefits and
humorous nuisances. While babies will use their poking finger to dip into
food and suck the food off their finger, expect the young artist to begin
body painting and finger painting with the food on the high-chair tray.
Enjoy this developmental skill while it lasts. And feel free to stop the meal
if baby is no longer eating.

OceanofPDF.com

 Feeding Strategies

Now that you have introduced your baby to the different tastes and textures
of his favorite solids, here are some tips gleaned from our family feeding
experiences:
Respect tiny tummies. Offer small helpings in frequent feedings. Since
babies’ tummies are about the size of their fists, they seldom take more than
4 tablespoons of a food at any one meal. Don’t overwhelm baby with a
whole pile of food on her tray. Instead, begin with a small fist-sized dollop
and add more as baby wants more.
Gradually increase variety and texture. For beginning solid eaters, fruits
and vegetables should be strained. As babies gain eating experience, they
can advance to pureed foods, then to foods that are finely minced. Most
babies can begin to accept chopped foods by one year of age.
Avoid pressure tactics. Never force-feed a child, as this can create longterm unhealthy attitudes about eating. Your role is to select nutritious foods,
prepare them well, and serve them creatively, matched to baby’s individual
capabilities and preferences. Baby’s role is to eat the amount he wants at the
time, according to his needs, moods, capabilities, and preferences. Feeding
children is similar to teaching them to swim—you need to find the balance

 between being too protective or restrictive and not vigilant or selective
enough.

Dr. Bob notes: If your baby shuns eating, try a bit of group encouragement.
Sit baby in a high chair. Let everyone start eating, but don’t give baby
anything. She will feel left out and want some food. When she starts
reaching for some food, give her something off your plate. Let her think it’s
your food, even though it may be her own food on your plate. When she
starts eating, don’t suddenly put a whole plate in front of her. Let her keep
asking for more, and give her only one or two bites at a time. This way,
baby feels in charge of deciding to eat on her own.

SAFE TODDLER (ONE YEAR AND OLDER)
FEEDING TIPS
Avoid stringy foods such as celery and string beans.
Pick out fish bones before mashing fish. In canned salmon, mash the
bones.
Safe and natural frozen teethers are bananas or any melt-in-the-mouth
frozen food.
Avoid commercial white-bread preparations; they form a pasty glob on
which baby could choke.
Spread nut butters well, instead of offering baby a chokable glob.
Cut meat and poultry across the grain and into tiny fingertip pieces
rather than large chokable chunks.
Check the chunks. Babies’ front teeth are for biting only. The molars—
chewing teeth—don’t appear until after the first year. Babies still gum

 rather than chew.
Offer finger foods only under supervision and when baby is seated, not
when reclining or playing.
Scatter only a few morsels of finger foods on baby’s plate or tray at
one time. Too much food in a pile encourages whole-handed gorging
rather than individual pickup bites.
Hot dogs are neither a nutritious nor safe food for babies. A bite of a
whole hot dog is just about the size of a baby’s windpipe, and baby
may choke. Healthy nitrate- and nitrite-free hot dogs are a favorite of
toddlers, and they can be safe if sliced lengthwise in thin, noodle-like
strips. Even these “healthy” hot dogs can be high in sodium, so limit
them.

OceanofPDF.com

 SAFE AND FAVORITE FINGER FOODS

O-shaped cereals
rice cakes (unsalted)
diced carrots (well cooked)
whole wheat toast (remove crust)
whole wheat bagel
scrambled eggs
french toast
cooked peas (dehulled)
pear slices (very ripe)
apple slices (cooked well)
pasta pieces (cooked)
tofu chunks
green beans (well cooked, no strings)
avocado dip or chunks

OceanofPDF.com

 CHOKABLE FOODS

nuts
seeds
popcorn kernels
hot dogs (whole or chunks)
hard beans
hard candy
raw carrots
raw apples
whole grapes
unripe pears
stringy foods
meat chunks

Expect erratic feeding habits. There may be days when your baby eats
solids six times, or she may refuse solids three days in a row and only want
to breastfeed or take a bottle.
Teach table manners. Babies are born clowns. When a baby drops a utensil
or a glob of food, everyone quickly reacts. Baby soon realizes that he is in
control of this game and continues to put food everywhere but in his mouth.
Shoveling is a familiar dinner-table-clown game. Sometimes the otherwise

 adept self feeder becomes impatient, shovels up a whole handful of food,
and splats the palmful of food half into his mouth and half on his face. Baby
continues to gorge and smear until his clowning gets the expected audience
reaction. Laughter not only reinforces this habit but can be dangerous since
baby may laugh with a mouthful of food, take a deep breath, and choke.
The ability to stimulate caregivers to react to one’s antics is a powerful
enforcer of baby’s emerging sense of competence. Enough is enough,
however. Reacting too quickly to the messer and flinger only encourages
this mealtime clown to continue his performance. Whether you laugh or
scold, either way baby takes this as a reaction from the audience, and the
performance continues. No comment is the best way to keep this little ham
off the stage. If his antics get out of hand, assume he’s not hungry and
remove his food. Don’t expect him to sit still as long as older children can.
Even at this early age table manners are learned by example. If he sees the
other children (or adults) laughing with a mouthful of food, flinging food,
banging utensils, and enjoying all of it, this little imitator will do likewise.
Also, remember to praise good manners.
Minimize the mess. Each new developing skill has its nutritional benefits
and humorous nuisances. Baby’s newly developing thumb and forefinger
pincer grasp and finger pointing stimulates him to want to pick up tiny
morsels of food and feed himself, yet it also creates an opportunity for more
messes. Allow baby the luxury of messing around a bit with his newly
discovered utensils. Believe it or not, baby is actually learning from this
mess. While some food makes its way into the mouth, other pieces scatter.

 Food flinging, dropping, and smearing are usual mealtime antics parents
can expect to deal with. Allow a certain amount of mess, but not when it
gets out of control. Too much food on a baby’s tray leads to two-fisted
eating and major mess making. To discourage food flinging and give the
food a fighting chance to make it into baby’s mouth, put a few pieces of Ocereals, cooked carrots, pieces of rice cakes, and any other bite-size pieces
of fruits and vegetables that baby likes on his tray. Then, refill as needed.
Placing a whole pile of food in front of baby is inviting a mess.
Settle the squirmer. This trick worked for one of our babies who would
constantly windmill her arms during feeding. Use three plastic spoons—one
spoon for each of her hands to occupy them and one for you to feed her.
Also, try this toy trick. Put toys with suction cups on a high-chair tray so
she can play with them with her hands while you spoon food into her
mouth. Sometimes when babies open their mouths to suck on toys, this
primes them to open their mouths to receive food.
Make feeding fun. Play games, such as the spoon-airplane game. Say
“Here comes the airplane” as the spoon makes its dive into baby’s mouth.
Overcome lip lock. To relax tight lips that are refusing a feeding, back off
and over-enjoy the food yourself. Model the excitement by replaying the
old reliable “Mmmmmm goooood!” As your baby watches you open your
mouth and savor the food, he may catch the spirit and relax his mouth and
his attitude. Use one of your child’s favorite foods as a teaser. As he opens

 his mouth for his favorite food, quickly follow with the food you wanted
him to try.
Use camouflage. Cover more nutritious but less liked foods with one of
baby’s favorites. Try dabbing a thin layer of applesauce (or other favorite)
on the spoonful of vegetables. Baby gets the applesauce on his tongue first
and then a scoop of the more nutritious but less liked food on top of it. If he
still hates it, forget it for a while.
Trick tiny taste buds. The taste buds for sweet flavors are found toward
the tip of the tongue; the taste buds for salt are on the sides of the tongue;
the taste buds for bitter are at the back of the tongue. In the middle of the
tongue, the taste buds are more neutral. So it is wise to place a new sweet
food on the tip of the tongue, but a new less sweet food on the neutral area
in the middle in order to give the food a fighting chance of going into baby
instead of coming back out. Veggies, for example, have a better chance of
being willingly swallowed if placed on the middle of the tongue rather than
on the tip of the tongue, except perhaps for sweet ones, like sweet potatoes.
Give your baby a bone. Baby can graduate from a nearly empty chicken
bone (sliver bone removed) to one with a decent amount of meat left on it
(still no sliver bone). It has great play value (for banging, gnawing on,
waving, transferring from hand to hand) to buy you a few more minutes of
savoring your own food, and baby may actually eat some of the chicken.

 Forgive food fears. It is normal for some babies to fear new foods. Expect
your baby to explore a new food before she eats it. Allow your baby to
become familiar with the new food before actually tasting it. One way to
encourage the cautious feeder is to place a bit of the food on baby’s own
index finger and guide his own fingerful of food into his mouth.
Enjoy the lap of luxury. If your child refuses to get in or stay in his high
chair, let him sit on your lap and eat off your plate. If baby begins messing
with your food, place a few morsels of food on the table between baby and
plate to direct his attention away from your dinner.
Share a plate. Let baby eat off your plate. Sometimes babies just don’t
want to eat like a baby; they’ll reject both baby food and baby plates.
Around one year of age, babies enjoy sitting on parents’ laps and picking
food off their plate, especially mashed potatoes and cooked, soft vegetables.
Try putting baby’s food on your plate and trick the little gourmet into eating
his own food.
Assist in self-feeding. Around one year of age babies enter the “do it
myself” stage and may want to feed themselves with a spoon. Most parents
find it much easier to feed a baby than to let baby take over the job with her
own utensils. Compromise is needed here. A trick we have used with the
determined self-feeder is to do the job together. The parent holds the
spoonful of food, and when baby grabs the spoon, mom or dad continues to
hold on and helps baby guide the spoon into her mouth. Take advantage of

 baby’s desire to mimic you at this age. When he sees you using a spoon
properly, baby is more likely to try it too. (For more feeding strategies, see
“Nourishing the Picky Eater,” here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 MAKING YOUR OWN BABY FOOD
Good nutrition, or the lack of it, can affect the health and behavior of your
child. It is worth spending a couple of hours each week to prepare your
infant’s food. You know what’s in it, and you can customize the texture and
taste to your baby’s palate. Before your baby’s impressionable taste buds
get spoiled with sugared and salted packaged foods, get your infant used to
the natural taste of freshly prepared foods. Besides, fresh foods taste better.
(See “Shape Young Tastes,” here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Healthy Cooking

Before serving or cooking, wash fruits and vegetables well. Scrub them
with a vegetable brush. Trim stringy parts and tough ends. Pit, peel, seed,
and remove anything that could cause choking. Trim excess fat off meat and
poultry.
Steaming fruits and vegetables preserves more of the vitamins and
minerals than boiling. Recapture some of the lost nutrients by adding a bit
of the steaming liquid to the food, or save it for making soups and sauces.
Also, try the following tips to make baby’s food as healthful as you can:

Don’t add salt or sugar—there’s no need to. You
may add a bit of lemon juice as a preservative and
a natural flavor enhancer.
Soften dried legumes (peas and beans) for
cooking by boiling for two minutes, then allowing
to stand for an hour, rather than the usual custom
of soaking overnight, which depletes them of
some nutrients.
Bake vegetables such as potatoes and squash in
their skins.

 Avoid frying and deep-frying, which adds
unhealthy fats to foods.
OceanofPDF.com

 Packaging and Storing Homemade Baby Food

Store your homemade food in the freezer. Allow the food to cool slightly
before freezing in small portions.

An ice-cube tray stores ideal infant-sized
portions. Pour the freshly cooked and pureed food
into the tray, cover with cellophane wrap, and
freeze.
After freezing, remove the frozen food cubes
from the tray and store the cubes in airtight
freezer bags. You can then remove one servingsized cube at a time when needed.
An alternative to the handy cube-sized serving is
the cookie-sized portion. On a cookie sheet lined
with waxed paper, place heaping tablespoonfuls
of the pureed baby food, or slices of cooked food,
in rows. Freeze until solid. Peel off the food
“cookies” or slices and freeze them in tightly
sealed bags.
Once babies graduate from cookie- and cubesized portions, store the food in recycled

 commercial baby-food jars, small jelly jars, or
plastic one-serving containers. Be sure not to fill
the jars to the brim, as food expands as it freezes.
Label all foods with the contents and date and put
the most recently frozen foods behind the
previously frozen foods, just like they do at the
supermarket. Homemade baby foods can safely
be kept frozen for three months.
WHAT YOU NEED TO MAKE YOUR OWN
BABY FOOD
Food processor and/or blender
Food mill
Hand-cranked baby-food grinder
Roasting pan
Vegetable steamer
Egg poacher
Saucepan with lid
Cutting board
Ovenproof glass cups
Fork and potato masher
Fine-meshed strainer
Vegetable brush and peeler
Measuring cups and spoons
Sharp paring knife
Ladle
Spatula
Grater
Colander

 OceanofPDF.com

 FOR STORING AND FREEZING

Ice-cube tray
Storage jars (4-ounce/120-milliliter)
Small freezer bags
Cookie sheet
Waxed paper
Freezer tape
Marking pen
Muffin tin

OceanofPDF.com

 Thawing and Serving Baby Food

Frozen foods should not be defrosted at room temperature for long periods
of time. When you’re ready to use frozen baby food, try these tips.

For slow thawing, place one serving, or a whole
day’s worth, in the refrigerator to thaw for three
to four hours.
For fast thawing, use an electric warming dish, or
place the frozen cube or uncovered jar in a
heatproof dish and place in a small saucepan. Fill
the pan with water to a level a bit below the rim
of the thawing dish. Thaw and warm over
medium heat and stir food occasionally to
promote even heating.
Before serving baby’s food, be sure to stir it well
and check to be certain no portion is too hot for
the baby. Touch the food to your upper lip each
time you load another spoon. A bite of too-hot
food can teach baby not to trust the material
coming at him on the spoon. Your finger would
know better.

 Because microwave warming may leave hot
pockets in the food and burn your baby’s mouth,
we do not recommend it. If you choose
microwave warming, use the low setting, be extra
careful in stirring, and always sample for even
heating before serving to baby.
To avoid wasting, only spoon-feed baby from the
portion you think she will eat. Add more to her
dish with a clean spoon if she wants more. You
can refrigerate the unused portion for up to two
days, but only if saliva has not been introduced.
Some babies never eat “baby foods,” and all this preparation information
can be bypassed if your baby tolerates a lot of texture, delays solids, hates
spoon-feeding, or goes straight to eating finger foods. Some mothers really
get into making baby food; others just go with family fare for baby’s meal
and use a fork to mash.

OceanofPDF.com

 COMMERCIAL BABY FOOD
Commercial baby foods do have some advantages as a convenience item.
They are relatively economical, sanitary, ready to serve, packaged in babyportioned jars, reusable for refrigerator storage of leftovers, and are staged
in graduated textures as baby’s chewing and swallowing skills increase. If
you choose to feed your baby a steady diet of commercial baby food, call
the manufacturer at its 800 number and ask the following questions:

Does the food contain pesticides, and how do they
police pesticide residues?
How fresh are the fruits and vegetables that are
used?
How long a shelf life is allowed?
Does the food contain additives?
Consumer questioning increases the standard of commercial baby food.
Admittedly, we are purists. We believe parents should be advocates for their
babies’ nutrition.

OceanofPDF.com

 BRING OUT THE CUP
“Introducing” the cup implies making the change from bottle or breast to
cup gradually and smoothly. Going from sucking to sipping requires a
completely different mouthing orientation and better coordination in
swallowing.

OceanofPDF.com

 Baby’s Cup Runneth Over

Because baby’s tongue-thrust reflex may not be completely gone at this
stage, the protruding tongue may interfere with a tight lip seal, so that some
of the liquid will flow over the tongue and dribble out the corners of the
mouth. Most babies cannot master a good cup seal until after one year of
age. Besides being dribbly, cup feeding is still a bit of a nuisance at this
stage, as most babies have not yet mastered the art of gently putting the cup
down. They are more likely to throw the cup on the table or floor or place it
down sideways rather than gently set it down upright. Developmentally,
baby will want to explore the joys of dumping. Here’s how to minimize cup
nuisances:

 A trainer cup with a tight lid and small spout can be a good starter cup.

Hold the glass or cup for your baby until he learns
how to handle a cup himself.
If baby dribbles too much out of a regular cup,
then use a trainer cup with a tight lid and small
spout.
Use a cup that is weighted on the bottom so it
doesn’t tip over easily.
Use a plastic two-handled cup that is easy to grab
and hold.
Make sure the cup has a wide base for greater
stability.
Protect baby’s clothing with a large absorbent or
waterproof bib.
Put a small amount of formula or water in the cup
at any one feeding.

OceanofPDF.com

 When to Introduce the Cup

There is no magic age for introducing the cup. Even a newborn can be
taught to lap out of a very bendable plastic cup. If introducing a cup around
five or six months, it is necessary for you to hold the cup at first, gradually
introducing a few drops of milk between baby’s lips and stopping
frequently to allow swallowing. Observe stop signs that baby has had
enough or is uninterested. When babies are able to sit up by themselves
without using their hands for support (usually between six and eight
months), they often want to “do it myself” and hold the cup without your
assistance. Then you will need to use a cup with a lid.
Most breastfeeding mothers prefer to bypass the bottle stage completely
and progress directly from breast to cup. If your breastfed baby still resists a
cup by the end of the first year, and you want to encourage weaning, try the
following get-to-love-the-cup tricks: To market the cup as fun, give your
baby a plastic play cup as a toy. To overcome cup fear, encourage your baby
to watch everyone around the table enjoy their own cup. Place baby’s cup
within grabbing distance on the table and notice that as you reach for yours,
baby reaches for hers. Chalk up another dinner table win. Put water in the
cup at first, instead of the suspiciously strange white stuff.

OceanofPDF.com

 What to Drink

Besides the right foods, babies need the right fluids. Here’s how to begin.

Water Your Baby

Next to breast milk and formula, water is the best beverage for baby.
Breastfed babies technically don’t need any water, as they can nurse
anytime they are thirsty. The infrequent-nursing toddler will probably need
some watering. Model water drinking by keeping your own water bottle
nearby throughout the day so that baby will want to partake of this curious
liquid she sees you sipping.
When to begin? There is no particular starting age for water; you can give
a formula-fed baby some water starting on day one if you are so inclined,
although it certainly isn’t necessary. If constipated, babies may benefit from
about 4 ounces spread throughout the day. Otherwise, water is not needed
until six months.
What water? Give baby the same water that you drink; it does not have to
be sterile. Special baby water you buy in the store is an unnecessary

 marketing gimmick. We recommend that families drink filtered water to
limit the impurities.
How much? Encourage about 4 daily ounces of water during the first six
months and 8 ounces between six and twelve months. A healthy goal for
total daily fluid intake for kids over one is 1 ounce for every pound of body
weight. Toddlers who breastfeed frequently need less water, as breast milk
is mostly water anyway. Cow’s milk (or substitute milk) is also mostly
water. So a 25-pound toddler who drinks about 16 ounces of milk or who
nurses several times a day (which would equal about 16 ounces) should
drink about 9 ounces of water.
What if baby won’t drink water? It’s tempting to entice the resistant
toddler to drink water by adding some juice to sweeten the deal. Try to
resist this. As we mentioned above, model drinking by sipping your own
water bottle throughout the day. Let baby see you getting your water out of
the fridge dispenser or from the water cooler in your kitchen; the gurgling
and bubbling noises should encourage your toddler to want to get some
himself.

Juicy Advice

It’s best to avoid juice for young children and stick to water. Although the
fruit content in most juices is technically natural and healthy, the fruit

 sugars (and especially any added sugars) may not be worth it. It’s also
important to get a baby hooked on water, and if baby knows juice exists, he
may hold out for the sweet stuff. If, however, you desire to give your baby
some juice, here is our advice.
When to begin? Introduce diluted juice when your infant is able to drink
from a cup, which in most cases is between six and nine months of age.
What juice? White grape juice is the most friendly to tiny intestines
because its sugar profile makes it easier to be absorbed. Pear, apple, and
grape are also favorite starter juices. Some infants develop abdominal pain
and diarrhea after drinking too much juice such as prune, pear, and apple. In
excess (more than 12 ounces a day), the sugar profile of these juices may
have a laxative and irritating effect on the colon. Orange, grapefruit, and
lemon juice are too acidic and are usually refused by or upset baby. Fresh
vegetable and fruit juice that you juice yourself at home (apple-carrot juice
is a common favorite) is the healthiest idea. Add some greens for even more
nutrition. If you model fresh juice drinking and baby never knows any
better, he will learn to love it. Store-bought green vegetable–fruit juice
mixes are also good.
How much? Because juice is less filling than breast milk or formula,
infants can consume a much larger quantity without feeling full.
Recommended amounts of 100 percent fruit juice are:

6 to 12 months: 4 ounces per day

 1 to 4 years: 6 ounces per day
Dilute juice with at least an equal amount of water. Consider juice as a
delivery system for extra water, which your baby needs once she is eating
solid foods.
Be label savvy. Always serve juice that says “100 percent juice” on the
label. Avoid juice “drinks,” “cocktails,” or “ades,” which may contain as
little as 10 to 20 percent juice with lots of added sweeteners, such as sugar
and corn syrup.
Avoid nighttime juice bottles. Don’t put your baby or toddler down to
sleep sucking on a bottle of juice. When a baby falls asleep, saliva
production and the natural rinsing action of saliva slows down, allowing the
sugary juice to bathe the teeth all night and contribute to tooth decay, a
condition called “juice bottle syndrome.” If your baby is hooked on a
nighttime juice bottle, remove the bottle promptly as soon as baby falls
asleep and brush her teeth as soon as she awakens in the morning. Each
night dilute the juice with more and more water until baby gets used to all
water and no juice—a trick we call “watering down.”

Don’t Drink Your Milk (Yet)!

 The Committee on Nutrition of the American Academy of Pediatrics
recommends that breast milk or formula be continued for at least one year,
and to avoid cow’s milk as a beverage until at least one year (longer if your
infant is allergic to dairy products). It is not wise to introduce a potentially
allergenic drink at the same time that your baby’s intestines are getting used
to a variety of solid foods.
If you are no longer breastfeeding, use an iron-fortified formula until at
least one year and longer if your infant is allergic to dairy products. Infant
formulas are much better suited to infants’ nutritional needs than is cow’s
milk. Formulas are much closer to the composition of human milk and
contain all of the necessary vitamins. Most contain additional iron
supplements that are so necessary at this age. Formulas are more expensive
than cow’s milk, but by the time you add the cost of additional vitamins and
iron, the cost of formula is only slightly more. Perhaps thinking of formula
as “milk” will lessen your urge to switch to cow’s milk. (See here for a
more detailed discussion of the pros and cons of cow’s milk.)

FIRST DAIRY FOODS
Instead of introducing cow’s milk, if your child does not have a family
history of dairy allergies or is generally not an allergic baby, you may try
dairy products such as yogurt, cheese, and cottage cheese between nine
months and a year. Yogurt gives all the nutritional benefits of milk but with
fewer problems. Yogurt is made by adding a bacterial culture to milk. This
culture ferments the milk and breaks down the milk lactose into simple
sugars, which are more easily absorbed—good to know when baby is
recovering from diarrhea. Milk proteins are also modified by the culturing
process, making yogurt less allergenic than milk. Most infants enjoy yogurt
around nine months. Sweeten plain yogurt using your own fresh fruit or no-

 sugar-added fruit spreads rather than using the heavily sweetened fruitflavored yogurt. Don’t use honey until baby is at least one year old.

A Note About the Compulsive Drinker

Toward the end of the first year most bottlefed babies consume around a
quart (32 ounces/1 liter) of formula each day and get about half of their
nutrition from solid foods. What about the baby who is a compulsive
formula drinker, consuming 40 to 50 ounces a day, and wanting more, but is
not interested in solid foods and appears to be gaining excessive weight?
For some suggestions on dealing with this, see “Seven Ways to Trim Baby
Fat,” here.
For the compulsive breastfeeder and apparently obese baby who still
wants to breastfeed all the time but refuses anything else, parents need not
worry. Breast milk naturally becomes lower in fat by the second half of the
first year. As your baby becomes an active toddler, he will most likely burn
off the excess baby fat.

GROW FOODS
To start your child off on the right nutritional track, be sure to serve mainly
grow foods, those that pack the most nutrition in the smallest volume, since
tiny children have tiny tummies. Grow foods are “real” foods, fresh foods,
and/or packaged foods that have a minimal amount of processing and no
factory-added ingredients. Grow foods enjoy these healthful qualities:
They pack more nutrients per calorie.

 They satisfy without making the child overly full or hungry soon after
eating.
They contain “slow carbs” that are digested slowly, giving the child a
gradual and steady release of energy.
They are free of chemical additives.
Our favorite grow foods are:
Salmon
Avocado
Eggs
Beans
Flaxseed meal, freshly ground
Yogurt, organic, Greek-style
Tofu
Oatmeal
Broccoli
Sweet potatoes
Oils (fish, flax, olive)
Lentils
Spinach
Blueberries
Hummus
Nut butters
Tomatoes
Cheese
Note: Nearly all fruits and vegetables could be called grow foods. Since
infants are too young to safely eat nuts and seeds, you can grind almonds,
sunflower seeds, and flaxseeds in a coffee grinder and sprinkle them on
cereal or yogurt. This gets baby used to the taste.

SEARS PARENTING LIBRARY ALERT
For two great resources that will expand your nutritional knowledge for
your entire family, see The Family Nutrition Book and The Healthiest Kid in

 the Neighborhood by the Doctors Sears.

OceanofPDF.com

 12

OceanofPDF.com

 Ten Tips for Becoming Your Family’s
Nutritionist

Parents, you have a nutritional window of opportunity in your child’s first
few years to shape her tastes into lifelong healthy eating habits. Here are ten
tips from the Sears family’s baby-feeding kitchen that will give your infant
a smart nutritional start.

OceanofPDF.com

 1. FEED YOUR BABY SMART FATS
Babies need a “right fat” diet, not a low-fat diet. Fats have gotten a bad rep
lately, and “cholesterol” is another bad word in adult nutrition.
Unfortunately, the low-fat, no-cholesterol craze has been carried over into
infant feeding. Babies need fats—lots of them. Human milk, our nutritional
standard, contains 40 to 50 percent of its calories as fats and—would you
believe?—is also rich in cholesterol. A balanced diet for infants should
contain at least 40 percent of its calories in the form of fats, and 30 to 40
percent for toddlers. Without fats babies won’t grow well. Here are the
nutritional reasons that your baby needs enough of the right fats:

OceanofPDF.com

 Feed Your Little “Fat Head”

Growing brains need smart fats. The brain grows
faster during the first years of life than at any
other time. It uses 60 percent of the total energy
consumed by the infant, and the brain itself is 60
percent fat. Also, fats provide the major
components of the brain cell membranes and the
myelin sheath that insulates the nerves in the
brain and spinal cord, enabling nerve impulses to
travel more efficiently throughout baby’s growing
body.
Fats are the body’s largest storage batteries for
energy. Each gram of fat provides 9 calories,
more than twice that of carbohydrates and
proteins.
Fats are the basic components of important
hormones and are valuable parts of cell
membranes, especially red blood cells.

 Fats act like ferry boats for the absorption and
transport of vitamins A, D, E, and K.
Fats make food taste good. Babies enjoy the
“mouth feel” of fat in food.
Fats are the most nutrient-rich food, packing in
the most calories in the smallest volume. This
nutritional perk is important for toddlers since
they are by nature picky eaters and consume
small amounts at each feeding.
As you can see, fats do good things for baby, as long as we provide this
little brain and body with the right kinds of fats, in the right proportions. In
choosing the healthiest fats, consider the source.

OceanofPDF.com

 Best Fats for Babies

Not only should infants get 40 to 50 percent of their calories from fats, they
should eat the right variety of fats. In addition to breast milk, the best fats
for babies (and also for children and adults) come from marine and
vegetable sources. Ranked in order of nutritional content they are:

seafood (especially salmon)
flax oil
avocados
olive oil
nut butters (because of possible allergies, your
baby’s doctor may advise delaying peanut butter
until after two years)
The top two sources of fats (breast milk and seafood) are rich sources of
omega-3 fatty acids, which are essential for optimal brain growth. In
addition to these smart fats, babies also need a variety of the other fats in
their diet.

GO FISH!
Besides being the top grow food, the omega-3 fats found in seafood also
represent the number one nutritional deficiency in many infants. Over the

 past decade, thousands of scientific articles have proven what mother
nutritionist has long suspected: babies need to eat more safe seafood.
Here are our best fish tips for feeding infants this top food:
Begin early, around nine months, as part of shaping young tastes
toward liking seafood.
Serve the safest seafood, preferably wild Pacific salmon.
Gradually work up to an average volume of 3 to 6 ounces per week, or
around two baby fistfuls a week. (A chunk of wild salmon the size of a
two-year-old’s fist twice a week would be about 6 ounces and give
your baby around 300 milligrams of daily DHA/EPA.)
If baby doesn’t yet savor the taste of seafood, give your baby fish oil
supplements at an average daily dose of 300 milligrams of combined
DHA/EPA.
Here’s what science says about seafood. Infants and children whose
diets contain sufficient omega-3s enjoy:
• Smarter brains
• Improved intelligence
• Improved behavior
• Happier moods
• Better vision
• Smoother skin
• Fewer allergies
• Healthier hearts
• Fewer “Ds”: ADD and ADHD
To entice picky eaters to eat seafood, try these tips:
Dip it in your baby’s favorite sauce.
Sneak it. Mix seafood into baby’s preferred foods with creations such
as pasta and salmon balls (instead of meatballs) and seafood soup. Add
drops of fish oil supplements into your child’s favorite foods or even
into a smoothie. Make your own fish sticks. Hide the seafood under a

 proven favorite, such as cheese, pasta, tomato sauce, or mashed
potatoes.
Sweeten it. Drizzle honey over a salmon fillet.
Switch it. Instead of a beef burger, try a salmon “burger.”
For detailed information about the science and safety of seafood, especially
for infants and children, see our new book The Omega-3 Effect (Little,
Brown, 2012). For seafood safety updates and safe seafood sources, see
AskDrSears.com/safeseafood.

OceanofPDF.com

 Saturated Fats for Babies

These fats come primarily from animal sources such as meat, eggs, and
dairy products. During the first two years of baby’s life, parents should not
keep their infant’s diet thin in saturated fats (remember that human milk fat
is 44 percent saturated fat). Older children, adolescents, and adults should
avoid foods high in saturated fats because they contribute to an increased
risk of adult heart disease, presumably because sat fats raise cholesterol.
The moral of this fat story is feed baby a diet rich in saturated fats but
gradually lower the amount of sat fats (meat, eggs, and full-fat dairy
products) as your child gets older. Foods that have predominantly saturated
fats include the following:

meat
poultry
full-fat dairy products
eggs
butter
chocolate
cocoa butter
palm and palm kernel oils
coconut oil

 OceanofPDF.com

 Bad Fats for Babies

While it is nutritionally correct to say there’s no such thing as a bad fat for
babies, artificial processing of natural fats can make a good thing bad. Read
labels, watching for the word “hydrogenated”—the only bad fat.
Hydrogenated fats (also called “trans fatty acids”) are produced by
artificially processing vegetable oils to make them like saturated fats. Used
to extend the shelf life of foods and give some packaged and fast foods a
fatty, oily taste, the artificially processed fats raise blood cholesterol. In our
opinion, these artificially made factory fats have never been proven safe for
babies, and new insights have shown they are certainly not healthy for
adults. These sinister fats are often tucked into these commercial foods:

DR. SEARS’S NUTRITIP
Avoid the “bad words” on package labels:
High-fructose corn syrup
Hydrogenated
Number symbols (e.g., red #40)
Flavor enhancers (e.g., MSG)
As a general guide, the nutritional value of foods that contain any of these
additives is suspect.

candy bars

 chips
cookies and crackers
deep-fried fast food
doughnuts
french fries
shortening
some peanut butters
Look at the fine print on labels. Shun foods whose ingredients list contains
the words “hydrogenated” or “partially hydrogenated.” Some healthier
products have recently started proudly displaying labels that say “Contains
no trans fatty acids.”

OceanofPDF.com

 2. FEED YOUR BABY THE BEST CARBS
Every baby is born with a sweet tooth. But, unfortunately, sugars have been
getting a lot of bad nutritional press. Every possible malady has been
blamed on sugar. Babies do need sugars, lots of them. But they need the
right sugars.
Infants and children are natural sugarholics. Kids crave sugar because
they need a lot of energy, mental and physical. Sugars are the body’s main
energy fuel. Each molecule of sugar is like a tiny power pack, energizing
each cell to do its work.

OceanofPDF.com

 Sweet Facts About Sugars

Nutritionally speaking, there is no such thing as a bad sugar. It’s how it is
served and what it’s combined with that determine whether it’s “good” or
“bad.”

Clearing Up Carb Confusion

Because parents want to feed their infants the best sugars, we’ll provide a
crash course in carbs. Carbs are “good” or “bad,” depending on how they
behave in the body. A good-for-your-baby carb is the sugar found in “real”
food because it always comes packaged with protein, fat, or fiber. A junky
carb is found in factory food. To clear up carb confusion, here’s how we
explain it to kids: A good-for-you carb plays with two or three friends—
fiber, fat, or protein. These friends make the healthy carbs behave well in
your body. When you eat a healthy carb, these friends slow down the rush
of carbs from your intestines into your bloodstream, giving you a steady
supply of energy. Examples of healthy carbs are those found in fruits,
vegetables, yogurt, and whole grains. That’s why a bit of added sugar to
foods that contain protein, fiber, and/or fat is nutritionally okay, such as
drizzling honey on oatmeal or adding a bit of table sugar to homemade

 cookies. A bad-for-you carb, or a junky one, has no friends. It plays alone.
So when you eat a junky carb, it rushes into your bloodstream too fast,
hypes you up, and then leaves your bloodstream too fast, causing low blood
sugar, unclear thinking, and undesirable behavior.

HEALTHY SUGAR SOURCES
Good carbs are naturally partnered with two “friends,” fiber and protein,
which slow the sugar rush into the bloodstream.

OceanofPDF.com

 HEALTHY CARBS
Contain fiber and protein
Fruits
Legumes (e.g., beans, peas, lentils)
Nut butters (e.g., almond butter)
Soy foods (e.g., tofu)
Veggies
Whole grains (e.g., oatmeal, brown rice, whole wheat bread)
Yogurt, organic
Sweet potatoes
Homemade cookies

OceanofPDF.com

 JUNKY CARBS
Contain little or no fiber and protein
Cereals with fewer than 3 grams of protein and fiber per serving
High-fructose corn syrup
Sweetened beverages
White bread and pasta

OceanofPDF.com

 3. PERK UP THE PROTEINS
Proteins are “grow foods.” Like the structural steel of buildings and the
metal meshwork in concrete, proteins provide structural elements to every
cell in the body. Proteins are responsible for growth, repair, and replacement
of tissue. They are the only nutritional element that can duplicate itself.
Tissues grow by piling millions of proteins on top of each other until each
organ has reached full growth, after which they replace one another when
worn out or injured.
While proteins are necessary grow foods, parents seldom need to worry
that their baby isn’t eating enough protein. During the first year, an infant’s
total protein needs can be met with breast milk or formula. Even during the
second year, when toddlers typically become picky eaters, it’s hard not to
get enough protein. During the first two years an infant needs about 1 gram
of protein per pound of body weight per day. The total daily protein needs
of a 20-pound toddler could be met by any of the following: a cup of yogurt
and a glass of milk; a peanut butter sandwich on whole-grain bread and a
glass of milk; two servings of whole-grain cereal and a cup of yogurt; two
scrambled eggs with cheese; a fish sandwich; or 4 ounces of chicken. As
you can see, for most children, getting enough protein is not a worry. Foods
that pack in the most protein are:

 seafood: especially salmon
dairy products: cottage cheese, yogurt, cheeses,
milk
legumes: soybeans, tofu, dried peas, chickpeas,
dried beans, lentils
meat and poultry
eggs
nut butters
whole grains: wheat, rye, oats, rice, corn, barley,
millet

OceanofPDF.com

 4. SHAPE YOUNG TASTES
Infants who enter childhood with a sweet, fatty, or salty taste in their
mouths are likely to continue with these cravings throughout childhood and
probably into adulthood. Infancy is the only time in your child’s life when
you can curb the candy. Junk foods shared by fellow toddlers, sugary
birthday parties, and even chocolatey trips to grandmother’s house are
normal nutritional insults awaiting your home-fed toddler. But here’s a story
that may be hard for you to swallow. Years ago we had a theory that if
young taste buds and developing intestines were exposed to only healthy
foods during the first three years, the child might refuse junk food later.
Sound like pie in the sky? Read on.
We tried this experiment with our own children and encouraged it in our
pediatric practice. For the first three years we gave our children only
healthy foods. We kept out of our diet added salt, table sugar, and unhealthy
fats. Our sixth infant, Matthew, was the most junk-food deprived. What
happened when Matthew went out into the sugar-coated world of birthday
parties and candy giving? Of course he had sticky fingers and icing on his
face, but he did not overdose. That’s the difference. Halfway through the
mound of icing or chocolate delight, Matthew would slow his partaking to a
stop and convey the “I don’t feel good” signs of yucky tummy. Now our
children know to scrape off the frosting and just eat the cake. At even as

 young as three years, children can make the food connection: “I eat good
food—I feel good; I eat bad food—I feel bad.” Health-food-primed babies
seldom overindulge, and that’s the best you can hope for in raising a healthy
body—a child and later an adult who avoids excesses.

SPICE IT UP!
Help shape your baby’s tastes toward enjoying the healthful benefits of
spices. For example, the combination of turmeric and black pepper is a
beneficial anti-inflammatory combo to get your baby used to.
Here’s how to shape your baby’s tastes in the right direction:

Avoid foods with added artificial sweeteners and
lots of sugar and corn syrup.
Avoid foods that contain hydrogenated oils.
Serve more fresh foods and fewer canned and
packaged foods.
Serve whole grains (e.g., whole wheat instead of
white bread).
Avoid foods with colorings and additives.

OceanofPDF.com

 5. FILL UP WITH FIBER
Fiber, the undigestible portion of starches and fruits, is a natural laxative,
helping remove food waste products from the intestines. Crunchy and
chewy foods, such as whole grains and legumes, are the best examples.
Fibers function as intestinal sponges and brooms. As sponges, fibers absorb
water and unneeded fats from other foods, adding bulk to the stool, slowing
the absorption of food, and giving the body a longer feeling of fullness.
Other fibers sweep the waste products downstream to be more easily
eliminated. In adults, adequate fiber diets help prevent many intestinal
disorders and may even lower the risk of colon cancer. In children, the main
role of fiber is to soften the stools, speed the transit time of waste products
through the intestines, and ultimately prevent constipation—a condition
common in toddlers. For fibers to do their intestinal clearing job, a child
must drink lots of fluid. The best sources of fiber are vegetables (such as
potatoes) with skins, whole grains, whole wheat bread, apples (with the
skin), prunes, pears, apricots, beans, brown rice, whole-grain pasta,
oatmeal, beets, eggplant, squash, and legumes. As a good fiber source for
our family we sprinkle flaxseed meal (branlike flakes) on a more tasty
cereal. Whole is the key to fiber. Peeling fruits and vegetables and refining
grains remove much of the fiber—another reason for leaving foods the way
they are grown or picked.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Fiber, Carbs, and Proteins—Partners in Health

Here’s a valuable nutrition tip for parents to remember: A good carb is a
fiber-filled carb; a bad carb is a fiberless carb. High-fiber foods that also
contain carbohydrates and sugars are better for your child’s behavior than
high-sugar, low-fiber foods. Fiber mixes the food into a gel and slows the
absorption of the sugar from the intestines. Add protein to this pair to slow
intestinal sugar absorption even more. This steadies the blood-sugar level
and lessens the consequent ups and downs of behavior. Many cookies and
packaged goods are high in sugar yet low in fiber and protein, a
combination that does not favor pleasant behavior.

OceanofPDF.com

 6. VALUE YOUR VITAMINS
In addition to the big three—proteins, fats, and carbohydrates—vitamins are
a valuable ingredient in your child’s diet. Unlike the big nutrients, these
micronutrients do not directly supply energy to your baby’s body, but they
help the food your baby eats work better, and all the body systems work
better. As the name implies, they vitalize the body. We cannot function
without these life-sustaining helpers. Our bodies need thirteen vitamins: A,
C, D, E, K, and the eight members of the B team—thiamine, niacin,
riboflavin, pantothenic acid, biotin, folacin, B-6, and B-12.
Go for variety. Vitamin-conscious parents, relax. No matter how picky
your eater is, it is unlikely your child suffers from any vitamin deficiency.
Many foods contain such a variety of vitamins that even picky eaters are
bound to pick up enough vitamins over a short period of time. Giving your
child a variety of foods ensures enough vitamins.
Vitamin storage. Some vitamins (A, D, E, and K) are stored in the body
fat, so if your child goes on a periodic veggie strike, he will survive on last
month’s vitamins. Other vitamins (C and the B team) are not stored in the
body very long and need frequent boosts.

 DOES YOUR INFANT NEED SUPPLEMENTAL
VITAMINS?
Consider vitamin supplements a drug to be prescribed, in correct doses, by
your doctor. Megadoses of vitamins, touted as cure-alls for many adult
diseases, should not be given to children.
Unless their doctor determines otherwise, exclusively breastfed term
infants do not need extra vitamins. Human milk contains all of the essential
vitamins. Because of a newly recognized vitamin D insufficiency, many
breastfeeding mothers are now advised by their doctors to take vitamin D
supplements. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that babies
of breastfeeding mothers be supplemented with vitamin D. Check this with
your baby’s doctor. As long as your infant is getting enough breast milk, he
or she is getting enough vitamins. Commercial formulas also contain all the
essential vitamins, provided your infant consumes the right amount of
formula each day. When your infant averages formula consumption of 32
ounces (about 1 liter) a day, extra vitamins are unnecessary unless he needs
extra nutrition—for prematurity, for example.
Because of the erratic diets of most toddlers, pediatricians usually
recommend an omega-3 fish oil supplement and possibly a daily
multivitamin/multimineral supplement beginning around one year of age
and continuing until the child eats a consistently balanced diet. (For current
recommendations on vitamins and other supplements, see
AskDrSears.com/supplements.
Fragile vitamins. Some vitamins, especially C, are weakened or destroyed
by processes such as boiling. Steaming and microwaving preserve the most
vitamins in cooked food. Fresh is best, followed by frozen; canned foods
have the lowest vitamin count.
Yellow/orange vegetables—yellow/orange skin. Yellow and orange
vegetables (squash and carrots) contain carotene, which if eaten in excess

 may give a yellow or orange tint to the skin. This harmless condition,
termed carotenemia, is often confused with jaundice, which also gives a
yellow color. Carotenemia colors only the skin, whereas jaundice also gives
a yellow color to the whites of the eyes. Simply cutting down on the yellow
and orange foods takes away the skin color.

OceanofPDF.com

 7. MIND YOUR MINERALS
Like vitamins, minerals are micronutrients; your child’s body needs only a
small amount to stay healthy. Minerals get into foods from the soil, and into
seafood from the ocean. Calcium, phosphorous, and magnesium, the big
three minerals, help build strong bones. Iron and copper build blood. Zinc
boosts immunity. Sodium and potassium (called electrolytes) regulate the
body’s water balance. Honorable mention is given to the smaller members
of the mineral family, called trace elements, which help fine-tune the body’s
functions: iodine, manganese, chromium, cobalt, fluoride, molybdenum,
and selenium. Deficiencies of these minerals and trace elements are rare,
except for iron, since they are found in all the same food sources as
vitamins. The two most important members of the mineral team are iron and
calcium. (Calcium sources are discussed here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 8. PUMP UP BABY’S IRON
Iron is an important mineral for the proper functioning of all vital organs.
Its main use is to build hemoglobin, the substance in red blood cells that
carries oxygen. During well-baby checkups, usually between nine and
fifteen months, the doctor should check your baby’s hemoglobin by taking
one drop of blood from a finger stick. An infant’s hemoglobin normally
ranges from 11 to 13 grams. If the hemoglobin is below 11, the infant is
termed “anemic,” or has “low iron.” If the anemia is due to insufficient iron,
this condition is termed “iron-deficiency anemia.” Signs and symptoms of
this problem are irritability, slow growth, diminished appetite, fatigue, and a
generally pale appearance, especially noticeable on the earlobes and lips
and beneath the fingernails. New insights into iron requirements show that
infants and children with long-term iron-deficiency anemia are at risk for
delayed intellectual development.
To understand how your baby can become iron deficient, let’s follow
this interesting mineral through the body. During baby’s life in the womb
the mother gives him a lot of extra iron, which is stored in the tissues of his
body and in the hemoglobin of red blood cells. (While term babies are born
with a large supply of reserve iron stored in their bodies, premature infants
need iron supplements beginning at birth.) As old red blood cells are used
up and disposed of by the body, much of the iron is recycled into new blood

 cells. As the iron in the blood is used up, the iron stores in the body portion
out enough iron to keep baby’s blood hemoglobin normal. If no dietary iron
were to come in, these stores would be used up by six months. This is the
nutritional rationale for giving babies iron-rich milk, either breast milk or
iron-fortified formula, beginning at birth, or at least within the first few
months. Here are some guidelines for avoiding iron deficiency.
Breastfeed your baby for as long as you can. The special iron in your
milk has a high bioavailability, so 50 to 75 percent of it is absorbed, but
only 4 to 10 percent of iron in other foods, such as iron-fortified cereals and
formulas, gets into your baby’s blood. In studies breastfed infants had a
higher hemoglobin value at four to six months than infants who were fed an
iron-fortified formula.
Avoid cow’s milk for infants; limit it for toddlers. Cow’s milk (which is
very low in iron) should not be given as a beverage to infants under one
year of age. Besides being a poor source of dietary iron, excessive cow’s
milk can irritate the lining of your infant’s intestines, causing tiny losses of
iron over a long period of time, further contributing to iron-deficiency
anemia. Also limit your toddler’s cow’s milk consumption to no more than
24 ounces (710 milliliters) a day.
Combine foods wisely. Some foods help and others hinder iron absorption.
Feeding solids just before or right after breastfeeding can diminish
absorption of the valuable iron in breast milk. For this reason, if your baby

 is iron deficient, space the feeding of solid foods and breastfeeding by at
least twenty minutes. Here are some iron helpers: Vitamin C–containing
foods (fruits and juice) are iron enhancers, meaning they increase the iron
absorption from other foods. Orange juice with a meal can double the
amount of iron absorbed from the food. Drinking cow’s milk with a meal
can decrease the amount of iron absorbed from the other foods. Nutritionists
believe that animal protein foods contain a “meat factor” that improves the
absorption of vegetable iron eaten at the same time as meat. The best cohelpers are meat and vitamin C–containing foods eaten together at the same
meal, for example, spaghetti with meat and tomato sauce, hamburgers and
coleslaw, or a turkey sandwich and orange juice. Another good combination
is fruit and iron-fortified cereal.

BEST IRON SOURCES FOR BABIES
breast milk
iron-fortified formula
iron-fortified cereals
prune juice
tomato paste
blackstrap molasses
tofu
chili con carne with beans
lentils
soybeans
beans (kidney, pinto)
turkey
fish
lean meats

 Iron requirements: Babies need around 1 milligram of iron per pound (0.5
milligram per kilogram) of body weight per day. If your doctor finds your
baby iron deficient, baby will need around 3 milligrams of iron per pound
every day for several months.

OceanofPDF.com

 9. MAKE EVERY CALORIE COUNT
Toddlers have tiny tummies, about the size of their fists. Add this
anatomical fact to the temperament of a busy toddler who doesn’t want to
sit still for anything, especially eating, and you have a recipe for a “picky
eater.” (We discuss the picky eater in Chapter 13.) Encourage grazing. Offer
your toddler nutrient-rich foods, those that pack a lot of nutrition, in
frequent, small doses. (See “Grow Foods,” here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 10. RAISE A LEAN BABY
There once was a time when a plump baby was sure to win approval from
grandmother. Now, fat is out; lean is in.
Are fat babies destined to become fat adults? Not necessarily, but there
is a heavy tendency. A fat infant has a higher chance of becoming a fat child
who has an even higher chance of becoming a fat teenager who has an even
greater chance of becoming an obese adult. An obese infant has a one in
five chance of remaining heavy at age five to eight years. An obese child
has twice the chance of becoming an obese adult. An obese teenager has
sixteen times the risk of becoming an obese adult. Fat children grow up
with a physical, psychological, and emotional disadvantage, in addition to
having a higher risk of adult diseases, such as heart disease, stroke, and
diabetes. Medical studies show that leaner people live longer and healthier
lives.
Some babies are more prone to obesity than others. Here are the main
risk factors to consider.

OceanofPDF.com

 It’s in the Genes

Infants are at risk of obesity from what’s in the genes and what’s on the
plate. Adopted children tend to follow the weight trends of their biological
parents more than those of their adoptive parents. If both parents are obese,
the child has an 80 percent chance of becoming obese; if one parent is
obese, a 40 percent chance. If neither parent is obese, the child has only a 7
percent chance of being overweight. Rather than saying that babies inherit
obesity, it is more correct to say that they inherit a tendency toward obesity.

OceanofPDF.com

 It’s in the Body Build

Besides inheriting a tendency toward fatness or leanness, babies also inherit
specific body builds, which are more or less prone to obesity.
Lean and tall “banana” body types (ectomorphs) are taller and lighter
than average on the growth chart. Ectomorph babies, recognized even at
birth by spindly “piano fingers” and long, slender feet, put more calories
into height than weight. Persons with ectomorph body types seem to burn
off more calories and better adjust their food intake to their activity level. If
they eat a lot, yet don’t gain weight, they are likely to be the envy of their
calorie-watching friends.
Stocky babies (mesomorphs, or “apple” body types) have average height
and weight, and both height and weight are near the same percentile on the
growth chart. These square-shaped babies have a greater tendency toward
obesity than their rectangular ectomorph buddies.
Endomorphs (“pear” body types) are short and wide. Of the three body
builds, these babies have the greatest chance of becoming overweight or
obese. Because of their pear-shaped contour, they carry excess weight the
least attractively.
Not all babies are pure body types; some have features of all three.
During a well-baby exam, parents often ask, “Do you think our baby
will grow up to be fat?” We are usually able to give them an educated guess

 by looking at the body builds of the parents and child. If mother and father
are both lean, and baby has an ectomorph body type, it is safe to say, “Your
child will probably be able to eat all the nutritious food she wants and not
get fat.” Because of this child’s body build and heredity, she will probably
not be fat. But if two short, round parents holding a short, round baby ask
the same question, we would counsel these parents that their baby does
have an increased tendency to obesity and that they should begin preventive
measures even in infancy.

OceanofPDF.com

 It’s in the Temperament

Babies get fat not only by eating too many calories, but also by not burning
enough off. Active, fidgety babies tend to burn more calories and have a
lower risk of obesity. Easy, mellow, and quiet babies tend to burn fewer
calories. “Sitters” tend to have an increased risk of obesity, which is
accentuated if this sedentary temperament is prevalent in other family
members. A long, lanky, wiry, active baby with similar parents has a slim
chance of becoming fat.

OceanofPDF.com

 Baby Thins Out

Most babies are most chubby around six months of age. Between six and
eight months, as babies begin to sit up, crawl, and play, they begin to lean
out. From one to two years even more leaning out occurs. Toddlers walk,
run, climb, and earn the name “picky eater.” They put more calories into
height than weight. It seems as if baby is finally growing into his oversized
skin. Gone are the plump baby pictures of the earlier months. A slimmer
toddler emerges. Often parents’ weight worries change from “Doctor, is he
too fat?” to “Doctor, is he too thin?” Cherish these grabbable baby rolls
while you can. They will soon disappear.
Being “lean” means having the right percentage of body fat for your
individual body type. Lean should not be confused with skinny (which is
often unhealthy) or lanky (which describes a person’s basic body type).
Every child can be lean and trim; not everyone can, or should, be thin and
lanky.
“Lean” is one of the most important health words you can know, since
leanness equates with a lower incidence of just about every serious adult
disease: heart disease, stroke, diabetes, and cancer. In the last decade
childhood obesity has reached epidemic proportions and is now considered
by both the surgeon general and the American Academy of Pediatrics one of
the most concerning childhood health problems.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Seven Ways to Trim Baby Fat

1. Give baby custom-calorie milk. Breastfeed. We believe breastfeeding
lessens the risk of obesity for these reasons:

Breast milk contains the recently discovered
satiety factor, a sort of built-in calorie counter that
signals a full feeling toward the end of a feeding.
The natural stop-eating factor in breast milk
imprints on the infant the feeling of when he or
she has had enough to eat—a feeling some older
children and adults never learn.
By varying his sucking style, the breastfed infant
is more in control of the calorie content of the
milk by the way he sucks. When hungry, baby
gets high-calorie milk; when thirsty or needing
only comfort, baby gets lower-calorie milk. When
the breast is “empty” but baby needs continued
sucking, very little milk is delivered. Not so the
formula-feeding baby. No matter how the infant
sucks, the high-calorie stuff keeps right on
flowing. (See here to learn how the fat and calorie

 content of breast milk change according to the
needs of baby.)
Recent studies comparing breastfed and formulafed babies show that after the first four to six
months, breastfed babies begin to “lean out”
sooner than their formula-fed peers, as they gain
proportionately more height than weight.
Formula-fed babies tend to get solid foods earlier
and gain proportionately more weight than height,
suggesting an early tendency away from leanness.
A breastfeeding infant is more in control of her
feedings, how much and how often she eats. A
breastfeeding mother is more likely to watch the
baby for cues, and since she can’t count ounces,
she learns to trust baby’s feeding signals. A
bottlefeeding mother, on the contrary, can take
control of the feeding away from the baby. She is
able to count ounces and watch the clock. She can
override an infant’s automatic hunger control by
urging the baby to take “just a little bit more.” As
a result, baby may come to expect that “stuffed
feeling” after a meal and eventually seek out this
feeling as part of her normal eating pattern. That’s
why it’s important for bottlefeeding mothers to
learn to read baby’s hunger and satiety cues.

 Research shows that formula-fed infants, if
allowed to determine for themselves how much
formula to drink, can self-regulate their total daily
calories quite well. In a study of six-week-old
infants, babies who were given a diluted, lowercalorie formula drank more to make up for the
less filling formula.
It’s tempting to allow a toddler to walk around
with a bottle just to “keep him quiet.” Offering
formula at every peep may condition the infant to
connect food with comfort. Breastfeeding
conditions the child to connect comfort with a
person.

Dr. Bill notes: In our pediatric practice, we occasionally see an exclusively
breastfed baby who is “overweight” on the growth chart. Because
exclusively breastfed babies nearly always “lean out” toward the end of the
first year or during the second year, we advise the parents neither to worry
nor to change baby’s pattern of feeding.

2. Watch for lower-calorie cues. Not all cries are for food. Being held may
sometimes pacify the upset baby; playing may entertain the bored baby.

 Oftentimes, crying or fussing babies are thirsty, not hungry. Formula-fed
infants and infants eating solids early get more concentrated feedings, and
consequently they need more water. Sometimes offer water instead of milk,
formula, or food. It’s noncaloric. If unable to appease the compulsive
formula drinker with plain water, consult your doctor about feeding your
baby fewer calories. In recent years, formula manufacturers have introduced
follow-up formulas that contain slightly less fat and fewer calories, much
like the difference between whole milk and low-fat milk.
3. Delay solids. Besides formula feeding, the early introduction of solids
adds to the obesity risk. Forcing solids early in hopes of getting baby to
sleep through the night not only seldom works (see here) but also is an
unwise feeding habit. If your baby has risk factors for obesity, when you do
begin solids, begin with the most nutrient-rich foods, those that pack the
most nutrition in the fewest calories, such as vegetables rather than fruit and
whole grains over refined grains.
4. Respect tiny tummies. As we’ve said before, babies’ tummies are about
the size of their fists. Next time you fill a bottle or place a heaping plateful
of food in front of your toddler, put them next to his fist and notice the
mismatch. A leaner approach is to dole out smaller portions and refill as
necessary. Avoid the temptation to insist your child clean his plate. Your job
is to prepare nutritious food and serve it creatively. How much he eats is up
to your child. In our experience toddlers rarely get fat from eating too much
nutritious food.

 5. Trim unhealthy food fat. While you don’t have to overfocus on fat
during the first two years, don’t ignore the potential problem either. Besides
introducing your baby to a variety of foods during this time, you are also
helping your infant develop a taste preference. It is unhealthy for your baby
to enter childhood with a craving for fatty foods. Here’s how to trim
unnecessary fats:

Forget the frying. Bake or broil instead.
Trim excess fat from meats and poultry. Children
love crunchy and greasy chicken skin. You don’t
have to pare away every crunchy morsel of fat,
but trim the excess.
Defat the dairy. Except for the compulsive, obese
milk drinker, we do not recommend the use of
low-fat milk and certainly not skim milk after
your baby is off formula (see “Milk Tips,” here,
for explanation). You can pare the fat from other
dairy products. Babies love butter. Substitute
healthy spreads, such as nut butters or avocado
spread. Get your infant used to low-fat cheeses,
yogurt, and cottage cheese.
Slow the fast foods. Avoid packaged fat-laden
snacks and high-fat fast foods.
As discussed here, avoid foods that contain
artificial fats, such as hydrogenated or partially

 hydrogenated oils.
6. Serve fiber-filled carbs. Too much of the wrong sugars can produce
obesity. High doses of sugar, corn syrup, and other sweeteners that are
added to packaged foods and drinks already low in fiber can simply feed a
baby’s sweet tooth. As a result, the child can eat or drink an excess amount,
since fiberless foods are less filling. (For an explanation, see “Fill Up with
Fiber,” here.)
7. Get baby moving. Rarely do you have to take your baby out purposely
for exercise. Most awake babies are in constant motion anyway. There is the
classic story of Jim Thorpe, the famous Olympic athlete. When he tried to
mimic the constant motion of an infant, he tired out after an hour, but the
baby kept right on going. Some mellow babies, however, are content to be
visually stimulated. They lie and look rather than wiggle and crawl. The
plumper the baby, the less baby likes to budge; and the cycle of inactivity
and obesity continues. Encourage your mellow baby to be an active toddler.
Crawl with the beginning crawler, take walks together, play chase (and
chase your toddler away from the TV), and run around in the yard playing
games.

DR. SEARS WELLNESS INSTITUTE
Do you want to get a head start on learning healthy eating habits even
before baby is born? Or are you looking for ways to help your family make
healthy lifestyle, exercise, attitude, and nutrition (L.E.A.N.) choices that
will last a lifetime? Interactive workshops for pregnant and nursing moms,

 families with school-aged children, and adults/seniors are now available
through a Dr. Sears’ Certified Health Coach in person or online. Learn what
foods growing bodies need, how to strengthen the immune system, simple
ways to help your family crave healthy foods, and much more. To find a
coach in your area or to learn more about becoming a Dr. Sears’ Certified
Health Coach, go to DrSearsWellnessInstitute.org.

OceanofPDF.com

 13

OceanofPDF.com

 Feeding the Toddler: One to Two
Years

The table is set. You corral your busy eighteen-month-old into his high
chair and proudly present him a plate heaping with painstakingly prepared
cuisine, and, of course, containing all the basic food groups. And, to show
off your thriving toddler, you have invited the grandparents. Everybody
cleans his plate and praises the chef. But what about Junior? His plate is
still full, except for a few holes in the potatoes from well-aimed pokes and a
few dozen squashed peas scattered about to remind everyone there is a baby
at the table. Your baby is utterly uninterested in your beautifully served
meal. Meanwhile, grandmother remarks: “Well, he does look a little thin”—
a put-down of your mothering. Your child is “starving,” and your mothering
is on the line. Want to avoid this scene? Read on.

OceanofPDF.com

 NOURISHING THE PICKY EATER
“Doctor, my child is such a picky eater.” We must have heard this complaint
a thousand times before we realized that toddlers merit this feeding title for
a reason. A knowledge of toddler behaviors and growth patterns will help
you understand why most one-to-two-year-olds pick and peck. During the
first year, babies eat a lot because they grow a lot. The average infant triples
his birth weight by one year, but the normal toddler may increase weight by
only one-quarter or less between the first and second birthdays. Also, many
toddlers grow proportionally more in height than weight, as they use some
excess baby fat for energy. This normal toddlerhood slimming down may
further increase parents’ worry that their child is not getting enough to eat.
A toddler’s eating habits change because her growth patterns change.
Changes in emotional and motor development also bring about changes
in eating patterns. Toddlers do just that—toddle! They don’t sit still to do
anything, especially to eat. They are too busy to interrupt their relentless
explorations around the house to sit still for long. Grazing—small, frequent
feedings—is more compatible with your baby’s busy schedule. Many
nutritionists believe this may be the healthiest way to eat anyway. And in
another respect, the term “picky eater” is well deserved. The thumb-andforefinger pickup, a motor skill that is refined toward the end of the first
year, also influences toddler eating patterns. Baby delights in practicing this

 important new skill by picking up small bits of edible items from his plate
or high-chair tray, or by reaching to your plate. These are all the reasons
toddlers are supposed to be picky eaters.

Dr. Jim notes: Feeding is one of the few things toddlers can take control of.
I remind parents that most of us were picky eaters, and we grew up just fine.

OceanofPDF.com

 Not in the Mood for Food

Erratic eating habits are as characteristic as the many mood swings of
normal toddler development. Your child may eat well one day and eat
practically nothing the next. He may adore fresh vegetables one day and
refuse them the next. As one parent said, “The only thing consistent about
toddler feeding is the inconsistency.” This patternless eating is normal,
though worrisome. If you average your baby’s food intake over a week or
month, you may be surprised to find his diet is more balanced than you
thought. Toddlers need an average of between 1,000 and 1,300 calories per
day from one to two years, but they may not eat this amount every day. One
day they seem to eat nearly nothing, but make up for it the next. Nutritional
intake seems to balance out over a period of time. One mother solved this
nutritional balancing act: “When her appetite is low, I only serve her one
food item, and a different one at each meal. Instead of worrying about
serving her a balanced meal, I concern myself with a balanced week.”

OceanofPDF.com

 Parents’ Role—Toddler’s Role

As parents of eight we admit that with our first children we did not look
forward to mealtime, especially when they were toddlers. We felt
responsible for their every meal, what they ate, how much they ate, and
worried that we had failed if they didn’t finish everything we gave them.
Now, the pressure is off. We learned it was our job to buy the right food,
prepare it nutritionally, and serve it creatively; then our job was over. We
now relax and leave the rest up to the child. How much he eats, when he
eats, and if he eats are mostly the child’s responsibility (admittedly, with
some encouragement and structuring from us). Once we relaxed and felt
less pressured at mealtimes, we enjoyed these special times with our
children, and, in fact, they seemed to eat better and enjoy it more.
When we had so many children to feed, it was difficult enough getting
them all to the table. We seldom had energy left to get them to eat. It was up
to them not to go hungry. We tried to develop a balance between being
pushy and negligent in feeding our toddlers. We tried to go with the flow of
their needs and moods. Nobody wins the forced-feeding battle. Too much
pressure leaves everyone exhausted and creates unhealthy feeding attitudes.
It is normal to camouflage foods, bribe, play feeding games such as airplane
and mommy-take-a-bite-baby-take-a-bite, and so on, as long as we lighten
up a bit in our desire to fill up our babies. After feeding children for forty-

 five years, we take neither the credit nor the blame for how much our
children eat.

OceanofPDF.com

 GETTING YOUR TODDLER TO EAT
Don’t take baby’s rejection of your lovingly prepared pureed carrots
personally. Be flexible about your child’s own style. If your child gives you
stop signs that he has had enough food, it’s time to call it a meal. With that
in mind, here are a number of tips and observations that will help you get
more food into your baby and take the pressure off you.

OceanofPDF.com

 Try the Nibble Tray

One of the most novel ideas we have come up with to nourish our babies
and take the hassles out of parenting is the nibble tray. It makes grazing
easy, and thus is perfect for most toddlers’ preferred eating style.

A “nibble tray” has real toddler appeal.

 Assembling the nibble tray. Here’s how to prepare the Sears family nibble
tray:

Use an ice-cube tray, muffin tin, or purchase a
compartmentalized plastic dish with suction cups
to attach it to a low table or high-chair tray. Put
bite-sized portions of colorful and nutritious
foods in each compartment of the nibble tray—
sometimes we call this arrangement a rainbow
lunch.
Be sure to reserve a compartment for a nutritious
dip.
Call these foods childlike names that your twoyear-old understands, such as
avocado boats—a quarter of an avocado
sectioned lengthwise
cheese blocks
banana wheels
broccoli trees
little O’s (O-shaped cereal)
sticks—cooked carrot or whole wheat bread
moons—peeled fruit slices
canoe eggs—hard-boiled-egg slices cut up to
look like canoes

 shells, worms, logs, and so on—different
shapes of cooked pasta
Place your baby’s own tray on your baby’s own table. As your toddler
makes his rounds through the house and passes by the table, he will often
stop, nibble a bit, and continue on his way. Teach him to stand by the table
while he chews and swallows.

SAFETY NOTE: To prevent choking, do not let your toddler run and play
with food in his mouth. (See “Chokable Foods,” here.)

GOOD GRAZING—GOOD BEHAVIOR
A child’s demeanor often parallels her eating patterns. Parents often notice
that a toddler’s behavior deteriorates toward the end of the morning or the
midafternoon. Notice the connection? Behavior is worst when going longest
without food. Grazing minimizes bloodsugar swings and lessens the
resulting undesirable behavior. (See discussion of sugars and the sugar
blues, here.)
If your toddler continually spills the tray or throws it on the floor, he is
too young to be allowed to nibble alone and may need supervision during
the feeding. By two years of age many children can be taught that the tray
stays at the table and is not to be dumped, dropped, or carried around the
house.

 Nibble tray for two. If your child is not enthralled with your creative
nibble tray, put the tray between you and nibble together. All that may be
needed is for your baby to catch the spirit of how fun it is to pick and
choose from the colorful assortment displayed before him. Exaggerate your
delight in nibbling from the tray by giving your child it’s-fun-to-eat signals.
Our children took to grazing from nibble trays so much that we began
grazing with them. (To order a fun-looking and fun-to-use nibble tray, see
AskDrSears.com/store.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Dress It Up

Dip it. Toddlers like to dip and dunk. Dipping less favored foods, especially
veggies, in a favored dip is a sure winner. Dip tips:

guacamole (with or without the spices)
nutritious salad dressing
cheese sauce
yogurt, plain but flavored with honey and/or fruit
concentrate
pureed fruit or cooked vegetables flavored with a
little salad dressing
chickpea puree (hummus)
cottage cheese dip
tofu puree
DIPPING
What about the toddler who refuses protein, especially legumes? The
answer lies in the presentation. Make a puree or sauce out of dairy foods,
legumes, or vegetables and encourage your child to dip whole wheat
crackers, whole wheat toast, pasta, or other grains and vegetables into the
sauce. Try guacamole dip, chickpea or tofu puree, or cheese sauce for
starters.

 A nutritious dipping sauce adds interest to finger foods, especially
vegetables.

Spread it. Toddlers and young children are into spreading—or is it
smearing? Let them smear nutritional spreads: avocado spread, cheese
spread, meat pâté, peanut butter, vegetable sauce, pear or other fruit
concentrates. Spread onto crackers, bagels, toast, or rice cakes.
Sneak it. To get more grow foods into your picky eater, here’s a Sears
family trick we call “serving sneakies”:

Use dips and sauces to cover up the veggies.
Finely chop or puree veggies and put them into
pasta dishes, soups, and stir-fry.
Sweeten the taste with cinnamon, raisins, and
honey, or spice them up with lemon or lime juice.

 Blend bits of veggies, such as kale, into a fruitand-yogurt smoothie.
Toddler toppings. Putting nutritious familiar favorites on top of new and
less desirable foods is a way to broaden the finicky toddler’s menu. Top
toppings are melted cheese, yogurt, cream cheese, guacamole, pear
concentrate, tomato sauce, meat sauce, applesauce, and peanut butter.

OceanofPDF.com

 Make It Easy to Eat

Easy foods. Respect the fact that small children have small tummies and
less well-developed chewing and swallowing skills. Cut foods in bite-sized
pieces. Make pâté out of foods that are hard to eat, such as meat. Puree and
spread it on a favorite cracker. A winner is equal parts cooked pureed meat
and cottage cheese blended together.
Drink your meal. Make “smoothies” of yogurt blended with fresh fruit if
your child refuses to eat but prefers to drink. With straws to make drinking
more fun, some toddlers make less of a mess, some more. Serve your picky
eater a nutritious drink. See AskDrSears.com for our recommendations.
Keep it small. Don’t overwhelm your child with a plateful. Dole out
minimeals a bit at a time and refill the plate when your child signals for
more.

OceanofPDF.com

 Encourage Grazing

Encourage nutrient-rich foods, those that are packed with a lot of nutrition
for each calorie. Fruits have a low nutrient density, juice even less, and
sweets the lowest. Nutrient-rich foods are especially important for the
toddler who is as active as a rabbit but eats as little as a mouse. Children
with picky eating habits tend to eat small volumes, so the key is nutrientrich foods and frequent feedings. (See the list of nutrient-rich foods here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Seating and Serving

Sit-still strategies. To fix your toddler in the high chair and restrain her
from climbing out, use a safety belt. Never leave a child unattended while
she is sitting in the high chair. Here’s how one mother harnesses her
escapee: “I keep coming at him with small spoonfuls of food. The rapid-fire
method of feeding holds his attention and keeps him still. Before he knows
it, the meal is finished, and I let him down. I’m able to get more food into
him with fewer protests. I don’t give him time to protest between bites.”
Moving or dangling feet make the toddler move more and eat less.
Encourage your toddler to sit at a child-size table with his feet planted on
the floor while eating alone. When he eats at the family table, place a box
under his feet.
Shelf space. Reserve a low shelf in the refrigerator for your two-year-old’s
food and drink and leftover nibble trays. Your child may often go to the
refrigerator and bang on the door to give you mealtime signals. Be sure the
refrigerator or pantry shelf is low enough so that your child can reach in and
grab her own food and drink when she wants it. When a toddler is ready to
self-serve without a splattered mess varies from child to child. But
encourage it. Also, reserving the child’s own shelf helps you keep track of
how much your little consumer eats.

 Table manners. Pleasant things go on at the table, consequently good
behavior is expected there. This is the mind-set you wish your child to
develop. Mealtime is special time, and the family table is a special place for
good fun, good talk, and good food. Strain and tension should not be served
up along with the food—this is not the time to bring up problems. Model
good behavior between adults and between older children. If a toddler
witnesses fighting and food flinging, she will view the family table as a
battleground and join in. Even a baby as young as one year of age can catch
the spirit of a mealtime prayer and happy conversation around the table.

SEARS FAMILY SMOOTHIE
8 oz. green vegetable juice
8 oz. carrot juice
8 oz. pomegranate juice or grape juice
2 cups unsweetened, organic Greek yogurt
1 cup blueberries (fresh or frozen)
1 cup other fruit, frozen, such as strawberries, papaya, mango,
pineapple
2 kiwis, peeled
3 oz. tofu
¼ cup ground flaxseed
¼ cup wheat germ
2 tsp. cinnamon
Mix all ingredients together in a high-powered blender until the smoothie is
the consistency of a bubbly milk shake. Shape young tastes slowly by first
making a simple fruit-and-yogurt smoothie that your toddler craves, then
gradually adding these other ingredients. Best served immediately.
Special Additions and Substitutions

 Dates, raisins, or figs (for sweetness)
1–2 tbsp. peanut butter (for extra energy and satiety)
Substitute organic milk for juice
Spinach or kale, organic
A multivitamin/multimineral protein powder
Flesh and seeds of 1 pomegranate (when in season), seeds removed
Full dose of an omega-3 supplement (see here)
The lap of luxury. Expect times when your child refuses to get in or stay in
the high chair. Let him sit on your lap and eat off your plate. As honorary
president of the Sears family mess-control club, Martha has found it helpful
to push her plate just beyond baby-grabbing distance and place a few
morsels of her food on the table in front of baby, between baby and plate.
This keeps the lap baby’s hands out of your plate. Enjoy this lap-sitting
stage; it soon will pass.

OceanofPDF.com

 Make Meals More Interesting

Mommy’s little helper. Let your child make her own food. Use cookie
cutters and create designs with cheese, bread, pasta, and sliced meats. A
mother we know puts pancake batter in a squeeze bottle and lets her child
squeeze the batter onto a griddle (not hot) in fun shapes, such as hearts,
numbers, or letters, sometimes even spelling the child’s name. Children are
more likely to eat their own creations.
Open the surprise. Kids love surprises. A marketing ploy of seasoned
veterans in the toddler feeding game is to let the child open the package of
food or take the foil off a previously frozen kiddie meal, revealing
compartments of colorful surprises. Play you-be-the-mommy by allowing
her to open individual servings (not hot ones, of course), encouraging baby
to want to serve herself. This also increases the likelihood that she will
actually want to eat it.
Change the menu. Be flexible in your feeding styles and menus. If the
serving technique continues to fail, change the menu. Try different
techniques and food varieties. Keep and improve what works; trash what
doesn’t.

 Pizza for breakfast? The concept of “breakfast, lunch, and dinner” has
very little meaning to a child. If your child is fixed on eating pizza in the
morning and fruit and cereal in the evenings, go with it. Better than not
eating at all. As your child gets older, don’t feel you have to be a short-order
cook, always fixing her preferences that are different from the family menu.
There will come a time when your child is expected to eat what the rest of
the family does. A less-than-favorite menu starts to look pretty good when a
five-year-old is presented with the alternative of making his own peanutbutter sandwich. Then again, peanut butter on whole wheat is a complete
protein.

OceanofPDF.com

 More Feeding Strategies

Overcoming lip lock. Ever spend precious hours preparing your one-yearold’s favorite food, only to sit down at the table, scoop up a spoonful of a
tasty morsel, and meet Mr. Tight Lips giving you the “No way I’m going to
eat, mom” sign? You have two choices: Advance with better weapons or
retreat from the battle. Try the following strategies: Sometimes it helps
relax tight lips by simply backing off from the feeding, going about your
business, or continuing to enjoy the food yourself. As your baby watches
you open your mouth and eat with relish, he may catch the spirit and relax
his attitude. Use one of your child’s favorite foods as a teaser. Offer a
spoonful of a proven winner. As the door opens, follow up with the food
you wanted him to have in the first place. Mr. Tight Lips may be giving you
the message that he is not hungry, not in the mood to eat, and wants to do
something else. Sometimes the best approach is simply to realize the door is
closed, back off, and come back another day.

FAVORITE TODDLER SNACKS
avocado dip
yogurt dip
rice cakes
hummus
peanut butter
fruit slices
dried fruit

 100% juice and nectar
healthy cookies
deviled eggs
fruit-and-yogurt smoothies
baby carrots, cooked
Keep the camera ready. One day when I, Dr. Bill, was writing, Martha
called from the kitchen, “Quick, take a picture before I get mad.” Stephen
had pulled an open box of cereal off a low shelf. There he sat, covered from
head to toe with cornflakes, wallowing in his grainy mess and eating it—the
boy was hungry!
Model excitement! To market unfamiliar or less favorite foods, first eat the
food yourself while you use all the verbal and body language you can
muster up to show your child how good it is. Or place the food in front of
your child and ask for a bite of the food yourself (he may enjoy holding it
out for you to eat) followed by the old reliable “mmmmmmm gooooood!”
The grass is always greener on the other plate. Suppose your child has a
thing about cauliflower, and this becomes your food challenge of the week.
You have tried camouflaging it with sauce, dipping it, giving it a different
name, and the cauliflower sits there, uneaten. Sit close to your child and put
the cauliflower on your plate while you replay the old “mmmmmmm
goooood” tune. To your amazement your child may pick the cauliflower off
your plate. If not, enter the cauliflower in a new contest at a later date. You
might try associating it with broccoli, which most kids love because of the
tree shape—you can have green trees and white trees.

 No two meals are the same. Toddlers are inconsistent in their eating habits.
You may find one day your child wants to feed herself, the next day she
wants you to feed her. On a day that you are not sure which way to go, use
two spoons, one for your child and one for yourself. Sit with her while she
eats. Sometimes she simply wants you to keep her company while she eats
but to leave her alone to feed herself. Other days she may want you to
entertain her and use your spoon to feed her. Sometimes we play the game,
“You take a bite with your spoon, and mommy gives you a bite with her
spoon.” Toddler may add, “And I give mommy a bite.”
Reverse psychology. Interestingly, one of the most effective strategies to
get the picky toddler to eat is to not try to feed him at all. Try this: prepare
the food, sit down to eat, and don’t say anything to your child. Go about the
meal and don’t even invite baby to the table. Talk, laugh, eat. Your child
will likely begin to feel left out and want to join you. At the table, don’t
offer him any food. Let him ask. Make it seem like it was his idea to eat.
Don’t suddenly place a full plate of food in front of him (this may
overwhelm him). Serve little portions at a time, either off your plate or from
the serving dish. Let him keep asking for more. Act as if it doesn’t matter
that he’s eating, and don’t offer praise. Give the message that eating isn’t a
big deal, it’s just something that you all do together at the table. It may take
months for this approach to really sink in, but a toddler who is internally
self-motivated will eat much more than one who gives in to external
pressure.

 Reduce milk intake. Many well-meaning parents allow a picky toddler to
continue drinking 32 ounces or more of formula or cow’s milk into the
second year of life in order to prevent nutritional deficiency. This can be a
vicious cycle. Baby won’t eat, so parents give more milk. Because baby
gets lots of milk, he doesn’t need to eat. Parents are reluctant to reduce the
milk until baby starts to eat more. But he won’t, because milk satisfies his
hunger. It is okay to reduce the amount of milk first; perhaps restrict it to
the comfort bottles that baby needs for naps and bedtime, but don’t allow
milk at mealtimes or for snacks. This should spur your finicky eater to seek
other sources of nutrition to satisfy his growing hunger. Keep healthy
snacks visible throughout the day; let him see you snacking so he’ll get the
message.

OceanofPDF.com

 Changing Habits

Putting the brakes on the binge. Sometimes a child may go on an eating
binge, overdosing on a favorite food, not wanting anything else. One
mother described how she solved this problem: “When we give her any
food or drink that we want to decrease her intake of, we often tell her it’s
the last one—‘All gone, no more!’ This avoids her harping for more.” But if
the binge food is a nutritious one (like a peanut-butter sandwich), there is no
reason to withhold it.
Food fixations. This feeding mind-set used to drive us bananas, until we
realized how to swallow it. Sometime between two and three years of age,
expect your child to be very set in the patterns of food he expects to be
served. If he has in his mind that peanut butter must be on top of the jelly
and you put jelly on top of the peanut butter, be prepared for an ungrateful
protest. Don’t interpret this as your child’s being stubborn, manipulating, or
controlling. It is simply a passing stage. A young child’s developing mind
goes through stages in which he has a preconceived idea about the order of
things. Peanut butter must be on top of jelly; the reverse is unacceptable.
Grin and spread it. Enduring these whims is a piece of cake. Wait until you
later go shopping for clothes.

 Voting down veggies. Every day we hear, “Doctor, he won’t eat his
vegetables.” Vegetables usually require more creative marketing than other
foods. Here’s the pitch:

Use veggies as finger foods, letting your child dip
them in a favorite dip, cheese sauce, or dressing.
Camouflage the vegetables with a favorite sauce.
Peanut-butter sauce is actually quite good on
cauliflower.
Play dress up: Adorn the vegetables with favorite
foods, for example, tomatoes laced with cottage
cheese.
Hide the vegetables in favorite foods, such as
rice, cottage cheese, or avocado dip.
Steam the vegetables. They’re more flavorful that
way.
Make designer veggies—try veggie art, colorful
faces with olive-slice eyes, tomato ears, a cookedcarrot nose, and so on.
Put on your best vegetable face. Food likes and
dislikes are contagious. Let your child see how
much you and the rest of the family enjoy eating
veggies.
Disguise vegetables in soups and sauces. Juicing,
grating, grinding, and pureeing help unwanted

 veggies slide down easier. Zucchini pancakes are
a big hit at our house, as are carrot muffins.
If you sincerely feel that family life cannot go on
without vegetables, let your child help you plant a
vegetable garden. Have your child dig up or pick
the ripe vegetables, wash them, and help prepare
them. Veggies from the little farmer’s home patch
at least have a fighting chance.
EATING OUT WITH A BABY OR TODDLER
The adage “Children should be seen and not heard” was possibly coined by
a restaurant owner. Here’s how to make dining out with a toddler an
enjoyable, or at least a tolerable, experience.
If possible feed your child before going out. Or order a quick child’s
meal as soon as you arrive at the restaurant. A hungry child is more likely to
be unruly.
If you’re planning an evening out and your sitter cancels, you can make
it an evening for three. Time your dinner reservation when baby is likely to
be tired. A long drive to the restaurant may lull her to sleep. Take the sleepy
baby, still in the car seat, and quietly place the baby–car seat package
underneath your restaurant table. Or request a booth and lay the sleeping
babe on one side.
If baby’s sleeping time and your eating time don’t match, here are some
strategies. Take along baby’s favorite finger-food snacks. For the high-chair
baby, bring soft, noiseless toys and plastic utensils. We have found that
wearing our baby in a sling is the easiest way to quiet and contain the young
restaurant goer. Seek out restaurants that show a “children welcome”
atmosphere. Shun a restaurant that doesn’t have high chairs. A final tip:
Choose a table off to the side so baby is not the center of attraction and
stimulated to entertain the audience.

 Take the pressure off. Pressure tactics make feeding harder, not easier.
Don’t force-feed, as this can create long-term unhealthy attitudes about food
and feeding.

OceanofPDF.com

 CHOOSING THE RIGHT MILK FOR YOUR
TODDLER
Is cow’s milk the perfect food? Yes and no. Yes, for baby cows. Not
necessarily for baby humans. For toddlers who are not intolerant of or
allergic to dairy products, milk is a one-stop shop for nutrition. It contains
nearly all the basic nutrients that the toddler needs for growth: fats,
carbohydrates, proteins, vitamins, and minerals. The main value of dairy
products is their reasonably balanced nutrition, especially at a time when
toddlers are notoriously picky eaters. While it is true that there is nothing in
milk that cannot be gotten just as well (and sometimes better) from other
food sources—vegetables, legumes, and seafood—a realistic fact of feeding
is that toddlers usually eat or drink dairy products in larger and more
consistent amounts than other foods.

OceanofPDF.com

 A Closer Look at Cow’s Milk

Baby cows grow much faster than baby humans, and this is the problem
with cow’s milk. It contains too much stuff. Cow’s milk contains excessive
mineral content (e.g., salt and phosphorus), in much higher concentrations
than in human milk or infant formulas. Why could too much of this good
stuff be bad for babies? The body’s waste-disposal system is geared to
handle what is called the renal solute load, which is simply the hard stuff
that the body does not need, usually excess proteins and minerals. If the
kidneys are presented with foods that contain high renal solute loads (cow’s
milk is two to three times higher than human milk or infant formulas), they
must work harder to eliminate this excess. The excess is especially tough on
the system in the early months, when an infant’s kidneys are still immature.
Besides these excesses in cow’s milk, the likelihood of allergy is another
reason that the American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Nutrition
advises against using cow’s milk as the primary beverage in infants under
one year. Allergists estimate that if cow’s milk is given to babies under three
months of age, approximately 25 percent will later become allergic to milk.
(See the discussion of intestinal closure, here, for an explanation of the
association of early feeding and later food allergies.)
Cow’s milk contains very little iron, a necessary ingredient of the
rapidly multiplying red blood cells of the growing toddler, and its

 overconsumption by toddlers can contribute to iron-deficiency anemia (see
here).
Despite these drawbacks, a moderate amount of milk is healthy for
babies. Just don’t overdo it. We encourage our patients to limit cow’s milk
to about 16 ounces a day in children over one year. This lessens iron
deficiency and allows baby’s appetite for other nutritious foods to expand.

OceanofPDF.com

 Types of Milk

Milk is labeled according to its fat content. Whole milk is what comes from
the cow. It contains 3.25–4 percent fat and 20 calories per ounce (an ounce
equals about 30 milliliters). Two percent (low-fat) milk has some fat
removed and contains 15 calories per ounce. Skim milk has practically all
of the fat removed and contains 11 calories per ounce. Since fat has
received so much bad press lately, shouldn’t infants drink lower-fat milk?
No! Low-fat and skim milk deprive the growing infant of valuable fat
nutrients.
Goat’s milk. The nutritional qualities of goat’s milk are similar to those of
cow’s milk, and the caloric content is the same. Because the structure of its
protein and fat is different, some children may find goat’s milk easier to
digest than cow’s milk. Goat’s milk contains only trace amounts of the
allergenic casein protein alpha S1, which is the protein found in cow’s milk.
Goat’s milk contains more essential fatty acids than cow’s milk does and a
greater percentage of short- and medium-chain triglycerides, the type of fats
that are more easily digested. An agglutinin, which causes fat globulins to
cluster, is present in cow’s milk but absent in goat’s milk. Most goat’s milk
produced in the United States today is pasteurized and antibiotic-free, and
the goats are not given any milk-enhancing hormones like the bovine

 growth hormone (BGH) in some brands of cow’s milk. Because goat’s milk
contains less than 10 percent of the amount of folic acid contained in cow’s
milk, be sure that the goat’s milk you use is supplemented with folic acid.
(For more information see meyenberg.com.)

SOURCES OF CALCIUM
Where does baby get enough calcium? What about the toddler who will not
drink milk or is allergic to milk and other dairy products? In North America
calcium deficiency is rare, because some calcium is present in most foods.
The recommended daily value for calcium for infants and children is 800
milligrams per day. Drinking 3 cups of milk will supply a child’s daily
calcium requirements. Consider the following sources.
Best Dairy Sources

Calcium Content*
yogurt, 1cup
415 mg.
milk, 1 cup
300 mg.
cheddar cheese, 1 oz. (1-inch cube)
200 mg.
macaroni and cheese, 1 cup
200 mg.
cottage cheese, 1 cup
155 mg.

 Best Nondairy Sources

Calcium Content*
sardines, 3 oz.
371 mg.
calcium-fortified orange juice, 1 cup
300 mg.
chickpeas, 1 cup
300 mg.
spinach, 1 cup
272 mg.
kale and collards, 1 cup
179–357 mg.
tofu (firm), 3 oz.
190 mg.
broccoli, 1 cup
177 mg.
rhubarb, 1/2 cup
174 mg.
salmon (canned), 3 oz.
167 mg.
refried beans, 1 cup
141 mg.
blackstrap molasses, 1 tbsp.
137 mg.
figs, 5
135 mg.
almond butter, 2 tbsp.
86 mg.
dried apricots, 1 cup
59 mg.
dried beans (cooked), 1 cup
50–100 mg.

Substitute milks. Rice, almond, soy, coconut, and hemp milks are
commonly used substitutes for kids who are allergic to cow’s and goat’s
milk. While all of these may satisfy a toddler’s craving for something
“milky,” and most are fortified with adequate calcium, they are not
nutritionally equivalent to real milk. Here are the facts:

MILK TIPS
Buy organic cow’s milk, which is free of antibiotics and added bovine
growth hormone (BGH).
Because of allergies, avoid cow’s milk as a beverage for children under
one year of age. Use breast milk and/or iron-fortified formula instead.

 Skim milk is not recommended for toddlers.
Use whole milk for toddlers.
Consider low-fat milk for children over two years of age.
Low-fat milk may be used from eighteen months to two years if the
child is a compulsive milk drinker.
For most toddlers, limit milk to 16 ounces (2 cups) a day.
Be aware of the symptoms of a subtle milk allergy or intolerance.

Soy milk is the closest match, with about the
same fat, only slightly less protein, and half the
carbs. However, soy allergy is common in those
who are allergic to milk.
Hemp milk is the next closest match, with about
the same amount of fat and carbs, and half the
protein, compared to milk.
Rice milk is mostly carbs, with minimal protein
and fat.
Almond milk is also mostly carbs, with less fat
and minimal protein.
Coconut milk has more fat and fiber, and fewer
carbs, but it is lower in protein compared to milk.
(“Virgin” coconut milk contains healthier fats.)
If your child won’t drink real milk (either cow or goat) or is allergic, these
substitute milks are adequate as long as a child is eating a well-balanced
diet of solid foods. Because these substitutes have less protein (in most

 cases), they aren’t as nutritious as real milk. Rice and almond milk are the
least like the real thing.
Remember, ounce for ounce, yogurt is more nutritious and less
allergenic than cow’s milk as a beverage.
Yogurt. An even better toddler food than beverage milk, organic yogurt is
made by adding Lactobacillus bacterial cultures to milk. These cultures act
like digestive enzymes, coagulating the milk proteins and transforming milk
lactose to lactic acid. With its less allergenic milk protein and more
digestible lactose, yogurt is tolerated by some toddlers who are allergic to
beverage-milk protein or intolerant of milk lactose.
Go Greek! Besides going organic, serve Greek-style yogurt. It’s nearly
twice as high in protein, so it’s a great grow food. Kefir (drinkable yogurt)
is another healthy option.
Yogurt is an ideal toddler food because you can do so much baby stuff
with it: spreads, dips, icings, pudding, and as a healthy substitute for cream
in recipes, sour cream on potatoes, and in sauces and custards.
Lactase milk (Lactaid). Lactase milk is made by adding the enzyme
lactase to milk. This breaks the lactose down into simpler sugars, allowing
them to be more easily digested by children who are lactose intolerant. As
an alternative, the enzyme lactase can be purchased as a tablet or drops that
you add to regular milk.

SWEET TOOTH SIPPING

 What about toddlers walking around with bottles and sippy cups? Toddlers
need a lot of fluids, approximately 1½ ounces per pound per day, mostly in
the form of milk, formula, or water. Allowing your toddler to sip frequently
on a bottle or cup increases the likelihood that she will get enough fluids.
Yet constant sipping on a bottle or a cupful of syrupy or acidic beverages
can cause tooth decay. If your toddler likes to toddle around the house with
a sippy cup, fill it with water only, please. Take this opportunity to shape the
toddler’s tastes for drinking plain water instead of always sweet beverages.
Imitation milks. “Nondairy” creamers, for example, are made with corn
syrup, vegetable oils, emulsifiers, stabilizers, flavorings, and occasionally
contain components of milk such as sodium caseinate. These are not milk
substitutes and should not be used as a beverage for infants and children.

OceanofPDF.com

 IS YOUR CHILD EATING ENOUGH?
“Doctor, I don’t think he eats enough” is a guaranteed concern sometime
between the first and second birthdays. The question is, Does baby eat
enough to satisfy mother or grandmother (no child eats that much!) or
himself? Try this step-by-step approach to becoming your child’s own
nutritionist.

OceanofPDF.com

 Step One: Plot Your Baby’s Progress on a Growth Chart

Using a growth chart, record your toddler’s height and weight. Your doctor
does this routinely at each well-baby visit, and you might request a copy of
the two years’ growth chart at your baby’s one-year checkup and ask how to
plot future growth on it. Growth charts are not infallible guides to infant
nutrition, but they are a place to start.
If your toddler plots near the top of the chart in height and weight, you
certainly don’t have to worry about his nutrition. Chances are your child is
getting enough of the right stuff to eat. If your child has been consistently
around the same percentile line all along, seldom is there cause for
nutritional concern. Take heredity into account in growth-chart plotting. If a
baby has two petite parents and is in the twenty-fifth or even the tenth
percentile, he probably belongs there. Babies with different body types plot
differently on the chart. Ectomorphs (slim) may plot above average in
height and below average in weight. Mesomorphs (stocky) tend to center
around the fiftieth percentile in both height and weight. Endomorphs (short
and wide) show a somewhat higher weight percentile than height. All of
these variations are normal.
A gradual fall to a lower weight percentile over several months is a
common occurrence. We call this “leaning out.” This happens most
noticeably between six and twelve months, when baby is learning to crawl,

 and between twelve and eighteen months, when baby is learning to walk
and run. During these periods, infants burn off a lot of their baby fat. So
don’t be surprised at your baby’s one-year checkup to see that she has gone
from a chunky ninetieth percentile to a leaner seventy-fifth percentile on the
weight curve. And do not be alarmed at the eighteenth-month checkup if
your already slim toddler has gone from the twenty-fifth percentile down to
the tenth percentile. Your health care provider will track your baby’s growth
closely and determine if any dramatic decline in percentile could be a sign
of inadequate nutrition.

OceanofPDF.com

 Step Two: Examine Your Toddler for Signs of Nutritional
Deficiency

In addition to looking at the chart, look at your child from head to toe. Here
are the most obvious signs of nutritional deficiencies:

Hair: brittle, easily plucked, dry, wirelike, sparse
Skin: wrinkled and loosely attached to muscle,
dry, flaky, easily bruised especially in areas not
usually exposed to falls, spiders (broken blood
vessels in the skin), irregular pigmentation,
delayed healing, areas of thickened or thinned
skin, pale
Eyes: dull and lusterless, bloodshot, nightblind,
fatty deposits in the nasal corner, dark circles
underneath
Lips: fissures at corners of the mouth that heal
poorly, pale, swollen
Gums: bleeding, spongy
Teeth: cavities, brittle
Tongue: smooth, fissured, pale
Nails: thin, concave, brittle

 Bones: bowed legs, prominent ribs
Feet: swollen (edema)
TODDLER NUTRITIONAL NEEDS AT A
GLANCE
1,000–1,300 calories per day average*
protein needs: 1 gram per pound per day
ideal balanced nutrition:
50–55 percent carbohydrates
35–40 percent healthy fats
10–15 percent proteins
vitamins and minerals in foods
water
vitamin supplements if prescribed†
frequent feedings best; allow grazing

OceanofPDF.com

 Step Three: Record a Dietary History

Prepare your child’s food record. Record the type of food eaten, the amount,
and the number of calories in each serving. Complete the food record for
seven straight days and total the number of calories each day. It is normal
for a child’s food record to vary from day to day. This is why a weekly
average is more accurate. As a rough guide, an infant should average 50
calories per pound per day (about 23 calories per kilogram). For example,
the average 20-pound one-year-old needs around 1,000 calories per day.
Some days he may eat 700 calories, on other days 1,300. Don’t expect to be
accurate to the last calorie. Even professional nutritionists aren’t. If your
toddler eats a weekly average of around 1,000 to 1,300 calories per day,
chances are he or she is getting enough. This figure includes the calories
obtained from milk, so if your child is still breastfeeding a lot, the number
of calories from food would be somewhat lower.

The Right Kind of Food

Determining if your child is getting enough calories is Nutrition 101. If you
want to graduate to level 202, determine if your child is getting not only the
right amount of food but the right kind of food. This means taking your

 food record and breaking down each food serving into the percentage of
proteins, carbohydrates, and fats. Total the number of grams of proteins,
carbohydrates, and fats each day, and then do a weekly total. Balanced
nutrition would give these weekly percentages: carbohydrates 50–55
percent, fats 35–40 percent, and proteins 10–15 percent. Don’t expect a
balanced day. Shoot for a balanced week.

The Wisdom of the Body

Usually a calorie count suffices to determine if your child is getting enough
nourishment. Studies have shown that if presented with a buffet of
nutritious foods, toddlers will, over a period of time, naturally eat the right
balance of foods. Nutritionists believe that the body has an inner sense of
wisdom in craving the right balance of nourishment. Besides doing the
calorie count, using the food-balance calculation is a valuable exercise in
learning about your child’s eating preferences and principles of good
nutrition.

RECOMMENDED RESOURCES FOR FAMILY
NUTRITION
Parents, we wish to encourage you to become an expert in family nutrition.
Many of the childhood and adult diseases that we see in our medical
practice could have been alleviated, or even prevented, by giving children
the right nutritional start. Here are some additional resources from the Sears
Parenting Library:

 The Healthiest Kid in the Neighborhood: Ten Ways to Get Your Family
on the Right Nutritional Track
The N.D.D. Book: How Nutrition Deficit Disorder Affects Your Child’s
Learning, Behavior, and Health, and What You Can Do About It—
Without Drugs
The Omega-3 Effect: Everything You Need to Know About the
Supernutrient for Living Longer, Happier, and Healthier
The Family Nutrition Book: Everything You Need to Know About
Feeding Your Children—From Birth to Age Two
The Healthy Pregnancy Book: Month-by-Month, Everything You Need
to Know from America’s Baby Experts
AskDrSears.com/topics/family-nutrition

OceanofPDF.com

 Step Four: Look for Other Circumstances Affecting Your
Toddler’s Growth

Expect a leveling off of growth, especially weight, during a prolonged or
recurring illness, such as diarrhea or frequent bouts with colds. Appetite
lags and the nutrition that would have gone into growth is redirected into
healing. Anticipate a period of catch-up growth when your child is well.
Between nine and eighteen months, crawling and walking slow down
weight gain but not height gain, as your toddler normally begins to “lean
out.”
Besides medical and developmental reasons, emotional setbacks may
slow growth and diminish the appetite. If something happens to upset the
parent-infant relationship (for example, untimely weaning, premature
mother-infant separation, marital disturbances, family crises), the baby may
fall down a few notches on the growth chart. One of the most fascinating
areas of research is the need that some infants have for a close parent-infant
attachment in order to achieve optimal growth—that is, to thrive. We
foresee the day when researchers will uncover biochemical links between
nurturing and growth. (See the discussion of high-need babies, here, and
“The Shutdown Syndrome,” here, for a further explanation of the
relationship between attachment and growth.)

 OceanofPDF.com

 Step Five: Obtain a Complete Medical and Nutritional Evaluation

If after going through the preceding steps, you suspect your toddler is
undernourished, consult a nutritionist for an evaluation of your child’s food
record and obtain nutritional counseling. The nutritionist will examine your
child’s food diary and analyze the nutrient content of what your child has
eaten, mainly average intake of calories, proteins, carbohydrates, fats,
vitamins, minerals, and fiber. Comparing these values with the
recommended dietary allowance, or optimal values, for your child’s age, the
nutritionist will advise you how to make up for deficiencies, if any.
Besides an examination of your toddler’s nutrition, a thorough medical
checkup may uncover reasons for his undernourishment. There may be
physical and emotional reasons that he is underweight. Your doctor may
obtain laboratory tests to determine if your child is getting enough protein,
iron, vitamins, and minerals.

OceanofPDF.com

 FOOD ALLERGIES
Food allergies are great masqueraders. We’ve heard just about every
imaginable problem attributed to food allergies. Sometimes food allergies
are overdiagnosed, depriving the child of nutritious and fun foods; other
times food-related problems are ignored. Somewhere between these two
extremes lies the truth about food allergies.

OceanofPDF.com

 What “Allergy” Means

“Allergy” comes from two Greek words: allos (other) and ergon (action).
So an allergic person shows an unexpected or different action, or reaction.
Medically, the term “allergy” is used to describe the reaction that occurs
when the body’s immune system reacts to an allergen.

A SAMPLE TODDLER MENU
The following list summarizes the components of a balanced daily menu for
the average 25-pound, eighteen-month-old toddler. Choose from the five
basic food groups (see here) to ensure balanced nutrition. (One serving of
fruit, vegetables, and grains ranges from ¼ to ½ cup. The serving size of
meat and of legumes is 2 ounces, or about the size of a child’s fist.)
1,000–1,300 calories per day
3 cups of whole milk or dairy equivalent (or breastfeeding at least
three to four times a day)
three to four servings of grains
two to three servings of vegetables
two to three servings of fruit
one serving of legumes
one serving of meat, fish, or poultry
3 to 4 ounces of healthy snacks

 Food
Amount Calories
egg or
1
80
iron-fortified cereal
½ cup
toast (with margarine or butter)
½ piece
55
milk
1 cup
160
orange slices
½ orange
35
peanut butter sandwich
½
150
broccoli tree
1
20
fruit and yogurt smoothie
1 cup
60
green seedless grapes
10
30
cheese chunk or slice
½ ounce
50
salmon
2 ounces
100
biscuit (2 inch)
½
50
green beans
10
15
pasta, whole grain
1 cup
150
Dips: vegetables in hummus or guacamole cup
130
1,185
A food intolerance is often more difficult to diagnose than a food
allergy. The term “intolerance” is used when a food affects the body in an
undesired way that does not involve an immune response, such as lactose
intolerance or hyperactivity to sugars or additives. Some food intolerances,
such as lactose intolerance (caused by a missing enzyme in the intestines,
resulting in abdominal discomfort and diarrhea in reaction to milk products)
are fairly objectively diagnosed. Other intolerances—of sugars and food
additives, for instance—are more subjective and difficult to prove. Any
food can be blamed for intolerance.

 A third term, hypersensitivity, means the same as “allergy.” All three
terms (allergy, intolerance, and hypersensitivity) can be lumped into the
simple term “food sensitivities,” meaning a certain food causes a child not
to feel right and act right, or certain organs not to function right.

COMMON SIGNS OF FOOD ALLERGIES*
Respiratory Passages
runny nose
sneezing
wheezing
stuffy nose
watery eyes
bronchitis
recurring ear infections
persistent cough
congestion
rattling chest
Skin
red, sandpaperlike facial rash
hives
swelling in hands and feet
dry, scaly, itchy skin (mostly on face)
dark circles under eyes
puffy eyelids
lip swelling
tongue soreness and cracks
Intestines
mucusy diarrhea

 constipation
bloating, gassiness
excessive spitting up
vomiting
intestinal bleeding
poor weight gain
burnlike rash around anus
abdominal discomfort
Every food, especially of animal origin, contains proteins called
antigens (allergens, if we are allergic to them). These suspicious proteins
enter the bloodstream and are recognized by the body as foreign intruders
who were not born there. The body’s immune system perceives these alien
bodies and mobilizes its own protein troops called antibodies. The fight
begins. When the antigens and antibodies come together for battle, the
effects invade certain parts of the body—the target organs—usually the
lining of the breathing passages, intestines, and skin. Reactions resembling
tiny explosions release chemicals that cause the allergic signs. The best
known of these released chemicals is histamine (hence the allergy
medicines called antihistamines), which disturbs the tissues, causing blood
vessels to leak fluid (runny nose and puffy, watery eyes) and to dilate (rash).
Sometimes muscles of the breathing passages go into spasms (wheezing).
Why some babies are allergic and some are not is not well understood.
Mostly, it’s in the genes.

OceanofPDF.com

 Allergic Signs to Look For

Signs and symptoms of food allergies are as unique as baby’s fingerprints.
The most obvious signs occur at three sites: the breathing passages, the
skin, and the intestines (see box here). These kinds of signs are the most
common and easily identified. Others are more subtle, and the offending
food more difficult to pinpoint. These symptoms affect the central nervous
system or brain:
crankiness
anxiety
night waking
crying
headaches
sore muscles and joints
irritability
hyperactivity
The battle signs differ in severity; some occur immediately or within
minutes; others are delayed for several hours or days. A baby may eat an
egg in the kitchen and break out in hives by the time she toddles into the
family room, or she may develop a rash days later. Food allergies also range

 in severity. You may be rushing your wheezing child to the nearest
emergency room within minutes after he eats a strawberry, or he may
develop only a nuisance type of rash that needs simply a tincture of time
and an over-the-counter antihistamine.
Food allergies, unlike fingerprints, change. Most lessen as the child gets
older; some occasionally worsen; many disappear entirely. Some children
show a shift in food allergies: They lose their allergy to tomatoes and can
again hit the catsup bottle, but may develop an allergy to mustard. Some
allergies occur every time the child eats a certain food; others are cyclical,
related to the quantity and frequency of the food. Food allergies also show a
threshold effect, meaning that each child has a certain level of sensitivity to
a particular food, and some allergies are dose related. For example, some
children may wheeze or develop hives after eating only a fingertipful of
peanut butter. Others do not show obvious allergies to peanut butter if they
limit this food to one sandwich a week.

OceanofPDF.com

 Tracking Down Hidden Food Allergies

If your child is showing signs of food sensitivity, here are guidelines to help
you identify the culprit(s).

Step One: Keep a Food Record

Record everything your child eats for four days, including all meals and
snacks.

Step Two: Try the Elimination Method

From the list of the foods your child most commonly eats select the most
suspicious allergen, probably one of the “big nine”: dairy products, wheat,
egg whites, peanut butter, corn, citrus fruits, soy, shellfish, or food
additives. Start your elimination at a time when other factors do not cloud
the detection of food allergies. Avoid, for example, holiday times, birthdays,
or other celebrations, and wait until pollen season or home remodeling is
finished. The most common offender seems to be dairy products, so you

 may decide to start there if you have no other hunches to go on. It is not the
easiest food to eliminate because it comes in so many delightful forms
(milk, yogurt, cheese, sour cream, ice cream). But cow’s milk protein is the
leading allergen.
For a period of two weeks (three weeks if you’re not in a hurry)
eliminate this food and chart your observations (see “Making a FoodAllergy Chart,” above). If you do not see any change, go on to another
suspicious allergen, continuing until you have exhausted the list.

MOST- AND LEAST-ALLERGENIC FOODS
Most-Allergenic Foods
berries
buckwheat
chocolate
cinnamon
citrus fruits
coconut
corn
dairy products
egg whites
mustard
nuts
peas
peanut butter
pork
shellfish
soy
sugar
tomatoes

 wheat
yeast
Least-Allergenic Foods
apples
apricots
asparagus
avocados
barley
beets
broccoli
carrots
cauliflower
chicken
cranberries
dates
grapes
honey
lamb
lettuce
mangoes
oats
papayas
peaches
pears
poi
raisins
rice
rye
safflower oil
salmon
squash
sunflower oil
sweet potatoes

 turkey
veal
Read Labels
Potentially allergenic foods may be listed under another name in packaged
foods. The most common are:
wheat flour: durum semolina, farina
egg white: albumin
dairy products: whey, casein, sodium caseinate
Careful label reading will help you discover what you are eating:
Cocoa mixes, creamed foods, gravies, and some sauces contain milk.
Noodles and pasta contain wheat and sometimes eggs.
Canned soups may contain wheat and dairy fillers.
Most breads contain dairy products.
Margarine usually contains whey.
Hot dogs, cold cuts, and “nondairy” desserts contain sodium caseinate.
For persons who keep kosher, the word “parve” on a label means the
food does not contain milk or meat.

MAKING A FOOD-ALLERGY CHART
Keeping a written record will help you discover if there is a connection
between your child’s allergic symptoms and foods in his daily diet. Here’s a
sample:

 Possible
Allergenic
Food
Milk

Signs
Symptoms

and Results
Elimination

After Notes

Runny
nose, Nose dried up, cough Couldn’t
diarrhea,
watery lessened, frequency of tolerate milk,
eyes,
cough, diarrhea
lessened, but yogurt and
awakened
three awakened once
cheese okay
times at night

When trying to pinpoint the source of trouble, start with singleingredient foods, milk, for instance. Bread, noodles, and luncheon meats
may contain multiple potential allergens, making isolation of a single
offender difficult. Under the food column write the first food to be isolated.
Focus on the most objective signs—rashes, changes in bowel patterns
(diarrhea or constipation), respiratory symptoms. Chart the most
troublesome signs and symptoms. If you are an observant person, you may
include some general behavior signs, such as irritability and night waking.
Under the results column, record the change in these signs and
symptoms after the food is omitted. Be as objective as you can; remember,
any new “treatment” can have a placebo effect because you are expecting to
see results, perhaps partly because of all the trouble you are going through.
In the notes column, chart additional observations or anything you want to
remember.
Keep a record of all foods eaten daily so you can recall what was eaten
when, in case symptoms change.

Step Three: Challenge Your Findings

When you have tracked down the culprit, to be sure the disappearance of
the symptoms is not just coincidental, reintroduce the suspicious food into
your child’s diet and see if the concerning signs and symptoms reappear.

 Remember, an allergic reaction does not imply a lifelong allergy. Children
outgrow most food allergies. When reintroducing foods, gradually introduce
a small amount of the food, and increase the amount every three or four
days to see if the signs and symptoms reappear.
Some children are allergic to a food only if they overdose on it or eat it
every day. Toddlers are prone to food jags during which they crave only one
food for a week and then won’t touch it for months. Rotation diets—
spacing the suspicious foods every four days—may lessen the allergy.
A quicker way to relieve the symptoms may be preferable if your child
is very allergic (sneezing, hives, frequent colds, ear infections, poor weight
gain, frequent night waking, abdominal pain). Eliminate all eight of the
foods previously mentioned for a period of one week or until you see
changes (maybe as long as three weeks). Then reintroduce one food each
week to see if the symptoms reappear. If so, that food goes on the no-no list
for at least four months, then slowly try small amounts again. “But what can
my child eat?” you ask. During this time your child may eat fresh
vegetables (except corn, tomatoes, and peas), fresh fruits (except berries
and citrus), avocados, rice, barley, millet, poultry, and lamb. It is wise
during this time to also avoid junk foods, nitrites, and other allergenic
foods. This would be a great way to get the whole family on a healthier
program.

OceanofPDF.com

 Medical Help for Allergies

How much time and energy you are willing to devote to elimination diets
depends upon how severe your infant’s allergies are. If they are simply a
nuisance and do not particularly bother the baby, by the time you go
through all of the elimination diets your child will probably have outgrown
the allergy anyway. If, however, your child is truly bothered by food
allergies, it is worthwhile, in consultation with a doctor knowledgeable
about food allergies, to do whatever is necessary to identify the food
allergens.
Blood tests called RAST tests are helpful but not 100 percent diagnostic
of food allergies. These tests measure the level of antibodies in your child’s
blood to certain foods. If your child has a very high level of antimilk
antibodies, this at least helps you in identifying milk as a possible allergen.
Skin tests for children over three are also helpful in identifying food
allergies. It is true, however, that laboratory tests should only be used in
conjunction with the preceding elimination diet and observational charting.
If your child has a high level of antimilk antibodies but exhibits absolutely
no symptoms of milk allergy, then it is seldom necessary to treat only on the
basis of a lab test. Food allergies, like most nuisances of infancy and
childhood, lessen or disappear in time. (See the Food Allergy and
Anaphylaxis Network (FAAN) website, foodallergy.org.)

 OceanofPDF.com

 PESTICIDES: HOW TO KEEP THEM OUT OF
THE MOUTHS OF BABIES
An apple a day may not keep the doctor away. After researching the
pesticide issue, we felt like moving our family to some unpolluted area (if
there are any left), planting our own garden, milking our own cows, and
drilling for clean water. Instead, we realized that there are ways to not only
live with this problem but clean up the food we feed our children. The
following information is not meant to scare, but to inform and motivate
parents to take action about a potentially serious problem that affects
today’s children and our future grandchildren.

OceanofPDF.com

 Why Food Chemicals and Children Don’t Mix

Poisoning our own food with pesticides is bad enough, but the special
eating habits and growth patterns of children pose the following additional
hazards:

Children’s eating habits are different from those
of adults. They eat proportionally more
contaminated food on a volume-per-weight basis
than adults. Infants and children consume much
more fruit and juices than do adults. They also do
not eat the variety of foods that adults do, often
binging on applesauce, for example, three days at
a time. The Natural Resource Defense Council
(NRDC) estimates that young infants consume
three times more apple juice than adult women
consume.
Today’s children will be exposed to toxic
chemicals over a longer time, so they face greater
health risks as adults. Researchers believe that
prolonged exposure to a toxic chemical may have
a cumulative effect.

 A 2004 study on ten babies by the Environmental
Working Group revealed that these newborn
infants had two hundred industrial chemicals in
their umbilical cord blood.
Researchers believe that the rapidly dividing cells
of an infant and a child are more susceptible to
the carcinogenic effects of pesticides.
An infant’s immature liver may have a limited
capacity to detoxify chemicals.
Children, especially infants, have proportionally
more body fat than adults. Pesticides are stored in
fat.
BRAIN DRAIN
The brain, above all other organs, is affected, for better or worse, by
pesticides and chemical foods for several reasons:
The brain is 60 percent fat, and chemicals are stored mostly in fat
tissue.
The blood-brain barrier, the one-cell-layer-thick protective wrap
strategically situated between the circulation and brain tissue, is not
completely developed in tiny infants.
The brain grows the fastest in the first two years of life; and it’s fastgrowing tissue that may be the most damaged by brain-toxic
chemicals.

OceanofPDF.com

 Food Laws—Do They Protect Children?

The answer is no. What is legal may not be healthy, and it is astonishing
what is legal in the pesticide–food growers industry. Usage and labeling of
pesticides is monitored by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The
amount of pesticide residue in foods is periodically tested by the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA). Here’s why the current laws and these
agencies don’t protect the apple your child eats.

How Pesticides Are “Tested” and Presumed “Safe”

Animals are given various amounts of pesticides and tested for the effects
of these chemicals. Besides obvious effects such as life or death, paralysis,
and growth retardation, the tissues are examined for microscopic evidence
of damage. Once a level is found that causes no identifiable damage, that
level is extrapolated to humans as the “maximum acceptable level” or
“tolerance level” or “safe level”—the level of pesticide residue in a food
that is legally acceptable. However, what is safe in the animal and legal for
the committee may not be healthy for the human. We cannot rely on these
studies for the following reasons:

 The process of extrapolating animal results to
humans is plagued with errors. How do you
measure the intelligence of a rat?
Short-term effects, not long-term damage, are
measured in these studies. Our concern in
children is the small amount of pesticide residue
accumulating over a long period of time and
causing damage years later, perhaps even in the
next generation.
The EPA-allowed levels are for adults and are
based on food-consumption habits of adults in the
1960s. The agency’s recommendations do not
take into account eating habits of children, who
eat proportionally more produce per pound of
body weight than adults. Parents don’t give their
children adult doses of drugs, so why would they
feed them adult doses of pesticides? Yet the EPA
regulations on pesticide limits allow infants to eat
adult-approved doses of pesticides that have not
been tested for safety in infants and young
children.
These studies are artificially done. How animals
are tested is not the way humans eat. Usually one
or a few chemicals are tested on an animal. In
reality a child may ingest a hundred different

 pesticides. Chemicals have a synergistic effect,
meaning that when put together, chemicals may
have a more harmful effect than when used
singly. Pesticides A and B may pass if tested
separately in different animals, but put them
together in the same animal and they may take on
harmful qualities. The gradual piling up of many
chemicals over long periods of time is the basic
concern that is not being measured. We believe it
is worthless to label any chemical poison “safe.”
Independent studies are usually better than EPA
tests. The EPA does batch testing. If you blend
100 pounds of potatoes and test the batch, you get
an average pesticide level. But what if only a few
potatoes contain most of the chemicals and the
child eats one of these “hot” potatoes?
Inert ingredients get by. In studying exposure
levels the FDA doesn’t consider the health effects
of inert ingredients. These are labeled “inert”
because they have no pest-killing action, not
because they are harmless. Inerts, however, can
be dangerous. The EPA has recently identified
110 inerts as hazardous, but there are no food
standards or tolerance limits for inerts. Also, the
FDA does not monitor food for inert ingredients.

 Pesticide manufacturers consider inerts trade
secrets and usually do not list them on package
labels.

A Pesty Issue

The EPA laws require that pesticides have no more than the minimal
allowable levels in foods while considering the need for an “adequate,
wholesome and economical food supply.” The EPA weighs the cancer risk
of a pesticide against its economic benefits. In plain language, they will
accept a cancer risk in a food if it keeps the price down and the supply up.
Putting such a price tag on health has been criticized by the National
Academy of Sciences and the NRDC. Are we a nation that cannot afford
healthy food for our children?

OceanofPDF.com

 What You Can Do

By now you may have concluded that government agencies are more
concerned with politics than health. Parents, don’t expect help from the
government. Food producers lobby more than parents; babies and children
don’t vote. The logical conclusion we come to, based on the preceding
evidence, is to ban all carcinogenic or neurotoxic and other harmful toxins
from food and milk, and eventually this ban should filter down to cleaner
water. This drastic step would be costly to food growers and to the sixbillion-dollar-a-year pesticide industry, but it can be done. Here’s how.

Just Say No!

Don’t buy poisoned food. Consumer pressure, especially from parents, has
corrected many medical and social problems; it can also clean up our food.
The food chain of consumer pressure is very simple: Parents demand
pesticide-free food at the store, the store only orders pesticide-free foods
from the food growers, and the food growers are, therefore, required to stop
using pesticides. We believe that this is the only “law” that will work. Why?
Because the motive is pure: to protect the health of ourselves and our
children. Any government motive is laced with residues of pleasing most of

 the people most of the time. Allow a little bit of cancer in return for a little
bit of pesticides in return for a happier food grower. This keeps most voters
happy, except the nonvoters most at risk, our babies and children.

Buy Organic

Look at the label on a jar of commercial baby food and you will see the
effects of consumer pressure. Labels read “no salt, no sugar, no
preservatives.” Now only one “no” is missing—no pesticides. Baby-food
manufacturers claim that they no longer use Alar-containing apples and they
have reduced the pesticide content far below legal limits. Commendable,
but not enough! Parents, use your purchasing power to send baby-food
manufacturers a clear message—you want pesticide-free food.
Initially expect to pay a higher price for pesticide-free food. You’re
paying the grocer now instead of the doctor later. If all food growers were
required—by consumer pressure and by law—to grow safe food, they
would find a less expensive way, and the cost would decrease.
Look for the label “certified organically grown food.” This certification
means that food is grown according to strict standards with third-party
verification by an independent organization or state government agency.
Certification includes on-farm inspections, soil and water testing, and
careful record keeping. Certified-organic farmland must be free of
agrichemical use for three years. Unless you know the farmer, this

 certification is your best insurance that the food you are paying for is truly
organic.

Other Things You Can Do

You have a right to expect that legal food is safe food. Vote for laws that fill
the loopholes in existing EPA and FDA monitoring and their ability to
detect pesticides. Here are some specific ways you can influence the safety
of food:
Wash fruits and vegetables. Washing produce in a diluted solution of
water and dish detergent (¼ teaspoon to a pint of water) may remove some
surface pesticides. Rinse well. Even careful washing may not remove all
surface residues, and it can’t remove pesticide residues that remain inside
the produce.
Buy domestically grown produce in season. Imported produce often
contains more pesticides than domestically grown and may contain
pesticides that are banned from use in the United States. Require your
supermarket to label produce with its country of origin. By buying domestic
you interrupt the “circle of poison.” American chemical manufacturers
export banned pesticides and the stuff comes back in the produce.

 Avoid fish from contaminated waters. If you buy fresh local seafood,
check with your regional health department for information on which fish
from which waters to avoid.
Avoid food containing nitrites and nitrates. Examples of these are cured
meats, such as lunch meats, hot dogs, and bacon. Nitrite-free foods can be
found in nutrition stores and through food co-ops.
Have your tap water tested. Periodically test your water for hazardous
chemicals, such as PCBs. Your local water department, EPA, or private
laboratories can check water samples. Bottled water may be safer.
Write to your elected officials. The shortterm answer to the pesticide
problem is simply don’t buy it. Food-buying cooperatives can help lower
the cost of organically grown foods. The long-term solution is to pass laws
ensuring pesticide-free foods.
Join with others. Become a member of organizations that have a general
concern for limiting pesticide exposure in children:

Environmental Working Group (EWG.org)
National Resources Defense Council (NRDC.org)
These agencies tackle often-overlooked issues, such as pesticides on pets.
Babies play with pets, yet the pesticides used on animals (for example,

 those in flea powder) have never been proven safe for babies.
An example of parent power in purifying what goes into the mouths of
babes is their response to the recent BPA concern. Even though science was
still undecided, BPA quickly went into parents’ “When in doubt, leave it
out” category, and rightly so. Parents stopped buying BPA-containing
plastics, especially baby bottles, and therefore manufacturers stopped
making them.
THE DIRTY DOZEN (Definitely
Go Organic)

THE CLEAN FIFTEEN (Lowest in
Pesticides)

1. Celery
2. Peaches
3. Strawberries
4. Apples
5. Blueberries
6. Nectarines
7. Bell peppers
8. Spinach
9. Cherries
10. Kale and collard greens
11. Potatoes
12. Grapes (imported)

1. Onions
2. Avocado
3. Sweet corn
4. Pineapple
5. Mangoes
6. Sweet peas
7. Asparagus
8. Kiwi
9. Cabbage
10. Eggplant
11. Cantaloupe
12. Watermelon
13. Grapefruit
14. Sweet potato
15. Honeydew melon

Source: Environmental Working Group (EWG.org)

OceanofPDF.com

 III

OceanofPDF.com

 Contemporary Parenting
At the very time when more parents are realizing the importance of being
close to their babies, social and economic pressures are competing with this
attachment process. Two-income parenting, single parenting, colicky
babies, sleepless nights, and special-needs babies are just a few of the
situations facing today’s parents. Parents are busy and are likely to get
busier. The good news is that there are more resources available to help
parents meet these challenges. To make parenting life easier, the next
several chapters present ways to keep attached while keeping busy—a
contemporary juggling act to prevent a distance from developing between
parent and child. Here is attachment parenting in action.

OceanofPDF.com

 14

OceanofPDF.com

 Babywearing: The Art and Science of
Carrying Your Baby

As long as I carry my baby, he’s content,” mothers of fussy babies in our
practice would say. After hearing parents extol the benefits of carrying their
babies, we coined the term “babywearing” and decided to study how this
parenting style, so useful in other cultures, could be part of our own
parenting repertoire. Here is the story of babywearing—how it changed the
lives of parents and babies in our practice and how it can change yours.

OceanofPDF.com

 NEW SUPPORT FOR AN OLD IDEA
In many other cultures parents wear their babies; in our culture we wheel
our babies, then park them somewhere. Infant development specialists who
travel throughout the world studying infant-care practices have repeatedly
observed that babies who are carried in a variety of cloth-type slings or
front packs seem more content than infants who are kept in cribs, playpens,
strollers, prams, and plastic seats. The mother of a patient of ours visited the
island of Bali, where she witnessed a ground-touching ceremony. The
Balinese babies are carried, or worn, for the first six months of life. The
mother or some other caregiver in the extended family wears the baby all
day long, and baby is put down to sleep next to the mother. The baby
literally does not touch the ground for the first six months, at which time a
ground-touching ceremony is held, and for the first time the baby is put
down on the ground to crawl and learn freestyle movements.
For a number of years we have researched infant-care studies and found
general agreement that babies behave and develop better when they are
carried a lot. Years ago, while attending an international parenting
conference, we interviewed two women from Zambia who were carrying
their babies in slings that matched their native dress. We asked them why
women in their culture wear their babies most of the time. One woman
replied, “It makes life easier for the mother.” The other woman volunteered,

 “It’s good for the baby.” These women went on to relate the feelings of
“completeness” and “value” that babywearing gave them. Women in their
culture don’t have the benefits of books and studies about mothering
hormones. What they have is centuries of tradition that have simply taught
them that something good happens to women and their babies when the
babies are worn.

OceanofPDF.com

 OceanofPDF.com

 Doesn’t every parent in every culture have these two simple desires: to
make life easier for themselves and to make life better for their baby?
Babywearing does both.
Encouraged by these observations, in 1985 we began our own personal
study on the beneficial effects of babywearing on babies and their parents.
Since that time we have logged miles of wearing our own babies and have
kept precise records as we experimented with various carrying styles. We
have advised parents to carry their babies as much as possible, beginning
right after birth. We have asked them to try out a variety of baby carriers
and choose the one most comfortable for themselves and their babies.
To the mothers we now say, “Try to get used to wearing your baby in a
sling-type carrier just as you would wear one of your favorite items of
clothing.” At their baby’s first checkup, usually at one week, we show the
new parents how to safely wear their baby. During their personal course on
babywearing, we advise each parent to experiment with various carrying
positions, to find the one that is most comfortable and allows baby to mold
to the contours of the parent’s own body; we encourage them to shift
carrying positions to match baby’s development.
This is why we call it babywearing. Now, to teach you how this practice
can make your parenting life easier and enhance the development of your
baby, here are the results of our studies and your own course in
babywearing.

THE BABYWEARING MIND-SET
In case you are wondering how much parents should carry their babies,
certainly parents have to put down their babies sometimes! In fact, it is

 important to take a balanced approach to babywearing. But this style of
parenting means changing your mind-set regarding what babies are really
like. You may envision your picture-book baby lying quietly in a crib,
gazing passively at dangling mobiles, and picked up only to be fed and
played with and then put down; you may think that “up” periods are just
dutiful intervals to quiet your baby long enough to put him down again. To
understand babywearing, reverse this view: Carry your baby much of the
time, and put him or her down for longer nap times, nighttime, and to attend
to your personal needs. Take a balanced approach to babywearing. Allow
baby to enjoy down periods and freestyle movements on the carpet, but pick
her up when she signals the desire to be carried. You will note an interesting
contrast in behavior. “Down” babies learn to cry to get picked up; “up”
babies learn noncrying body language signaling their need to get down. The
amount of holding time naturally decreases as your baby increases in age
and motor skills. Even your toddler, however, may show occasional highneed periods when he or she wants to be picked up and worn.

OceanofPDF.com

 CHOOSING THE RIGHT BABY CARRIER
Early in our study we realized one of the reasons Western mothers did not
wear their babies much was that the baby carriers then available were not
easy to use. One of the reasons that mothers in other cultures wear their
babies so much is that they fabricate a sling-type carrier that looks like part
of their garments and, in fact, usually is. We encouraged mothers either to
find or create a carrier that would be comfortable for them and easy to use
and that would keep their baby from fussing. As we were exposed to a
whole parade of babywearing mothers, we observed what types of carriers
and styles of wearing worked for most parent-baby pairs most of the time.
After years of watching babywearing parents, we came to the same
conclusion that mothers in other cultures have known for centuries and
Western mothers are now beginning to discover—a sling-type carrier works
the best. In selecting a sling-type carrier look for the following features.
Safety. The most important feature of any baby carrier is safety. The sling
must both support and contain the baby. See safety tips, here.
Comfort. A baby carrier must be comfortable for both parents and baby. A
well-designed carrier should distribute the baby’s weight on the adult’s
shoulders and hips, not the back and neck. The sling should be comfortably

 padded over all pressure points, especially along the wearer’s back and
shoulder and wherever the edges of the carrier press against baby’s torso
and legs.
Versatility. Choose a carrier that you can use from birth to at least two
years of age, thus making it unnecessary to purchase a series of carriers as
baby gets older. Fussy, colicky babies are seldom content to be carried in
the same position all the time. Carriers that flatten baby against mother’s
chest are often too restrictive for a baby who, like all of us, is more content
being stimulated by a 180-degree view of the world around him. The
illustrations in this chapter show the versatile positions of a sling-type
carrier.
Ease of use. A fact of human nature is that if something is not convenient to
use, we won’t bother with it. Fathers, especially, shy away from carriers that
have sets of buckles and straps. A well-designed sling-type carrier can be
adjusted with baby inside, while holding on to baby with one hand and
adjusting the sling with the other. Another important feature of a welldesigned carrier is that you should be able to easily and safely slip out of
the carrier, leaving baby still inside—a useful maneuver while putting baby
down if you want, once baby is asleep.
Suitability for feeding. One thing we often hear from mothers is that they
have to remove their babies from a carrier in order to breastfeed. With a
sling-type carrier, however, you can easily and discreetly breastfeed your

 baby while she is still in the sling. A hungry baby can be quickly attached
before having to fuss for a feeding and can quietly drift off to a satisfied
sleep while still in the sling. Using the sling carrier as a shield allows you to
meet baby’s need to feed at those inopportune times when you just can’t get
to a quiet, private place or when you don’t have a place to sit down (such as
standing in line at the grocery store).
Consult experienced babywearers for advice on which carrier to select
and how to use it. Borrow and test-wear various carriers before settling on
the best one for you and your baby. You are not only selecting a carrier, you
are investing in a parenting style. Baby carriers are nurturing devices, and
sling carriers make rediscovering the lost art of wearing the baby easier for
parents—and good for the baby.

BABYWEARING HELP: For information about where to purchase safe
baby slings, see AskDrSears.com.

OceanofPDF.com

 HOW TO WEAR YOUR BABY: A PERSONAL
COURSE
Each baby has his or her individual preference on how to be carried, and
each babywearer has his or her preference on how to carry the baby.
Because the sling-type carrier has enjoyed worldwide use for centuries and
is the one we have used for our personal research, we suggest the sling as
standard apparel for your course in babywearing. (The following general
instructions apply to most sling-type carriers. They may vary according to
the design of the carrier.)

The following is a step-by-step approach to wearing your newborn.

 OceanofPDF.com

 PUTTING ON THE SLING
Decide which shoulder you wish the sling to rest on. Pull the safety stopper
through both rings as shown in the manufacturer’s instruction manual. Hold
the baby sling where the tail passes through the rings and place it over your
head, letting it come to rest on your shoulder and across your chest. The
sling should fit snugly before you place baby in it. The top of the sling, the
padded railing, should fit around the top of your bust line, and the bottom of
the sling should fit around the level of your waist. Be sure to wear the sling
high enough so that the rings are just below your collarbone.
Adjusting the sling. You can adjust the size of the sling by simply pulling
on the tail, creating a snugger fit. The smaller the infant and/or the
babywearer, the longer the tail will be. Holding baby’s bottom while you
adjust the size of the sling lessens the weight on the sling, making
adjustment easier.

PUT IT IN GEAR! As soon as baby is nestled securely and comfortably
in the sling, start walking immediately; babies usually associate being
nested in the sling with movement. If you stand still too long after putting
baby in the sling, he may fuss.

 Putting on a baby sling.

OceanofPDF.com

 UPRIGHT CRADLE STYLE (A FAVORITE FOR
THE EARLY MONTHS)
The cradle hold and its variations are useful from birth and throughout the
first year.

1. Put the sling on as shown above.
2. Hold baby facing you on the ring side of the sling,
with baby’s head around the level of the rings.
While supporting baby’s back and head with one
arm, with the other arm pull the sling railing open
and slide baby’s bottom into the sling while
lowering baby into the pocket formed by baby’s
body and the padded railings of the sling. Pull the
outer railing up over baby’s shoulder.
3. Adjust baby’s body so that he is “sitting” in the
sling with his head at or above breast level. (If
you can’t easily kiss the top of baby’s head, he is
positioned in the sling too low.)
4. Frequently alternate which shoulder the sling is
on so that baby’s body gets used to various

 positions.

Upright cradle style.

 Snuggle hold.

 Forward-facing.

Breastfeeding position.

OceanofPDF.com

 SNUGGLE STYLE
This carrying position is useful from birth to six months.

1. Hold baby facing you on the side without the
rings.
2. Pull the outer elastic railing of the sling open and
lower baby into the sling pocket, bottom-first.
3. Make sure the inner elastic railing of the sling is
pulled up and baby is positioned between the two
pieces of the elastic railing.
4. Make sure baby is seated comfortably with the
railing around baby’s back and neck to ensure
stability. The sling should be positioned around
baby’s back and head so that the head is not able
to bob back and forth, especially in the early
months.
5. Adjust the snugness of the sling so that baby is
securely nestled against your chest. Be sure the
lower railing is snug against baby’s thighs and the
upper railing snug along the back of his head and
neck. In a properly secure snuggle hold, baby will

 seem to be sitting in a little pouch, just above the
lower padded railing of the sling.
Some babies need the sling to be very snug or they don’t feel securely
held. If after adjustment the sling still feels too large in the snuggle hold, try
the following: (1) The upper edge will usually have much more slack that
can be taken up by tucking it underneath your arm opposite the ring. Hold
that arm tightly against your body to secure the upper edge of the sling
under your arm so that it sits snugly around the back of baby’s head and
neck and all the slack is transferred to your back. (2) Cinch in the sling so
that the lower edge snugly cups under your baby’s bottom, making sort of a
pouch—enabling baby to sit on the inner railing of the sling. (3) Be careful
that baby’s nose and mouth are free to breathe, not covered by your clothing
or sling fabric.

 Easing baby into the snuggle hold.

Snuggle hold.

OceanofPDF.com

 KANGAROO

CARRY

(FORWARD-FACING

POSITION)
Between three and six months (earlier in some babies) your baby may
prefer the kangaroo carry, or forward-facing position. Once baby has
developed good head control and a curious personality, he may find the
cradle and snuggle holds too confining and want to see more. The kangaroo
position is usually preferable for very active babies who are quieted by the
stimulation of the 180-degree view. If your baby is one of those “archers”
who fusses and stiffens out as if attempting back dives while you are trying
to wear him in either the snuggle or the cradle hold, the kangaroo carry may
be the answer.
To determine whether your baby is ready to be carried facing forward,
try the following: Without the sling, hold your baby against your chest with
her head and back resting against your chest, your arms underneath her legs,
bending her thighs upward to touch her abdomen. This is one of the colic
curl positions (see here). Start walking and revolving a bit side to side,
giving your baby a full 180-degree sweeping view. If your baby likes this
position, she is probably ready for the kangaroo carry.
Six-month-old babies love the forward-facing carry. Started early, some
babies may enjoy this forward-facing position for up to a year or longer.

 Use your sling as follows for the kangaroo carry:

1. Support baby facing forward with one arm under
her legs and her back against your chest.
2. With your free hand hold the top edge of the sling
outward, forming a pouch.
3. Slide baby down into the pouch, bottom first,
either with her back resting directly against and
sliding down the front of your chest or nestled in
the crook of your arm. Most babies sit crosslegged at the bottom of the pouch, with their legs
in front of their body. Some older babies prefer
their legs folded under their bottom.

 Easing baby into the kangaroo carry.

Kangaroo carry, or forward-facing position.

Sidesaddle carry. This is a variation of the forward-facing position. Slide
baby down into the pouch, bottom first as in the kangaroo carry. Next turn
baby’s feet toward the side opposite the rings and nestle his head in the
sling pocket a few inches beneath the rings.

OceanofPDF.com

 HIP STRADDLE
Between four and six months, or when baby can sit without support, your
baby may like to be carried on your hip (see illustration on next page). Try
the following steps:

1. Most parents prefer to wear their baby on the hip
opposite their dominant hand; wear your baby on
your left hip if you are right-handed, for example.
2. With your left hand (if you are righthanded), hold
baby high up on your shoulder.
3. Using your right hand, pull baby’s feet through
the sling so that his bottom rests on your hip and
his legs straddle your left side.
4. Adjust the sling to have the lower padded railing
resting snugly behind baby’s knees and the body
of the sling across his buttocks. Pull the upper
railing of the sling upward so that it fits snugly
beneath baby’s arms and high on his back.
Some babies like to play the game of arching themselves backward
shortly after being put in the hip straddle. It is all right for baby to lean

 away from your body to some extent; he doesn’t have to be held in as
tightly as in the snuggle hold. Try giving your baby a toy, or engage your
baby in immediate eye-to-eye contact to lessen this nuisance, convincing
him that he wants to be close to you rather than push away from you.
Shifting positions from the hip straddle. Baby can be shifted easily from
the hip straddle to the safety hip carry by shifting baby backward so that her
legs straddle the back of your hip, rather than the side, and her head is
behind your shoulders. This position is a favorite for the toddler, especially
if you are doing something in front of you and wish baby to be safely out of
the way. Baby can still peer around your side and observe what you are
doing.
To shift from the hip carry to the cradle hold for breastfeeding or
comforting, bring baby’s back leg to the front alongside the other one, and
swing both legs over to the ring side, letting baby cradle across your front.
Pull up extra fabric from the upper railing so that your entire front area is
covered for private feeding.
The real fun of babywearing, for you and your infant, is experimenting
with various positions and carrying styles to find the ones that work best for
you and your baby. The earlier you begin wearing your baby (preferably
begin in the newborn period), the better baby will become accustomed to
the sling. Even infants six months old or older can be taught to enjoy the
sling, but it often takes some creative wearing styles to get the older firsttime sling baby to get used to being in a carrier.

 Hip straddle.

Hip straddle.

 OceanofPDF.com

 THE BABYWEARING FATHER—BECOMING
A SHAREHOLDER
As fathers and certified babywearers, we feel that it is important that a baby
get used to father’s handling, too. Father has a different rhythm to his walk,
a difference that baby learns to appreciate. The snuggle hold and neck nestle
are favorite wearing positions for father.
The neck nestle. Place the baby in the snuggle position and lift him up a bit
until his head nestles into the curve of your neck. You will have found one
of the most comforting and calming holding patterns. In the neck nestle dad
has a slight edge over mom. Babies hear not only through their ears but also
through the vibration of their skull bones. By placing baby’s head against
your voice box, in the front of your neck, and humming and singing to your
baby, the slower, more easily felt vibrations of the lower-pitched male voice
often lull baby right to sleep. As you rock and walk with your baby, sing a
calming song such as “Old Man River.”

SAFE BABYWEARING
Baby carriers made by reputable manufacturers have been safety-tested, but
there are human elements that must be accounted for. Actually, one reason
parents wear their babies is they feel the safest place for baby is in their
arms, right under their eyes. The positions of babywearing are meant to

 mimic in-arms carrying positions. So your baby should be in the same
position in which you would hold him or her. In a nutshell, at all times
baby’s face should remain visible and kissable. Observe the following
safety tips when wearing your baby:
Wear baby high on your body. Especially in the early months, “the
higher, the safer” is Babywearing 101. An easy-to-follow safety tip we
have taught since beginning babywearing in 1985 is “Wear your baby
high enough so that you can easily kiss the top of baby’s head.” We’ve
had thousands of babywearing families in our medical practice, and to
our knowledge babies whose parents have followed our instructions
have not had one injury.
While you are getting used to wearing your baby, support her with
your hands. As you go through the learning phase of babywearing,
holding your baby with your hands becomes instinctive—like
embracing your protuberant abdomen while pregnant. After you
become a babywearing veteran, you can safely carry your baby in the
sling with one hand free.
Be sure baby’s mouth and nose are free to breathe and not covered by
the sling, your own body, or clothing fabric. Be sure baby’s face is
always facing upward, usually in line with the rest of baby’s body, not
turned sideways where mouth and nose could be covered.
When baby is tiny and in the cradle position, have one arm (usually the
one opposite the side with the shoulder pad) along the top rail of the
sling. This added protection contains baby while you are getting used
to the sling.
Be sure you can see baby’s face at all times. Baby’s head and neck
must be gently and completely supported, off chest.
Be sure to keep one hand on baby at all times, especially while
carrying baby in the forward-facing position.
If you’re carrying something else, remember first the little person
you’re also carrying. Don’t hold objects, such as bags of groceries, in
both hands. Always keep one hand free to embrace baby.
In the hip carry, be sure the top rail of the sling is pulled up over
baby’s back at least as high as baby’s shoulder blades. Little archers

 like to practice their back dives when carried in this position.
Containing baby in the sling discourages this action.
Consult the carrier manufacturer’s website for updated safety
information before using secondhand slings.
Older babies like to squirm and sometimes even try to stand in the
sling. Carefully support your baby during these antics.
Do not wear baby while cooking at the stove, cycling, or riding in a
moving vehicle. Baby carriers are obviously not substitutes for an
approved car seat.
Return baby to proper carrying position after nursing.
Be sure other babywearers, such as baby-sitters, read and observe these
safety precautions.
While babywearing, always keep your eyes on baby during breast- or
bottlefeeding to be sure baby’s mouth and nose remain uncovered after
feeding is finished.
Avoid sudden twisting. Babies can fall when a mother suddenly turns
to do something (such as rescue another child from danger) and
“forgets” she is wearing her baby. As a precaution, try this safety
rehearsal: suddenly twist your upper body to grab something, and at
the same time firmly embrace your baby with your other arm. After
you have frequently rehearsed
this reaction, you will instinctively clasp your baby with one hand
while lunging with the other.
When wearing your baby and stooping over, bend at the knees, not at
the waist; hold on to baby in the sling with one hand while picking up
the object with the other.
Toddlers, while being worn, are at your reaching level and can grab
dangerous or breakable objects off shelves. Keep an arm’s distance
away from potential hazards.
When going through doorways or around corners, be careful that
baby’s body does not stick out past your arm and strike the wall or
doorjamb.
Don’t drink hot beverages when wearing baby, although wearing her
while eating is all right.
Attend to and check on baby often. Be sure to follow the
manufacturer’s instructions. If you buy a used sling that does not come

 with package instructions, refer to these babywearing safety tips. For
babywearing safety updates, see AskDrSears.com
Another attraction to the neck nestle is that baby feels the warming air
from your nose on her scalp. (Experienced mothers have long known that
sometimes just breathing onto baby’s head or face will calm her. They call
this “magic breath.”) Our babies have enjoyed the neck nestle more than
any of the other holding patterns, and I have, too. Dads, become a
shareholder in the family art of babywearing.
The warm fuzzy. For a uniquely male variation of the snuggle hold, place
baby’s ear over your heart—bare skin to bare skin. The combination of the
rhythm of your heartbeat and movement of your chest, plus the feel of
abdominal breathing and the rhythm of your walk, introduce baby to the
uniqueness of being worn by dad.

 The neck nestle, a favored position of babywearing fathers.

For a father to be comfortable wearing his baby and a baby to respond to
dad’s babywearing techniques are real bonuses for mothers of high-need
babies. It helps prevent mother burnout. Here is a common scenario a
mother of a high-need baby recently shared with me:

“I love our new baby, but he is one of these high-need babies and I need to
wear him constantly. He was wearing me down and I was burning out. My
husband feels very insecure in calming fussy babies and for this reason I
was reluctant to release our baby to him during those trying fussy times.
The sling was the answer. After my husband got used to wearing our baby,
and I saw that our baby liked it, I felt more comfortable releasing our baby
to him. Initially I would hover over my husband to make sure our baby
would stop fussing but as soon as he proved himself as a competent
babywearer I felt a sense of relief. Even though I wear our baby most of the
time, just having my husband share this beautiful experience gives me a
much-needed break.”

My own experience is similar. I, Dr. Bill, felt a real high the first time I
put Stephen in the neck nestle and snuggled him securely against my chest
for a walk. As we strolled together, I felt a sense of completeness.
Sometimes I wore him for hours at a time. I felt right when we were

 together and not right (or complete) when we were apart. These are feelings
usually reserved for the mother-infant pair. I wanted a piece of this
babywearing action, too. The more I wore Stephen, the more comfortable
we both became at trying different wearing positions. The more he liked it,
the more I liked it, and the more we enjoyed being together.

OceanofPDF.com

 OTHER BABYWEARERS
While infants enjoy being worn by their parents best, babies will adapt to
substitute caregivers better if worn in the sling they are used to. “Home” to
a baby can be in the sling. Brian, a toddler in our practice, calls his sling
“my little house.” Be sure other babywearers read the safety precautions
here.

OceanofPDF.com

 Babywearing and Baby-sitters

Parents of high-need babies often confide to us that they are afraid to leave
their baby with anyone because no one else can comfort these special
babies. High-need babies who are accustomed to being worn are more
easily comforted by a baby-sitter who wears them. Barbara, a busy mom
whose only hope of survival was to wear her high-need baby, relates this
story. “Jason is so happy when he is in the sling that I feel comfortable
briefly leaving him with a sitter. Sometimes if I’m in a hurry, I greet the
sitter at the door, transfer Jason to her while in the sling—sort of like the
transfer of a baton in a relay race—and she takes over the wearing. He
forgets to fuss, and I feel better knowing his routine is not disrupted.”

OceanofPDF.com

 Babywearing by Siblings

When we adults wear babies, we model for our other children that big
people carry little people. Children and grandchildren are later likely to
adopt the style of parenting that they received or witnessed when young.
For example, our own children have sometimes “worn” their dolls in
homemade baby slings because they have witnessed us wearing babies so
often. The effect of role modeling on children’s views of the mother-infant
relationship was brought home to us one day when our then six-year-old
daughter Hayden was asked by her teacher to draw a mother and baby. She
drew the two as essentially one person. She recognized that, at least in the
early months, mothers wear babies, and the two are inseparable.

OceanofPDF.com

 Babywear in Day Care

To ensure that your baby gets a lot of holding time, especially if you have a
high-need baby, instruct your day-care provider on how to wear baby in a
sling. Impress upon her how much happier and better behaved are “sling
babies.” The following is a “prescription” I often give parents to present to
their day-care providers:

OceanofPDF.com

 Special Groups: Teens and Marines

Teenage girls often enjoy wearing babies, but this style of baby care is not
easy to model to teenage boys. Here’s how our son Peter at fourteen years
old got hooked on wearing his then two-month-old brother, Stephen.
Martha was asked to give a talk to a group of military wives at a local U.S.
Marine base. The topic was how to get their husbands to share in more baby
care. Martha offered to provide slings in a camouflage pattern. We did, and
the dads loved wearing their “baby marines.” Peter, who was into army
things anyway at that time, couldn’t wait to put on the camouflage sling and
wear his baby brother. It is important that boys develop tenderness. How
heartwarming it is to see men and boys care for little babies.

 OceanofPDF.com

 WEARING DOWN TO SLEEP
It’s 9:00 P.M. and you’re tired but baby isn’t. Nestle baby safely in the sling
and stroll around the house until he falls asleep. The rhythm of your
heartbeat and body motion will lull baby to sleep. This is what we call
wearing down.
First-time parents may have been led to believe that the way a baby goes
to sleep is that at some preassigned time they put the half-awake baby into
the crib, kiss him on the cheek, turn out the lights, and leave the room. Baby
peacefully drifts off to sleep without much bother. This happens only in
books and movies, or for someone else’s baby, but seldom in real life. Most
babies want to or need to be nursed (comforted) down to sleep in a
caregiver’s arms. Babywearing allows the infant to make the transition from
an awake state to sleep more easily.
When you feel that baby is ready to go to sleep (or you are ready for her
to go to sleep), wear her in the sling in the position that you have found to
be least stimulating and most sleep inducing. Walk around the house. Try
breastfeeding while moving. Some babies will fight sleep if they know you
are trying to lull them to sleep in a sling. Instead, walk around the house or
outside as if you are simply tending to normal daily tasks. Baby will likely
be curious to watch everything you do at first, but then she’ll become bored
and sleep will sneak up on her. When your baby is in a state of deep sleep

 (recognized by a motionless face and limp limbs) lower yourself onto the
bed until she is lying down and you can gently slip yourself and baby out of
the sling.

After “wearing down”—babywearing your baby to sleep—gently slip baby
out of the sling.

OceanofPDF.com

 BABYWEARING IN REAL-LIFE SITUATIONS

OceanofPDF.com

 Breastfeeding While Babywearing

In the last twenty years the majority of mothers have chosen to breastfeed
their infants. Babywearing allows breastfeeding on the move so that busy
mothers can more easily nurture their babies with the best nutrition, yet
continue their active lifestyles.

Advantages

It’s convenient. Breastfeeding while babywearing makes life easier for the
mother of a marathon nurser, a baby who in the early months wants to nurse
constantly, such as a baby who is going through a growth spurt. It’s
convenient outside the house, too. If you are shopping with the baby and
need to feed in public, breastfeeding is very easy and private while wearing
baby. Because baby feels comfortable in the sling, he is content feeding
there, even in a public place. Martha has spent a few hours of babywearing
and breastfeeding in the checkout line at the grocery store, and even on
national television. Breastfeeding in the sling is especially convenient in
restaurants and similar places where being a baby may not always be
socially acceptable. Patrons in a restaurant would much prefer a discreetly
breastfeeding baby to an annoying, screaming baby. Additionally, babies

 who are worn in public places tend to fuss less and are therefore more
welcome—especially in a society that has heretofore traditionally not
welcomed babies everywhere.
It organizes problem suckers. Some babies breastfeed better on the move,
especially those problem suckers who need movement to organize their
sucking. Tense babies (those with a suck problem called tonic bite) and
back archers often breastfeed much better in the sling because of the
organizing effect babywearing has on their entire physiology. As the baby’s
whole body relaxes, so do the suck muscles. For babies who suck better on
the move, first position baby in the sling in order to achieve proper latch-on,
and then quickly begin walking.

Babywearing allows for discreet, convenient breastfeeding.

 It helps mother to care for older siblings. Breastfeeding in the sling is
especially valuable when there is a new baby and a toddler. By feeding the
tiny baby in the sling, mother has the mobility to attend to the toddler also.
As one mother said, “Breastfeeding our new baby in the sling gives me an
extra pair of hands to play with and enjoy our toddler. This has done
wonders to lessen sibling rivalry and allowed me to mother both children
well.”
It helps the slow-weight-gaining baby. In our practice, when a
breastfeeding baby is showing a less-than-adequate weight gain and we
have exhausted all possible reasons why, we have experienced amazing
results by encouraging the mother to wear her baby at least several hours a
day and breastfeed while doing so. Mothers report that babies feed more
frequently and in a more relaxed way, and weight dramatically increases.
This proves again what researchers have long known: Proximity to the
mother encourages a baby to feed more frequently. In addition to this, it
could be that the nearness of mother to baby enables and encourages mother
to read and respond to baby’s feeding cues more promptly. Also, because
baby is always near the source of milk and comfort, he does not have to
waste energy summoning mother; baby can use this energy to grow. (See
related sections on premature and failure-to-thrive babies, here.)

Babywearing Positions for Breastfeeding

 The cradle hold is the usual breastfeeding position for a baby of any age.
The sling itself, however, does not hold baby snugly enough at the breast to
maintain latch-on. It is necessary to support baby with your free arm to keep
him close to the breast. This is done with your arm alongside baby’s head
and back on the outside of the sling, and with baby positioned on his side so
that he is facing the breast without turning his head. Your other hand can be
slipped inside the sling in order to present the breast. Mother can continue
to hold her breast for her baby, or if she needs a free hand, she can prop her
breast with a cloth diaper or hand towel to keep it at the right level for baby,
if needed.
The clutch hold. In the early months babies may prefer breastfeeding in the
clutch hold. Using a modified snuggle hold, shift baby into a side cradle
position, with his head in front of the breast and his legs curled up beneath
the same arm. Mother can then use her arm on the side of the sling to hold
baby’s back and head close to her breast and use the opposite hand inside
the sling to help baby latch on. The clutch hold is particularly useful in the
early weeks of breastfeeding while babies are learning how to latch on.
Bending some babies in the clutch hold helps them suck better and maintain
proper latch-on longer. This is especially true of the archer—the clutch hold
may keep her from doing back dives during feeding.

 The cradle hold is the usual position for breastfeeding a baby in a sling.

 Breastfeeding in the clutch hold.

Burping baby. To burp your baby, shift from the clutch or cradle hold to
the snuggle hold so that baby is upright. The pressure of your chest against
baby’s tummy plus the gentle patting on baby’s back (in addition to the
snugness of this hold) will help baby burp.

OceanofPDF.com

 Work and Wear

Babywearing fits in beautifully with complex lifestyles. It makes life easier
for the busy mother. Mothers in other cultures have fabricated various slingtype carriers because it is necessary to carry their babies with them when
they work or when they are on the go. Mothers in Western cultures are also
on the go, they just “go” differently.
Besides mothering eight children, Martha is a lactation consultant and
taught breastfeeding classes. One day, just before a seminar, Matthew, who
was then six months old, developed an ill-timed fussy period. Not wishing
to cancel her class but more strongly not wanting to leave Matthew during a
high-need period, Martha wore him in our sling while delivering a one-hour
lecture to 150 pediatricians. After mother and baby finished “their” talk on
the attachment style of parenting, one of the doctors came up to her and
exclaimed, “What you did made more of an impression than what you
said!”
Many mothers who have part-time jobs outside the home have been able
to wear their babies at work. They call this “work and wear.” Such jobs as
selling real estate, shopkeeping, demonstrating products, and housecleaning
lend themselves well to babywearing. Janice, a mother whose business
involves cleaning houses a few hours a day, wears her baby in a sling while
doing housework. A pediatrician friend wears her baby to work in her

 office. She often wears her baby during well-baby exams on her patients.
Her office staff members wear her baby if she is examining a patient who
might have a contagious disease. Work and wear helped her and her new
baby to stay together yet allowed her to continue working in her profession.
Most employers are initially reluctant to allow mothers to wear their
babies to work, but we encourage them to give it a fair trial. Employers
often find that the babywearing mothers actually do a more productive job,
since they so appreciate being given the opportunity to keep their babies
with them. They make an extra effort to prove that they can do two jobs at
once. One employer even found the baby to be an added attraction for his
customers, as if they sensed that a centuries-old custom of working and
wearing was being practiced in this store. The customers felt that something
right was going on. Try it and see!

OceanofPDF.com

 Wearing Out, Eating Out

How often have you said, “I’d love to go, but I’ve just had a baby.” Some
mothers go stircrazy after a few months. There is nothing in the motherbaby contract that says you have to stay home and become a recluse after
you have a baby. But a new mother is usually not ready to leave her baby to
go out. Babywearing allows you to “have your baby and eat out, too.”
When our son Stephen was two months old, we were invited to a black
tie formal affair. Rather than decline the invitation, as new parents usually
do, we wore Stephen in a fashionable sling, and we all had a great time.
With a few breastfeeding snacks, Stephen nestled peacefully in the sling
during the three-and-a-half-hour affair. Stephen was not a disturbance, but
he was often the center of attention. Onlookers initially had that puzzled
expression, as if wondering, “What is that she’s wearing?” The puzzlement
turned to admiration. “Why it’s a baby, how cute!” By the end of the
evening, as the guests noticed how content we were with our babywearing
arrangement, there was an air of acceptance throughout the room.
Babywearing had achieved not only social approval but social admiration.
Here’s another scenario: Shortly after the birth of a baby, dad says,
“Honey, how about a date? Let’s go out to dinner.” Mom replies, “But we
can’t leave our baby.” The answer to this dilemma? Babywearing. Babies
are quiet in restaurants when worn in a sling. They seldom cry and are

 usually seen and not heard. Babies can breastfeed discreetly and are rarely
disruptive to restaurant patrons.

OceanofPDF.com

 Babywearing While Traveling

Wearing your baby in a sling provides a safe, protective environment for
baby when you are shopping or traveling anyplace in which there are
crowds. Walking through a crowded shopping mall or airport with a toddler
in tow is nerve-racking when you consider what could happen if you let go
of his hand even for a moment (or take your hand off his stroller and get
distracted). Between the ages of one and two, when the infant begins to
walk, dart out from your protective arms, and explore the environment,
babywearing keeps the toddler close to your side in any situation where a
free-roaming toddler may not be safe. Have you ever noticed that a
pedestrian toddler’s face is at the exact level that people hold their lit
cigarettes? Busy shoppers or travelers often don’t watch out for little
people. Bring your baby or toddler up to a safe level and relax—he won’t
go anywhere without you.
Busy parents throughout the world are on the go, and babywearing
makes traveling easier. During travel babies are constantly required to make
the transition from one activity to another. With babywearing, transitioning
(changing environments or going from wakefulness to sleep) is easier.
While you are standing in line at the airport, a baby worn is safe, secure,
and happy. If your baby fusses a bit on an airplane, wear her and walk
around the plane so that she is attracted by the visual stimulation of the

 environment. When baby is ready to go off to sleep in a hotel room, wear
her down onto a bed in the sling until she falls asleep. Home to a baby is
where mother and father are, and the sling is a constant reminder of baby’s
“home.” It makes adaptation to new environments easier and travel more
pleasant for the whole family.
Here is another use for the sling while traveling:
As a changing pad. Place the sling on the floor or on a changing table
(don’t leave baby unattended on a table), place baby’s head on the shoulder
pad of the pillow, and presto! you have a comfortable diaper-changing
surface. During changing, place a clean diaper under baby to protect the
sling.

Dr. Bob notes: In colder weather, Cheryl and I used to playfully fight over
who got to wear the baby when we went out, since our little “portable
heater” was a nice way to keep at least one of us warm.

OceanofPDF.com

 BABYWEARING IN SPECIAL SITUATIONS
For families with special circumstances and infants with special needs,
babywearing eases some of the strains.

OceanofPDF.com

 Wearing Twins

After the first few months, twins are usually too heavy to carry one in each
arm. Babywearing is the solution. Either wear one baby in the baby sling
while holding the other in your arms (safer than two babies in arms in case
you trip), or have two slings—one for each baby and parent. Besides being
convenient for parents, twin wearing allows interaction between babies. As
the parents are relating, so are the babies, because they are face-to-face
rather than behind each other in a stroller.

OceanofPDF.com

 Babywearing for Medical Benefits

Premature babies. A premature baby, especially one with medical
problems needing weeks or months of intensive care, is deprived of those
final weeks or months in the womb. Instead, baby must grow in an outside
womb. The problem is that outside wombs are static. They don’t move.
Research has shown that a premature whose “womb” moves gains weight
faster and has fewer stop-breathing (apnea) episodes. Specialists in newborn
care have fabricated a variety of moving wombs, such as oscillating water
beds.
A group of newborn-care specialists in South America made an
ingenious discovery. Some hospitals could not afford incubators and all the
technology needed to care for the preemies. They were forced to use the
mother. These preemies were wrapped around their mothers in a slinglike
wrap, a custom called packing. To everyone’s amazement the babies thrived
as well as or even better than the technologically cared-for babies.
The researchers concluded that the close proximity to mother helped the
babies to thrive. Being close to mother enticed babies to feed frequently.
Mother’s warmth kept the baby warm; mother’s movement calmed the
baby, enabling the baby to divert energy from crying to growing. Mother’s
breathing movements stimulated baby’s breathing, so that these babies had

 fewer stop-breathing episodes. Mother acted as sort of a respiratory
pacemaker for baby’s breathing.
As soon as a premature baby no longer needs oxygen and intravenous
therapy and enters the growing phase, we encourage mothers to wear their
babies as much as possible, a practice called kangaroo care. (For an
explanation, see here.)
Failure-to-thrive babies. The infant who fails to thrive also benefits from
babywearing. Some babies, for a variety of medical reasons, are very slow
to gain weight, a condition called failure to thrive. In our pediatric practice,
and for one of our own babies, we have used babywearing as a therapeutic
tool to stimulate thriving. My doctor’s orders to the parents are very simple:
“Put your baby on in the morning and take him off at night. Wear him down
for naps and to sleep. Wear him when you go out and about the house. Take
long relaxing walks while wearing your baby. This will help both of you to
thrive.”
How does babywearing help babies thrive? Motion does good things for
growing babies. It has a calming effect on infants. They cry less and
therefore divert the energy they would have wasted on crying into growing.
Also, proximity increases feeding frequency, another reason that
babywearing stimulates growth. Frequent feedings are a potent stimulus for
growth. Perhaps babywearing promotes growth hormones and body
enzymes that enhance growth. This has been shown to be true in
experimental animals. I believe that in addition to these growth-promoting
effects babywearing helps babies thrive because of the organizing effect on

 the baby. The baby’s overall biological system seems to work better when
she is worn.
The handicapped baby. Parents often spend much time and money on
infant stimulation techniques and better-baby classes when the best
stimulation available at the lowest possible cost is right in front of them—
babywearing. The handicapped baby especially profits from being worn.
Picture the stimulation baby gets: He hears what you hear, sees what you
see, moves like you move, because he is near your eyes, ears, and mouth.
Baby is in constant touch.
Cerebral palsy babies who arch and stiffen are greatly helped by
babywearing. The contoured, bent position of the cradle hold and kangaroo
carry competes with baby’s tendency to arch backward, and lessens this
annoying back-diving posturing. (See “Babywearing Enhances Learning”
here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 HOW BABYWEARING BENEFITS INFANTS
AND PARENTS
During our study of the effects of babywearing on infants and parents, we
noticed many benefits. Here’s how this age-old custom of infant care brings
some of them about.

OceanofPDF.com

 Babywearing Organizes and Regulates the Baby

It’s easier to understand babywearing when you think of a baby’s gestation
as lasting eighteen months—nine months inside the womb and at least nine
more months outside. During the first nine months the womb environment
regulates baby’s systems automatically. Birth temporarily disrupts this
organization. The more quickly, however, baby gets outside help with
organizing these systems, the more easily he adapts to the puzzle of life
outside the womb. By extending the womb experience, the babywearing
mother (and father) provide an external regulating system that balances the
irregular and disorganized tendencies of the baby. Picture how these
regulating systems work. Mother’s rhythmic walk, for example (which baby
has been feeling for nine months) reminds baby of the womb experience.
This familiar rhythm, imprinted on baby’s mind in the womb, now
reappears in the “outside womb” and calms baby. Mother’s heartbeat,
beautifully regular and familiar, reminds baby of the sounds of the womb as
baby places her ear against her mother’s chest. As another biological
regulator, baby senses mother’s rhythmic breathing while worn tummy to
tummy, chest to chest. Simply stated, regular parental rhythms have a
balancing effect on the infant’s irregular rhythms.
Another way mother exerts this regulatory effect is by stimulating the
regulating hormones in baby’s developing adrenal and nervous systems.

 Researchers have shown that continued mother-infant attachment, such as
babywearing provides, stimulates the infant to achieve quicker day-night
regulation. They believe that mother’s presence exerts a regulatory
influence on the baby’s adrenal hormones, which promotes night sleeping
and day waking.
Mother’s voice, which baby is constantly exposed to during
babywearing, regulates baby’s limb movements. In a 1974 study, video
analysis of an infant’s body movements while the mother was talking to her
baby showed the baby moving in perfect synchrony with the inflections of
mother’s speech during her unique “baby talk.” These synchronous
movements did not occur in response to a stranger’s voice. In essence, the
mother’s rhythmic movements and vocalizations “teach” the baby to put
more rhythm into her movements, balancing out the usual newborn
tendency toward irregular, uncoordinated, and purposeless movements.
Babywearing exerts a balancing effect on baby’s vestibular system. This
system, located behind each ear, helps keep a person’s body in balance. For
example, if you lean over too far to one side, the vestibular system signals
that you should lean over to the other side to stay in balance. The system is
similar to three tiny carpenter’s levels, with one oriented for side-to-side
balance, another for up and down, a third for back and forth. The “levels”
function together to keep the body in balance. When carried, baby moves in
all three of these directions. Every time baby moves, the fluid in these
levels moves against tiny hairlike filaments that vibrate and send nerve
impulses in the muscles of baby’s body to keep him in balance. The preborn
baby has a very sensitive vestibular system that is constantly stimulated

 because the fetus is in almost continuous motion. Babywearing “reminds”
the baby of and continues the motion and balance he enjoyed in the womb.
What may happen if the baby does not have the benefit of a strong
mother-infant attachment, spending most of his time lying horizontally in a
crib, attended to only for feeding and comforting, and then again separated
from mother? A newborn has an inherent urge to become organized, to fit
into his or her new environment. If left to his own resources, without the
frequent presence of the mother, the infant may develop disorganized
patterns of behavior: colic, fussy cries, jerky movements, disorganized selfrocking behaviors, anxious thumb sucking, irregular breathing, and
disturbed sleep. The infant who is forced to self-regulate before his time
spends a lot of energy self-calming, wasting valuable energy he could have
used to grow and develop.
Fussing and disorganized behavior is a withdrawal symptom—a result
of the loss of the regulatory effects of the attachment to the mother. Babies
should not be left alone to train themselves to become self-soothers, as
some parenting advisers suggest. This style of detached parenting is not
supported by common sense, experience, or research. Behavioral research
has repeatedly shown that infants exhibit more anxious and disorganized
behaviors when separated from their mothers. While there is a variety of
child-rearing theories, attachment researchers all agree on one thing: In
order for a baby’s emotional, intellectual, and physiological systems to
function optimally, the continued presence of the mother, as during
babywearing, is a necessary regulatory influence.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Babywearing Reduces Crying and Colic

During the course of our study, parents in our practice would commonly
report, “My baby seems to be content as long as I wear him.” Babywearing
parents of previously fussy babies related that their babies seemed to forget
to fuss. Parents enjoyed their babies more because their babies were more
content. Babies were happier because they had less need to cry. Families
were happier, and we were happier because finally there seemed to be a way
to reduce crying in fussy babies. Stimulated by this new discovery of the
old art of comforting, we wondered why babywearing reduced crying; also,
did other pediatricians notice that carrying a baby reduced his crying?
In 1986 a team of researchers in Montreal reported a study of ninetynine mother-infant pairs, half of which were assigned to a group that was
asked to carry their babies in their arms or in a carrier for at least three
hours a day. In the control, or noncarried, group, parents were asked to
position their babies facing a mobile or pictures of a face when baby was
placed in a crib but not to try to calm the baby by increased carrying. The
infants who received supplemental carrying cried and fussed 43 percent less
than the noncarried group. The unique feature of this carrying study is that
mothers were encouraged to carry their infants throughout the day
regardless of the state of the infant, not just in response to crying or fussing.

 The usual mode of carrying in Western society is to pick up and carry the
baby after the crying has started.
We surveyed the writings of anthropologists who study infant-care
practices in other cultures. These researchers uniformly agree that infants in
cultures that wear their babies cry less. In the Western culture we measure
our baby’s crying in hours per day, whereas in other cultures it may be
measured in terms of minutes. In Western culture we have been led to
believe that it is “normal” for babies to cry an hour or two a day, whereas in
other cultures this is not the accepted norm. Stimulated by the general
agreement among infant-care researchers that increased carrying reduces
crying (as well as observing this correlation in our own pediatric practice),
the next question is why?
Babywearing reduces crying by its organizing effect on the baby’s
vestibular system, as previously described. Vestibular stimulation (rocking,
for example) has been shown by long experience and detailed research to be
the best cry stopper. Vestibular stimulation, as occurs during babywearing,
soothes baby because it reminds him of the womb, allowing baby to click
into the familiar experiences that were imprinted upon his developing mind
during life inside the womb. The familiar overcomes the unfamiliar to
which he is now exposed. This lessens baby’s anxiety and lessens the need
to fuss.
Because babywearing resembles the womb as closely as is humanly
possible, it fulfills a style of parenting that baby would have anticipated and
helps a new baby fit into her environment. This rightness of fit lessens the
need to fuss. Baby is learning to fit into her outside womb as she did in the

 inside womb. We may erroneously regard birth as the end of an assembly
line, producing a tiny adult immediately ready to adapt to the world. It helps
if we regard the newborn as somewhat incomplete. Babywearing completes
the attachment that baby was used to, giving her a sense of rightness. A
baby feels valuable because of the way she is treated. Wearing values the
baby.

OceanofPDF.com

 Babywearing Enhances Learning

If infants spend less time crying and fussing, what do they do with the extra
time and energy? We’ve already discussed how babywearing helps babies
thrive and grow physically. It also helps baby’s mental development. Our
own observation and that of others who study carried babies is that these
babies do not sleep a lot more but actually show increased awake
contentment time called quiet alertness. This is the behavioral state in which
an infant is most content and best able to interact with the environment. It
may be called the optimal state of learning for a baby.
Researchers have reported the following effects of babywearing and
quiet alertness: Carried babies show enhanced visual and auditory alertness.
The stability of the infant’s physiological system is related to the capacity
for contented behavior during awake periods; simply stated, during the state
of quiet alertness, the infant’s whole system seems to work better.
The behavioral state of quiet alertness also gives parents a better
opportunity to interact with the baby. When worn in the cradle hold, baby
sees mother’s face in the en face position. Notice how mother and baby
position their faces in order to achieve this optimal visually interactive
plane. Researchers have found that the human face, especially in this
position, is a potent stimulator for interpersonal bonding. In the kangaroo
carry, baby has a 180-degree view of her environment and is able to scan

 her world. She learns to choose, picking out what she wishes to look at and
shutting out what she doesn’t. This ability to make choices enhances
learning.

BABYWEARING HELPS BABIES CRY BETTER
AND PARENTS COPE BETTER
In counseling parents of fussy babies, we strive for two goals: to mellow the
temperament of the baby and to increase the sensitivity of the parents.
Babywearing helps foster both of these goals. By creating an organized,
womblike environment, wearing lessens a baby’s need to cry. Even when
baby does cry, babywearing teaches her to “cry better.” Parents, please
remember it is not your fault that your baby cries, nor is it your job to keep
baby from crying. The best you can do is not to let baby cry alone, and
create a secure environment that lessens baby’s need to cry. Babywearing
helps you do this.

Carried Babies Are More Involved

Another reason that babywearing enhances learning is that baby is
intimately involved in the babywearer’s world. Baby sees what mother or
father sees, hears what they hear, and in some ways feels what they feel.
Wearing humanizes a baby. Carried babies become more aware of their
parents’ faces, of the parents’ walking rhythms and scents. Baby becomes
aware of and learns from all the subtle facial expressions and other body
language, voice inflections and tones, breathing patterns, and emotions of
the babywearer. A parent will relate to the baby much more often, just by
virtue of the baby’s sitting there right under his or her nose. Proximity

 increases interaction, and baby can be constantly learning how to be human.
Carried babies are intimately involved in their parents’ world because they
participate in what mother and father are doing. A baby worn while a parent
washes dishes, for example, hears, smells, sees, and experiences in depth
the adult world. He is more exposed to and involved in what is going on
around him. Baby learns much in the arms of a busy person.
Consider the alternative infant-care practice, in which baby is separate
from the mother most of the day and picked up and interacted with only at
dutiful intervals. The voices he may hear in another room are not associated
with anything happening to him. Because they have no meaning to him, he
does not store them. He gets the message that they are neither important nor
worth storing. For the infant who lives alone, normal daily experiences have
no learning value for him and no bonding value for the mother. Because
baby is separate from her, mother does not, as a matter of course, gear her
activities and interactions as if baby were a participating second or third
party. At best, baby is involved as a spectator rather than a player.
The babywearing mother, on the other hand, because she is used to her
baby being with her, automatically gears her interactions to include the
baby. The baby, in turn, feels that he is included and feels that he is valuable
—a real boost to baby’s emerging self-esteem.

How Babywearing Promotes Cognitive Development

 To help the brain grow and develop, environmental experiences stimulate
nerves to branch out and connect with other nerves. Babywearing helps the
infant’s developing brain make the right connections. Because baby is
intimately involved in the mother’s and father’s world, she is exposed to
and participates in the environmental stimuli that mother selects and is
protected from those stimuli that bombard or overload her developing
nervous system. She so intimately participates in what mother is doing that
her developing brain stores a myriad of experiences, called patterns of
behavior. These may be thought of as thousands of tiny short-run movies
that are filed in the infant’s neurological library to be rerun when baby is
exposed to a similar situation that reminds her of the making of the original
“movie.” For example, mothers often tell us, “As soon as I pick up the sling
and put it on, my baby lights up and raises his arms as if in anticipation that
he will soon be in my arms and in my world.”

 Wearing a toddler—having a conversation.
We have noticed that carried babies seem more attentive, clicking in to
the conversation as if they were part of it. Babywearing enhances speech
development. Because baby is up at voice and eye level, he is more
involved in conversations. He learns a valuable speech lesson—the ability
to listen.
Normal ambient sounds, such as the noises of daily activities, may either
have learning value for the infant or disturb him. If baby is alone, sounds
may frighten him. If baby is worn, these sounds have learning value. The
mother filters out what she perceives as unsuitable for the baby and gives
the infant an “It’s okay” feeling when he is exposed to unfamiliar sounds
and experiences.
Parents sometimes worry that their baby won’t learn to crawl very well
if they carry him a lot. Even carried babies can get down and enjoy floor
freedom and crawling. Actually, attachment-parented babies show enhanced
motor development, perhaps for two reasons: the effect of attachment on
nervous-system development and the extra energy they have that might
have been wasted on fussing.

OceanofPDF.com

 Babywearing Enhances Parent-Infant Bonding

The term “bonding” receives a lot of press, but is probably the least
understood concept of parenting. Bonding is not instant intimacy. Bonding
is a gradual process. Some parent-infant pairs achieve bonding more
quickly and strongly than others. Babywearing accelerates the formation of
this bond.

Babywearing Helps Mothers and Babies Get the Right Start

The way a mother and baby get started with each other often sets the tone
for how successful the bonding relationship is going to be. Early in the
newborn period we focus on what the mother does for the baby, as if baby
minding were all a case of mother gives and baby takes. After sixty-five
years as combined pediatricians and eighty as parents, we all have grown to
realize that the idea of this early give-a-thon is only partially true. Not only
do the parents develop the baby, but the baby develops the parents. The
ideal infant-care system—when it operates at its best—is a mutual giving,
whereby all parties follow their mutual instincts to bring out the best in each
other. Here’s how the system works.

 The mother (and to a lesser extent the father) has a biological instinct
drawing her toward her infant; an innate desire to pick up, carry, nurse, and
simply be with her baby. This is called mother-infant attachment. In some
mothers this attachment comes naturally—mother’s intuition. Other
mothers feel a bit shaky in this intuition. Here’s where the baby does his or
her part.
Just as mothers have attachment-giving qualities, babies come wired
with attachment-promoting qualities that stimulate in the mother the desire,
and perhaps the need, to be near her baby. Cooing, sucking, smiling, and the
beautiful round and alluring features of the baby all do something good to
the mother. Within the mother are the so-called mothering hormones,
specifically prolactin and oxytocin. The attachment-promoting behaviors of
the baby stimulate these hormones to flow in the mother. Thus baby actually
gives to mother a biological booster shot that in turn helps her give the baby
the quality and quantity of mothering the baby needs—a mutual giving
between two needy members of the biological pair. If we make an
assumption that the higher and more consistent these hormones are, the
easier mothering will be, it follows that a mother is well advised to adopt a
style of mothering that keeps her hormones high. This is exactly what
babywearing does. The continued presence of the baby is what keeps these
biological systems active. Intermittent contact does not. Let’s analyze this
further.
Hormones have a biological measure of activity called a half-life—
meaning the time required for one-half of the substance to be used up in the
bloodstream. Some substances have a long half-life; others, a short one.

 Mothering hormones have a very short half-life—approximately twenty
minutes. This means that in order for a mother to maintain a consistently
high level, these hormones need to be stimulated around every twenty
minutes. Babywearing causes this to happen. The continued presence, the
frequency of feeding and touching, keeps mother’s hormones high.

Babywearing Stimulates Attachment Parenting

When a mother wears her baby many hours a day, she gets used to being
with her baby, and baby gets used to being with her. In a nutshell, bonding
means they feel right when together and unright when apart. This mother is
more likely to give an immediate nurturant response to a baby’s cry, to
continue to breastfeed more frequently and longer, and to sleep with the
baby at night—a sort of nighttime babywearing. Margie, one of the
babywearers in our practice, proudly exclaimed, “I feel absolutely addicted
to my baby.” This consistent hormonal stimulation is probably the
biological basis for Margie’s feeling. Martha says, “I miss my baby if she’s
been asleep too long in someplace other than the sling.”
Babywearing is even more important for the mother-baby relationship
that is slow to start, either because of a medical condition causing
temporary separation between mother and baby or a mother whose
biological attachment system takes a while to click in. The extra closeness
with your baby may be just what you need to get started.

 The Next Step: Harmony and Competence

After mother and baby feel connected and complete, what’s next? The net
effect of babywearing may be summed up in one word—harmony. This
beautiful term is what babywearing and bonding are all about. There are
various dictionary definitions of “harmony,” but the simplest, and the one
we like best, is “getting along well together.” Other definitions include: “an
orderly and pleasing arrangement” and “an agreement of feelings or
actions.”
During the first month much of the mother-baby interaction is a learned
response. Baby gives a cue, and mother learns what the best response is.
After the pair has rehearsed this cue-response interaction hundreds of times,
what initially was a learned response becomes an intuitive response. Mother
naturally and intuitively gives a nurturant response, and the whole
relationship operates in harmony.
Along with promoting harmony, babywearing promotes a sense of
competence in baby and mother. Because a mother can read her baby’s cues,
she learns to respond effectively and meet her baby’s needs; she feels
fulfilled and somewhat amazed at her own increasing powers of
observation. Mother and baby are so close that mother doesn’t miss a cue.
The cue-response network, although at first learned, eventually becomes
intuitive. The mother feels very competent. The infant also develops a sense
of competence because his cues are interpreted correctly. He learns to cue
better because of the consistent and appropriate responses his cues elicit in

 the mother. This mutual awareness, sensitivity, and competence are all
enhanced by babywearing.
Carrying your baby a lot also helps you witness and enjoy your baby’s
quickly changing developmental skills—also important in developing the
bond. The way your baby moves, the way he looks at you, the way he
reaches and touches you, the way he reaches toward other persons and
things all give you an enhanced appreciation for the daily changes that
occur in the developing baby. In essence, mother and baby develop together.
The understanding and appreciation for your baby’s developmental skills
are just one more aspect of cementing the bond.

Babywearing Overcomes Obstacles to Bonding

Not only does babywearing enhance bonding by promoting stimulation of
mothering hormones, a mutual reading of each other’s cues, and
competence, it also helps mothers overcome many of the obstacles to
bonding.
Postpartum depression. One of the main obstacles is postpartum
depression. Postpartum depression is much less common in babywearing
mothers than among other mothers. Perhaps this is due to several factors,
including mother’s hormonal stimulation and baby’s reduced crying.
Frequent hormonal stimulation, as previously discussed, causes mothers to
have a consistently high level of maternal hormones instead of fluctuating

 ups and downs, as happens with infant care at a distance. From a biological
standpoint, these mothering hormones have been shown to have a
tranquilizing effect on mother, which may help ward off depression. Women
we have interviewed often report that after using attachment activities such
as wearing their babies they feel relaxed, as if they have learned to take
advantage of the natural biological tranquilizing effect of the maternal
hormones. Babywearing also prevents depression because a baby who is
worn fusses less, so the mother feels more confident, less strained, and
therefore less depressed.
But mothers take note: The goodness of a baby is not a measure of your
effectiveness as a mother. Some babies cry a lot regardless of your style of
mothering, so do not feel that you are not a good mother if your baby cries a
lot. This is a reflection of the temperament of your baby and not your style
of mothering. (For a complete description of how the amount of time a baby
cries is due to the temperament of the baby, see Chapter 16, “Parenting the
Fussy or Colicky Baby.”) But a babywearing mother develops competence
more quickly, which overrides the usual feelings of inadequacy that most
new mothers initially experience.
Babywearing helps mothers be more discerning when they read books
and magazines that promote mother-infant detachment, or parent-centered
magazines. Over the last several years we have noticed that mothers who
wear their babies a lot feel so competent that they are not bothered by wellmeaning friends and relatives preaching, “You hold that baby too much;
you’re going to spoil her.” They are resistant to parent-centered books and
magazines that promote high-tech baby care, giving new parents the

 message that the outcome of their infant is directly proportional to the
things they purchase for the baby—a so-called enriched environment.
(Think about it. What environment could be richer for a baby than his
parents’ arms?) The parent-centered school of thought, which promotes a
more restrained response to an infant’s needs, becomes foreign to the
internal programming of a babywearing mother. This advice does not feel
right to her, or if she temporarily succumbs to this advice, her system rebels
and she does not feel right afterward. Babywearing mothers intuitively feel
that the best enriched environment to give their baby is the closeness of
babywearing. They are able to resist high-tech advertising and settle
comfortably into their high-touch style. Family-centered mothers of the
babywearing set are more likely to develop the slogan “The us generation.”

OceanofPDF.com

 Babywearing Makes Life Easier for Busy Parents

Because we have a large and busy family, Martha and I enjoy our once-aweek dinner for two after the dust has settled and the younger children are
in bed. Whenever we had a new baby, this usually turned out to be a dinner
for three. If one of us wore the baby at the dinner table, baby was usually
quiet, content, or, with Martha, breastfeeding, but not at all disturbing or
interrupting. Also, the baby, if awake, was intimately involved in the
conversation and all the goings-on without disturbing us.
In social situations babywearing allows uninterrupted socializing with
guests; instead of your having to excuse yourself continually to go to
another room and breastfeed or attend to baby, baby joins the group. What a
beautiful sight to see a group of parents sitting around enjoying one another
yet wearing their babies. When infants are old enough to be in the hip carry
(usually four to six months), babies can make eye contact and engage others
in some form of baby communication while the parents talk.

OceanofPDF.com

 BABYWEARING

MAY

CHANGE

YOUR

LIFESTYLE FOR THE BETTER
Even a busy babywearing mother does not regard her baby as interfering
with her life-style but rather enhancing it. Because she has become
competent in the art of babywearing she finds ways to incorporate her baby
into her daily tasks and desires, and an exciting cycle occurs: Babywearing
enhances bonding, which stimulates the mother to want to be with her baby
more. Because she wants to be with her baby, yet wants to or needs to have
other pursuits, she finds creative ways to carry her baby with her while she
does other things. This further enhances the bonding, as mother finds baby
not at all inconvenient or disruptive, but enjoyable and completing.
Karen had planned to return to her career outside the home once her
baby was six months old. She had been a perfectionist in her career and was
used to doing everything right. She carried this professional attitude over
into her mothering and wanted to do everything right for her baby. As part
of the attachment style of parenting, she wore her baby several hours a day
during the first six months. Essentially the baby went with her in every
activity she did. After six months Karen and baby Jane were so bonded that
Karen said to me, “I cannot return to my former job and leave my baby.”
She went on to state that there was something in her internal makeup that

 prevented her from separating from her baby. Acting on her conviction,
Karen sought out and obtained employment that allowed her to “work and
wear” her baby. (Mothers who cannot wear their babies to work can
strengthen the bond by wearing their babies when away from work; see
Chapter 17, “Working and Parenting.”) Babywearing provides the
circumstance that strengthens the bond, and because the bond is
strengthened the mother seeks out a lifestyle that allows the babywearing
bond to continue—another example of how babywearing does something
good for the mother, for the baby, and for society.
As the parenting style of the new millennium, babywearing makes life
easier for parents—and does good things for babies.

BENEFITS OF BABYWEARING
Because babywearing is an exercise in baby reading, it is a valuable
attachment tool. Not only does babywearing benefit parents, it benefits
babies.
Sling babies cry less. Both research and parents’ observations show that
carried babies cry less, perhaps because the sling provides a familiar motion
that babies enjoyed while in the womb. Babywearing is particularly helpful
to calm those “P.M. fussers,” babies who seem to save up all their energy
for a long blasted cry in the evening. We would plan ahead for this “happy
hour” by putting baby in the sling and taking a long walk. The fresh air, the
motion, and the visual attractions, such as moving cars, birds, trees, and
kids playing in the park, all worked together to help baby forget to fuss.
Sling babies grow better. As we explained here, babywearing is
particularly beneficial for babies who are premature or slow to gain weight.
Motion and the proximity to a familiar caregiver help babies thrive.
(Thriving does not only mean getting heavier and taller, it also means
growing optimally: physically, intellectually, and emotionally.)

 Sling babies learn more. Babies learn a lot in the arms of a busy caregiver
for two reasons. Contented, carried babies spend more time in a state of
quiet alertness, the behavioral state in which babies are best able to interact
and learn from people and activities in their environment. Also, when worn
in a carrier, baby is intimately involved in the world of the caregiver. She
goes where you go and sees what you see. A sling baby sees the world from
your viewpoint. Certainly, a sling baby learns more than one who is lying
flat in a pram and looking up at the sky.
Sling babies talk better. Because a sling baby is up at voice and eye level,
she learns the subtleties of body language and human expression. Baby is
more involved in the conversation because she watches her caregivers talk.
A speech pathologist and veteran babywearer in our practice shared her
observations with us: “My husband and I used the sling from about one
month to one year with both of our children. When they were able to sit
upright in the sling, they began watching speakers use turn-taking and eye
contact to communicate. By viewing the speaker’s mouth up close, children
learn to imitate correct speech movements for accurate articulation patterns.
Sling babies start practicing words and sounds and store these memories at
an earlier age. We feel that wearing our babies has greatly contributed to our
children’s abilities to communicate.”
Enjoy the babywearing stage while it lasts. The time in your arms is a
relatively short time in the total life of your child, but the memories of your
touch and availability will last a lifetime. For more information, see
AskDrSears.com/babywearing.

OceanofPDF.com

 15

OceanofPDF.com

 Nighttime Parenting: How to Get Your
Baby to Sleep

From our knowledge of good sleepers we have isolated those factors that
go into helping baby and parents sleep through the night. Here is a balanced
approach to nighttime parenting which takes into account that tired and
busy parents need to sleep and need their baby to sleep, yet respects babies’
unique set of nighttime needs. Hence, we use the term “nighttime
parenting,” not just “how to get your baby to sleep.” We want you to
develop a style of nighttime parenting that helps you sleep better, helps your
baby sleep better, and—the long-range goal—helps your baby develop a
healthy sleep attitude.
Sleep is not a state you can force a baby into. A more appropriate
approach is to create a sleep-inducing environment that allows sleep to
overtake the baby—both in going to sleep and in staying asleep. Nor should
getting baby to sleep be a mechanical process using insensitive techniques:
“Let baby cry five minutes the first night, ten minutes the second…” and so
on—a method that trains babies with less sensitivity than we train pets. Our
goal is not only to get baby to fall asleep and stay asleep, we want baby to
regard sleep as a pleasant state to enter and a fearless state to stay in. You

 can’t separate daytime and nighttime parenting. The 50 percent (or more) of
each day that baby spends in sleep is not wasted time. It’s a time when baby
develops healthy and trusting attitudes about sleep—and about life.
As we were studying ways to help baby sleep better, we also surveyed
various theories of how to get baby to sleep. We found all of them to be
variations on one tired theme: Let baby cry it out. This insensitive dogma
first appeared in baby books around 1900 and has carried over, with modern
modifications, into every baby book thus far. Yet here are the sleepless
facts: Sleep problems in babies—and adults—have reached epidemic
proportions. There are now sleep-disorder centers in nearly every major
city, yet the same forced-sleep techniques continue. It’s time for a more
humane approach. First we want to share with you some facts about infant
sleep, and then we’ll suggest a step-by-step approach to helping your baby
develop a healthy sleep attitude—one that will carry over into healthy adult
sleep habits.

OceanofPDF.com

 FACTS OF INFANT SLEEP
Ever wish you could “sleep like a baby”? When you learn how babies really
sleep—or don’t—you won’t wish an infant’s sleeping habits on yourself.
Imagining how babies sleep brings visions of peaceful, uninterrupted
slumber. But here’s how babies really spend their nights—and why.

OceanofPDF.com

 No One Sleeps Through the Night

During the night, everyone—adults and babies—progresses through many
stages and cycles of sleep. Let’s first put you to sleep, and then your baby,
to see how differently you both sleep.
As you drift into sleep, higher brain centers begin to rest and gradually
shut down, enabling you to enter the stage of deep sleep, called non-REM
(non–rapid eye movement) or quiet sleep, because the eyes are quiet. You
are now in sound sleep. Your body is still, breathing is shallow and regular,
your muscles are loose, and you’re really zonked. After about an hour and a
half in the deep-sleep stage your brain again begins to arouse with
increasing mental activity from deep sleep into light sleep, or active sleep
(called REM because during this stage of sleep the eyes actually move
under the closed lids). During REM sleep we perform mental exercise, and
the higher brain centers don’t really sleep. You catch a few dreams, stir, turn
over, adjust the covers, perhaps even fully awaken to go to the bathroom,
return to bed, and descend back into deep sleep. This sleep cycle of light
and deep sleep continues every couple hours throughout the night so that a
typical adult may spend an average of about six hours in deep sleep and two
hours in light sleep. So you don’t sleep soundly all night even though you
may think you do.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Babies Sleep Differently

While adults can go directly from wakefulness into the state of deep sleep
rather quickly, babies can’t. They first go through a period of light sleep
before entering deep sleep. Let’s now put your baby to sleep.

Babies Enter Sleep Differently

It’s time for baby to go to bed. His eyelids droop, and he begins to nod off
in your arms. His eyes close completely, but his eyelids continue to flutter,
his breathing is still irregular, his hands and limbs are flexed, and he may
startle, twitch, and show fleeting smiles—called sleep grins. He may even
continue a flutterlike sucking. Just as you bend over to deposit the
“sleeping” baby in his crib and creep quietly away, baby awakens. That’s
because he wasn’t fully asleep in the first place. He was still in the state of
light sleep when you put him down.
Now, try again. Rock, feed, pace, or use your proven bedtime ritual, but
continue this ritual longer. Soon baby’s grimaces and twitches stop; his
breathing becomes more regular and shallow; his muscles completely relax.
His previously fisted hands unfold, and the arms and limbs dangle
weightlessly (the limp-limb sign of deep sleep). Now you can put baby

 down and sneak away, breathing a satisfying sigh of relief that finally baby
is asleep.
Why? Infants in the early months enter sleep through an initial period of
light sleep lasting around twenty minutes. Then they gradually enter deep
sleep, from which they are difficult to arouse. If you try to rush by putting
baby down during this initial light sleep period, he will usually awaken.
This fact of infant sleep accounts for the difficult-to-settle baby who “has to
be fully asleep before I can put him down.” In later months many babies
can enter deep sleep more quickly without first going through light sleep.
Learn to recognize your baby’s sleep stages. During deep sleep you can
move a sleeping baby from car seat to bed without baby awakening.
Lesson one in nighttime parenting:
Babies need to be parented to sleep, not just put to sleep.

Babies Have Shorter Sleep Cycles

Stand adoringly next to the bassinet or bed and watch your nearly
motionless baby in peaceful slumber. After about an hour she begins to
squirm. She tosses a bit, her eyelids flutter, her face muscles grimace, she
breathes irregularly, and her muscles tighten. Baby is reentering the phase
of light sleep, and during this vulnerable period many babies awaken if any
upsetting or uncomfortable stimulus occurs. You lay a comforting hand on
your baby’s back, sing a soothing lullaby, and over the next ten minutes

 baby drifts through this light sleep period and descends back into deep
sleep. For the rest of the night? Not yet!
Another hour passes and baby reenters light sleep, another vulnerable
period occurs and perhaps another night waking. Babies have shorter sleep
cycles than adults. In the early months, baby’s sleep cycles are shorter,
periods of light sleep occur more frequently, and the vulnerable period for
night waking occurs twice as often as for an adult, approximately every
hour. Most restless nights are due to difficulty getting back to sleep after
waking up during this vulnerable period. Some babies have trouble
reentering another stage of deep sleep.

Babies Don’t Sleep as Soundly as Adults

Not only do babies go to sleep differently and have shorter sleep cycles and
more arousal periods, they have twice as much light sleep as adults. This
hardly seems fair to parents tired from daylong baby care.
Lesson two in nighttime parenting:
Babies sleep the way they do—or don’t—because they are designed that
way.

OceanofPDF.com

 Survival Benefits

Suppose your baby slept like an adult. He could spend most of his night in
deep sleep with only a few vulnerable periods of night waking and would
resettle on his own after those. Sounds wonderful! Perhaps for you, but not
for baby. Suppose baby was cold and couldn’t awaken to signal his need for
warmth; suppose he was hungry but did not awaken to communicate his
need to eat. Suppose his nose was plugged and his breathing compromised,
but he did not awaken to signal the need for help. We believe that babies are
wired with sleep patterns to awaken easily in the early months when their
nighttime needs are most intense but their ability to communicate them is
most limited. Could this frequent waking be a built-in protective
mechanism against SIDS? Perhaps we shouldn’t be too quick to train it out
of baby.

OceanofPDF.com

 Developmental Benefits

Sleep researchers believe that light sleep is good for baby because it
provides mental exercise. Dreaming during light sleep provides visual
images for baby’s developing brain. This autostimulation during sleep
enhances brain development. One day as we explained the theory that light
sleep helps babies’ brains develop, a tired mother of a wakeful infant
chuckled and said, “If that’s true, my baby’s going to be very smart.”
But when will baby sleep through the night? The age at which babies
settle—meaning they go to sleep easily and stay asleep—varies widely
among babies. Some babies go to sleep easily but don’t stay asleep. Some
go to sleep with difficulty but will stay asleep. Other exhausting babies
neither want to go to sleep nor stay asleep.

TIRING FACTS OF INFANT SLEEP
Babies enter sleep through REM sleep; they need help to go to sleep.
Sleep cycles are shorter for babies than for adults, with more light than
deep sleep.
Babies have more vulnerable periods for night waking than adults;
they have difficulty getting back to sleep.
The medical definition of “sleeping through the night” is a five-hour
stretch.
Babies usually awaken two or three times a night from birth to six
months, once or twice from six months to one year, and may awaken
once a night from one to two years.* Some will wake more.

 Babies usually sleep fourteen to eighteen hours a day from birth to six
months, fourteen to sixteen hours from three to six months, and twelve
to fourteen hours from six months to two years.
Babies’ sleep habits are more determined by individual temperaments
than parents’ nighttime abilities. It’s not your fault baby wakes up.
Stuffing babies with solids at bedtime rarely helps them sleep longer.
It’s all right to sleep with baby in your bed. In fact, sharing sleep works
better than other arrangements for many families and may be more
“normal” than baby’s sleeping separately in a crib.
You cannot force sleep upon a baby. Creating a secure environment
that allows sleep to overtake baby is the best way to create long-term
healthy sleep attitudes. The frequent-waking stage will not last forever.
In the first three months babies’ sleep habits resemble their feedings:
small, frequent feedings, short, frequent naps. Tiny babies seldom sleep for
more than four-hour stretches without needing a feeding. They have little
respect for day or night schedules and usually sleep a total of fourteen to
eighteen hours a day.
From three to six months most babies begin to settle. They are awake for
longer stretches during the day, and some may sleep for five-hour stretches
at night. Expect at least one or two night wakings.
As baby gets older, periods of deep sleep lengthen, light sleep lessens,
the vulnerable periods for night waking decrease, and babies can enter deep
sleep more quickly. This is called sleep maturity, and the age varies at
which babies develop these adultlike sleep patterns.
Theoretically it sounds good, but why do they still wake up? Just as
baby’s brain is beginning to sleep better, the body wakes it up. Arousal
stimuli, such as colds and teething pain, become more frequent. As babies
go through major developmental milestones (sitting, crawling, walking, for

 example), they often awaken to practice their newly developing skills. Just
as baby begins to sleep through these nighttime warm-ups, other causes of
night waking, such as separation anxiety, remind you that parenting is an
around-the-clock job. While you never completely go off nighttime call,
expect night waking to lessen with time. Then a sibling arrives and
intensive nighttime parenting starts all over again.
Now that you are familiar with the way a baby’s sleep differs from your
own, here is a step-by-step approach that has evolved from the approach we
have taken with our eight little sleepers, and one that, in our experience in
counseling hundreds of parents, works—most of the time.

OceanofPDF.com

 STEP ONE: GIVE YOUR BABY THE BEST
SLEEP START
To begin, take a look at your attitude toward sleep.

OceanofPDF.com

 Develop a Nighttime-Parenting Mind-set

How do you regard a baby’s sleep? Do you look at night as a time of relief
from the constant attachment of baby during the day, a well-deserved baby
break, when you can disconnect from baby? Is “sleeping through the night”
at the top of your parent-achievement list? And if you are not rewarded with
a perfect sleeper, have you failed Parenting 101? If you answer yes to the
last three questions, consider another approach.
What you do with your baby at night is part of the whole parenting
package, an extension of an attitude that says, “During the day I want my
baby to feel close to me, to trust me. I want to carry these feelings of a
healthy attachment into the night. I don’t want my baby to feel disconnected
from me at night.” In other words, attachment is different at night than
during the day, but there is still an attachment. The nighttime mind-set we
want to steer you away from is that getting your baby to sleep through the
night requires a list of gadgets and insensitive techniques that “break” baby
of night waking. This is a short-term gain and possibly a long-term loss. In
breaking baby’s night waking, you may also break other, more fragile
connections with your baby.

OceanofPDF.com

 Develop a Nighttime-Parenting Style That Works for You

Having a baby opens the door to a barrage of “experts,” all advising you on
how to get your baby to sleep, and sleep through the night at all costs.
Because babies have varied temperaments, and families have varied
lifestyles, there is no right way to get a baby to sleep—only a right attitude
about sleep.
Every baby comes wired with an overall temperament that affects how
she sleeps. Every parent has a unique lifestyle and individual sleep habits
that must also be considered. Develop a nighttime-parenting style that fits
all of these individual needs. Try the approach that feels right for you, your
baby, and your lifestyle, and if it’s working, stick with it. If it’s not, be open
to trying other nighttime-parenting styles.

BEWARE OF SLEEP TRAINERS
Since the days when baby books found their way into bedrooms, a parade of
sleep trainers have all claimed magic formulas to get babies to sleep. Most
are just the old cry-it-out method in a new guise; few get to the real cause of
the restlessness.
Be discerning about using someone else’s “method” to get your baby to
sleep. Before trying any sleep-inducing program, you be the judge. Run
these schemes through your inner sensitivity scale. Weigh the pros and
cons. Select what best fits your own family situation and seems right to you,
eventually arriving at your own method.

 Good sleepers are partly born, partly made, never forced. We present
various options for nighttime parenting and take a balanced approach to
meeting the whole family’s nighttime needs. One or more of these
techniques will fit most families most of the time. Some parts of one
method may fit better at one stage of baby’s development and parents’
lifestyle; other nighttime styles fit better at other stages. Our only request:
Be open to trying different nighttime approaches to see which one fits the
sleep temperament of your baby and your lifestyle and sleep habits. Being
closed to any of the options may deprive you of the joys and benefits of
certain parts of nighttime parenting and lead to long-term unhealthy sleep
attitudes, and possibly long-term distancing between you and your child.

OceanofPDF.com

 The Attachment Style of Nighttime Parenting

The approach we have learned, by trial and error, that usually works for
most families is the attachment style of nighttime parenting. It is what we
used in our family, what we teach in our practice, and what experience,
science, and plain common sense seem to validate. It is not radical or
extreme; it’s fundamental and simple. The best things in life usually are.
The two elements of this style of nighttime parenting are (1) organizing and
mellowing your baby’s temperament during the day and (2) sleeping close
to your baby at night.

Restful Days Promote Sleepful Nights

Most sleep disturbances result from an overall disorganization. Newborns
are disorganized. Sleeping and feeding “schedules” are not in a newborn’s
initial plan. A baby’s physiological systems seem irregular, and this
disorganization lasts over a twenty-four-hour period. Organizing a baby
during the day helps baby become better organized at night. Here’s how to
do it.

 Feed on cue. Frequent cue feedings during the day tank up a baby,
promoting better sleep at night. Babies who are rigidly scheduled during the
day are more likely to become day sleepers and night feeders.
Wear baby during the day. Put your baby in a baby sling and carry your
baby a lot during the day. Proximity promotes frequent feeding, closeness
promotes calmness, and a calm baby by day is more likely to be a calm
baby at night (see here for the calming effects of babywearing). Your
daytime parenting style and its effects on baby’s daytime behavior carry
over into nighttime sleep habits. An in-arms baby in a responsive caregiving
environment learns trust and calmness. A less anxious baby during the day
becomes a less anxious baby at night.
The effects of daytime attachment parenting on nighttime sleep habits
are especially true for the baby who comes into this world fussy. These
babies are notoriously restless sleepers. Mellowing a baby’s fussy
tendencies during the day carries over into a mellower baby at night. In
essence, daytime attachment parenting gives baby the early message: There
is no need to fuss—day or night.
What’s in It for Parents?
Besides giving your baby a less anxious start by frequent feedings and
holding, daytime attachment parenting gives you a good nighttime start. By
interacting with your baby so frequently during feeding and wearing, you
become sensitive toward your baby. You begin to know your baby during

 the day, and this carries over into your nighttime sensitivity, helping you to
intuitively know: Where should baby sleep? How should I respond to her
cries? What is the best way to parent her to sleep? Almost every sleeptraining method is curiously silent on the topic “Your Baby’s Nighttime
Needs.” Attachment parenting helps you fill this gap.
Your daytime parenting style allows this connection to flow into a
nighttime connection. Sometime during the first month of attachment
parenting you will naturally develop a nighttime-parenting mind-set, and for
most parents that means sleeping close to their baby, not because they read
it in a book, but because it feels so right to them. Attachment parenting is,
after all, a continuum of life in the womb. As one mother put it: “Just
because my baby is now all of a sudden born doesn’t mean he should be
separate from me in the crib—I just can’t bring myself to put him in there.”
Where Should Baby Sleep?
Wherever all your family members sleep the best is the right arrangement
for you. Some babies sleep best in their parents’ bed; some sleep well in
their own crib in the parents’ bedroom; other families prefer encouraging
their baby to sleep in a separate room. Realistically, plan to juggle all these
sleeping arrangements as you come to know your baby’s nighttime
temperament and needs. Sharing sleep with your baby is a practice we
firmly believe in and highly recommend (see the detailed discussion
beginning here). The key to surviving night life with a new baby is to be
open to trying various nighttime-parenting styles and settling on one that

 works—and to be open to changing styles as your baby’s developmental
needs and your family situation change.

Sharing sleep is one way many parents respond to their baby’s nighttime
needs.

OceanofPDF.com

 STEP TWO: CONDITION YOUR BABY TO
SLEEP
We repeat: Sleep is not a state you can force your baby into. Sleep must
naturally overtake baby. Your role is to set the conditions that make sleep
attractive and to present cues that suggest to baby that sleep is expected.
Choose from the following sleep-tight tips those that are appropriate to your
baby’s age, stage of development, nighttime temperament, and your own
lifestyle and sleep habits. And remember: Which sleep tips work depends
on your baby’s temperament and stage of development. What doesn’t work
tonight may work next week.
We purposely omit what we call the “harden your heart” method, which
preaches, “Put your baby down to sleep awake in a crib in her own room
and let her cry herself to sleep so that she gets used to falling asleep by
herself and won’t always need to rely on you to get her back to sleep. When
she awakens, don’t go in to her. She will soon learn to put herself to sleep
and back to sleep.” We believe that, at least in the first six months, this
method is unwise; you run the risk of losing your baby’s trust, you may
become insensitive to your baby’s cries, and, in the case of infants with
persistent personalities, it usually doesn’t work.

 Many of the following sleep-conditioning tips would be absolutely
forbidden in the teach-your-baby-to-sleep-on-his-own books. How sad to
deny a mother these simple pleasures for the sake of expedience. How even
sadder to deny the baby valuable human touch in his journey to maturity.
How can the hands-off approach do anything but weaken your bond?

OceanofPDF.com

 Getting Baby to Fall Asleep

Parents often wear out before baby winds down. Here are ways to close
those little eyes.
Make sure daytime is peaceful. A peaceful daytime is likely to lead to a
restful night. Holding and soothing your baby a lot during the day mellows
your baby into an easier sleeper at night. If your baby has restless nights,
take inventory of unsettling circumstances that may be occuring during the
day. Are you too busy? Is the day care and day-care provider the right
match for your baby? Does your baby spend a lot of time being held and in
the arms of a nurturing caregiver, or is he more of a “crib baby” during the
day? We have noticed that babies who are carried in baby slings for several
hours during the day settle better at night. (See Chapter 14,
“Babywearing.”)
Set consistent nap routines. Pick out the times of the day when you are the
most tired, for example 11:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M. Lie down with your baby
at these times every day for about a week to get your baby used to a
daytime nap routine. Napping with your baby helps you get some muchneeded daytime rest rather than being tempted to “finally get something

 done” while baby is napping. Babies who have consistent nap routines
during the day are more likely to sleep longer stretches at night.
Set consistent bedtimes. The older the baby, the more desirable are
consistent bedtimes and rituals. Babies who have a reasonably consistent
bedtime usually sleep better. Because of modern lifestyles, rigid and early
bedtimes are not as common or realistic as they used to be. Consider busy
parents who often do not get home until six or seven o’clock in the evening.
This is prime time for a baby; don’t expect him to go right to sleep as soon
as you get home. By the time you get home from a busy day at work, father,
mother, or both may be eager for baby to go to bed early, rather than endure
spending an evening with a cranky baby. If one or both parents are
accustomed to arriving home late, then a later bedtime is more practical and
realistic. In this situation give your baby a later afternoon nap so that baby
is well rested during prime evening time with the busy parents.
Enjoy predictable bedtime rituals. Familiar bedtime rituals set your baby
up for sleep. The sequence of a warm bath, rocking, nursing, lullabies, and
so on, set baby up to expect sleep to follow. Capitalize on a principle of
early infant development known as patterns of association. Baby’s
developing brain is like a computer, storing thousands of sequences that
become patterns. When a baby clicks into the early part of a bedtime
routine, she is programmed for the rest of the pattern that ends with drifting
off to sleep.

 Calm your baby down. A soothing massage or a warm bath is a solution
for relaxing tense muscles and busy minds. (See infant-massage techniques,
here, and bathing techniques, here.) If your baby doesn’t enjoy baths, or
finds them stimulating rather than calming, bathe earlier in the day.
Wear your baby down. This technique worked best for our babies,
especially one who was in high gear most of the day and had difficulty
winding down. (See techniques for wearing down, here.)
Nurse your baby down. Going off to sleep at mother’s breast is at the top
of the natural-sleep-inducer list. Nestle up next to your baby and breastfeed
him off to sleep. The smooth continuum from warm bath to warm arms to
warm breast to warm bed usually leads to sleep. And bottlefed babies can
also be nursed down to sleep.
Father your baby down. As stated earlier, “nursing” implies not only
breastfeeding. Fathers can nurse down by their own uniquely male ways of
soothing baby. It is wise for baby to get used to the sleep-inducing styles of
both mother and father. (See suggestions for practical ways that fathers can
comfort babies using the warm fuzzy, here, and our favorite, the neck
nestle, here.)
Nestle your baby down. Your baby may be almost ready to fall asleep, but
just doesn’t want to be put down to sleep alone. After rocking, wearing, or
feeding baby to sleep in your arms, lie down on your bed with your sleeping

 baby and nestle close until you are certain baby is sound asleep (or you are
sound asleep). We call this the “teddy-bear snuggle.”

The neck nestle is a popular “fathering down” technique.

Rock your baby down. A bedside rocking chair is near the top of your
bedroom furniture list. Treasure these moments of rocking to sleep, as they
are unique to the early years and soon pass.
Create a bed on wheels. Suppose you’ve tried everything. You are ready
for bed, or are ready for your baby to go to bed, but she is not able to wind
down. As a last resort put your baby in a car seat and drive while she falls
asleep. Nonstop motion is the quickest sleep inducer. We call this “freeway
fathering”; the before-bed ritual is especially practical for nighttime

 fathering and gives a tired mother a baby break. We also used this driving
time for much-needed communication between ourselves as baby nodded
off to sleep from the constant motion and hum of the car engine. When you
return home and notice that baby is in a deep sleep, don’t remove her
immediately from the car seat or she will probably awaken. Carry the baby
car seat into your bedroom and let baby remain in the seat as her bed. Or if
baby is in a very deep sleep (look for the limp-limb sign), you might be able
to remove her from the car seat and place her in her own bed without her
fully awakening.
Try a mechanical mother. Gadgets to put and keep baby asleep are big
business. Tired parents pay high prices for a good night’s sleep. It’s all right
to use these as relief when the main comforter wears out, but a steady diet
of these artificial sleep inducers may be unhealthy. One newspaper article
extolled the sleep-tight virtues of a teddy bear, with a tape player in his
stuffing, that sang or made breathing sounds. Baby could snuggle up to the
singing, breathing, synthetic bear. Personally, we were not keen on our
babies going to sleep to someone else’s canned voice. Why not use the real
parent?
A swing is an effective way to lull baby to sleep when you need an
occassional break; avoid creating a dependency on it.

WATCH FOR THE LIMP-LIMB SIGN. All of these tips for getting baby
down will be thwarted if you try to sneak away while baby is still in the

 state of light sleep. Watch for a motionless face and dangling limbs, signs
that your baby has entered the stage of deep sleep, and you can safely
deposit your sleeping beauty into his or her nest and creep away. (See the
illustration here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Getting Baby to Stay Asleep

Now that your baby is finally asleep, here’s how to keep him that way.
Tank up baby during the day. Help baby learn that daytime is for eating
and nighttime is for sleeping. Some older infants are so busy playing during
the day that they forget to eat and make up for it during the night by waking
frequently to feed. To reverse this habit, feed your baby at least every two to
three hours during the day to cluster baby’s feedings during the waking
hours.
Tank up baby before bed. Before you go to bed, or upon baby’s first night
waking, attempt a full feeding; otherwise, some babies, especially breastfed
infants, enjoy nibbling all night.
Position baby for safe sleeping. Unless instructed otherwise by your
baby’s health care provider, place your baby down to sleep on her back for
at least the first nine months. While babies are thought to sleep longer on
their tummies, new insights into safe sleeping patterns have revealed that
sleeping longer may not mean sleeping safer. (For an explanation, see “Put
Baby to Sleep on His Back,” here.)

 Dress baby for sleep. Experiment with different ways of dressing your
newborn at bedtime to see which coverings help your baby settle best.
Many allergy-prone babies sleep better in 100 percent cotton sleepwear.
Moving beds. Some babies do not stay asleep after being rocked to sleep in
a rhythmic motion and then put down on a static bed. The bed needs to
continue moving. This is why the time-honored cradle works. After rocking
your baby to sleep in your arms or in a chair, gently nestle your baby in the
cradle and immediately continue your previous rocking motion at around
sixty beats per minute, the heartbeat rhythm that your baby grew
accustomed to in the womb. In the early months some babies use both the
cradle and the parents’ bed, alternating between the two in settling. Often
parents, intending to get a crib “one of these days,” never get around to the
purchase.
Laying on of hands. Ever notice that as soon as you release your sleeping
baby onto her bed she immediately awakens, and you start the whole ritual
all over? Or you may notice that as soon as you place your baby into the
crib, she squirms and bobs her head up and down. Your baby is giving you
the signal that she is not in deep enough sleep to be left alone and is not
ready to disconnect completely from your touch. Put one hand on the back
of your baby’s head and another on your baby’s back. The warmth of a
secure hand may be the added touch that is needed to help baby give up her
silent protest and nod off to sleep. To add the finishing touches to this sleepinducing ritual, pat your baby’s back or bottom rhythmically at sixty beats a

 minute. Then remove your hands gradually, first one, then the other, easing
the pressure slowly so not to startle baby awake. When laying hands on our
babies we found it better to remove a hand very gradually, even allowing it
to hover a bit above baby’s body surface before backing off. Sometimes
fathers, perhaps because they have larger hands, are more successful in this
hands-on sleep-keeping ritual.
Leave a little bit of mother behind. If your baby is particularly separation
sensitive, leave a little bit of yourself in baby’s bed. One mother noticed
that her baby settled better when she left her breast pad in the cradle.
Another mother left a continuous tape recording of herself singing a
bedtime lullaby.
Honor your partner with his share of nighttime parenting. It’s important
for baby to get used to father’s ways of comforting and putting him to sleep
(and back to sleep). Otherwise, mother burns out. A father’s participation in
nighttime parenting is especially important for the breastfeeding infant who
assumes that “mom’s diner” is open all night. (For suggestions, see “The
Babywearing Father,” here, and “Wearing Down to Sleep,” here.)
A quiet place to sleep. Most babies have an amazing ability to block out
disturbing noises, so you don’t have to tiptoe around and create a noiseless
sleeping environment. Our first baby slept in a cradle next to our study. He
slumbered through telephone rings, study noises, music, and all the ambient
sounds of student life. Some babies startle easily at sudden noises and need

 a quieter sleeping environment. Oil the joints and springs of a squeaky crib.
Put out the dog—before it barks. Take the phone off the hook or turn off the
ringer. If guests are arriving, put a sign on the door: “Please enter quietly,
baby is sleeping.”
Get to baby quickly. Determine what your baby’s nighttime temperament
is. Is your baby a born self-soother who awakens, whimpers, squirms, and
then resettles without bothering anybody? Or is your baby not a selfsoother, who, if not promptly attended to, fully awakens, becomes angry,
and is difficult to resettle? If you get to your baby quickly before he
completely wakes up, you may be able to settle him back to sleep with a
quick laying on of hands, a cozy cuddle, or a warm nurse. If you parent
your baby through this vulnerable period for night waking, you can often
prevent him from waking up completely.
A full tummy, but not too full. You may be tempted to feed your baby a
glob of cereal in hopes that a before-bed stuffing will keep him asleep.
Studies comparing babies given cereal before bed and those given milk
alone showed no difference in night waking. But, for tired parents, it’s
worth a try. Babies whose tummies are either too empty or too full will be
more restless. Breastfeeding or a bottle of formula before you go to bed is
usually enough to satisfy the infant. A glass of milk, a bowl of cut-up fruit,
or a nutritious cookie is a good bedtime snack for the toddler.

SOUNDS TO SLEEP BY

 Your baby has not exactly had the quietest sleeping environment during her
nine months in utero. Baby may still need some background music to settle.
So it is natural for babies to settle best with sounds that remind baby of the
womb, such as
running water from a nearby faucet or shower
a bubbling fish tank
recordings of mother’s heartbeat and other womb sounds
a loudly ticking clock
a metronome set at sixty beats per minute
CDs of waterfalls or ocean sounds
noisemaking systems that simulate these sounds
Other sounds that settle a restless baby are known as white noise—
sounds that are repetitive, without meaning, that lull baby to sleep. Some
producers of white noise are a vacuum cleaner, a fan or an air conditioner,
and a dishwasher. We have known mothers who have worn out several
vacuum cleaners during the course of the first year of getting their baby to
sleep. (One finally realized she could accomplish the same result by taperecording the vacuum cleaner sound.) Wearing your baby in a sling while
vacuuming may be a winning combination. Some sensitive babies, on the
other hand, startle at the sound of a vacuum cleaner.
You can also try continuous-play recordings. Make your own medleys of
sleep-inducing sounds and songs that work. Lullabies of your own voice are
at the top of the list.
In seeking out sleep-best music, remember that sleeping babies have
selective musical tastes. Choose a medley of tunes that both soothe your
baby and are easy listening to your ears. Babies settle better with classical
music that has slowly rising and falling tempos, such as Ravel, Mozart, and
Vivaldi (also Dvo ák, Debussy, Bach, and Haydn). Babies prefer music that
is simple and consistent, such as flute and classical guitar. Turbulent,
nonrhythmic rock music is a proven night waker. Music boxes or musical
mobiles with lullabies, such as Brahms, are other sounds that soothe. A
relaxing and sleep-inducing CD is Giver of Peace by Jason and Nolan
Livesay, available at iTunes.

 OceanofPDF.com

 STEP THREE: LESSEN CONDITIONS THAT
CAUSE NIGHT WAKING
While some night waking is inevitable and the result of the temperament
and developmental stage of your baby, there are many causes of disturbed
sleep over which you do have some control.

OceanofPDF.com

 Physical Causes

Teething pain. Even though you may not yet be able to feel baby’s teeth,
teething discomfort may start as early as three months and continue off and
on all the way through the two-year molars. A wet bed sheet under baby’s
head, a telltale drool rash on the cheeks and chin, swollen and tender gums,
and a slight fever are clues that teething is the nighttime culprit. What to
do? With

your

doctor’s

permission,

give

appropriate

doses

of

acetaminophen or ibuprofen (see here) just before parenting your baby to
sleep and again during the night if baby awakens.
Wet or soiled diapers. Some babies are bothered by wet diapers at night;
most are not. If your baby sleeps through wet diapers, there is no need to
awaken her for a change—unless you’re treating a persistent diaper rash.
Nighttime bowel movements necessitate a change. Here’s a nighttime
changing tip: If possible, change the diapers just before a feeding, as baby is
likely to fall asleep during or after feeding. Some breastfed babies,
however, have a bowel movement during or immediately after a feeding
and will need changing again. If you are using cloth diapers, putting two or
three diapers on your baby before bedtime will decrease the sensation of
wetness.

 Irritating sleepwear. Some babies cannot settle in synthetic sleepwear. A
mother in our practice went through our whole checklist of night-waking
causes (see here) until she discovered her baby was sensitive to polyester
sleepers. Once she changed to 100 percent cotton clothing, her baby slept
better. Besides being restless, some babies show skin allergies to new
clothing, detergents, and fabric softeners by breaking out in a rash. Organic
cotton sleepwear may be the answer.
Hunger. Tiny babies have tiny tummies, about the size of their tiny fists. A
baby’s digestive system was designed for small, frequent feedings, so
expect your baby to need a feeding at least every three to four hours during
the night for the first few months. As they grow older, babies may be so
busy playing they forget to eat. To lessen nighttime hunger, tank up your
baby with frequent daytime feedings.
Stuffy nose. In the early months babies need clear nasal passages to
breathe. Later they can alternatively breathe through their mouth if their
nose is blocked. Newborns are especially restless if their nose is congested.
To deal with this, first clear the air (see “Environmental Causes,” below).
Next, to unstuff baby’s nasal passages, see the suggestions here and here.
Baby too hot or too cold. Restless sleeping may be a sign that your baby is
too hot or too cold. See here for tips on how to dress your baby at night.

OceanofPDF.com

 Environmental Causes

Fluctuating temperature and humidity. Provide a room temperature and
relative humidity conducive to sleeping. In the early weeks, this means a
consistent temperature and humidity. See here for a discussion of how to
maintain the proper sleeping environment in baby’s bedroom.
Airborne irritants. Environmental irritants may cause congested breathing
passages and awaken baby. Common household examples are cigarette
smoke, baby powder, paint fumes, perfumes, hair spray, animal dander
(keep animals out of an allergic child’s bedroom), plants, clothing
(especially wool), stuffed animals, dust from a bed canopy, feather pillows,
blankets, and fuzzy toys that collect lint and dust. If your baby consistently
awakens with a stuffy nose, suspect irritants or allergens in the bedroom.
(See here for suggestions on allergyproofing a bedroom.)
A cold bed. Placing a warm baby on cold sheets is a guaranteed night
waker. Flannel sheets in cold weather or a warm body preceding baby
provide a toasty bed.

Dr. Bob notes: I used to lie down in our bed to warm it up for ten minutes
before Cheryl brought our sleeping baby in.

 Unfamiliar sounds. A startling sound, especially a sudden, loud, unfamiliar
noise, is likely to awaken a sleeping baby, particularly if it occurs during
light sleep or during the vulnerable period for night waking, the transition
from deep to light sleep. Don’t feel you have to hush-hush and tiptoe
around a deeply sleeping baby. In fact, consistent, familiar, womblike
sounds may lull a baby to sleep. (See “Sounds to Sleep By,” here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Hidden Medical Causes

Most babies wake up more frequently when sick, while some take
advantage of the healing effects of sleep and sleep more during illnesses. If
your baby is not only waking up frequently, but also seems to hurt and wake
up in pain, consider a medical cause. Here are some of the common medical
causes of painful night waking as well as some hidden causes of internal
irritation that can awaken baby.
Gastroesophageal reflux. See here for a full discussion of this most
common medical cause of “hurting baby.”

WHEN TO SUSPECT A MEDICAL CAUSE
Suspect a medical cause of night waking if
baby awakens with sudden colicky-type abdominal pains
a good sleeper suddenly becomes a restless sleeper
baby has not slept well since birth
there are other signs or symptoms of illness
baby cries inconsolably
your intuition tells you something’s wrong
no other cause is apparent

 Colds. A baby with a cold awakens because of the congestion that blocks
his breathing passages and the general discomfort that comes from colds.
(See here for the general treatment of colds, particularly nighttime
remedies.)
Ear infections. An ear infection is a painful cause of night waking. Suspect
an ear infection as a cause of nighttime restlessness when the following
occur:

Your baby’s sleeping patterns change from
sleeping well to restlessness and waking during a
cold.
Your baby has a cold, and the discharge from her
nose changes from clear and watery to thick and
yellow, and the cold is accompanied by yellow
drainage from baby’s eyes.
For more about ear infections, see here.
Fever. Many germs produce a higher fever at night than during the day. If
your child is ill during the day but does not have much of a daytime fever
(yet he spiked a fever on previous nights), it is still wise to give your baby
the appropriate dose of fever-lowering medicine before bedtime in
anticipation of the fever going up at night, even though he may appear to
have a normal temperature before going to bed. It is seldom necessary to

 awaken a sleeping child to take his temperature; just feel or kiss his
forehead. Unless advised by your doctor, it is usually unnecessary to
awaken a sleeping feverish baby to administer fever-lowering medicine.
Allergies and the resulting intestinal discomfort. Food allergies and their
effects can be hidden causes of frequent night waking. Food allergies head
the list. Suspect a food or milk allergy as the nighttime culprit in the
following situations:

Baby’s sleep is restless most of the night.
Baby awakens with sudden, colicky pains, and
you lay hands on a tense, gas-filled abdomen.
Baby shows other signs of allergies: daytime
colic, rashes, nasal congestion.
Baby may be allergic to the cow’s milk the breastfeeding mother drinks
and may wake up more frequently as a result. (If you suspect a food or milk
allergy, follow the elimination diet suggestions outlined here.)
Pinworms. Common residents in many children’s intestines, pinworms
look like tiny pieces of white thread about

inch long and may produce

night waking in the older infant and child. Here’s how these little parasites
behave in your baby’s intestines to cause night waking: The pregnant
female travels down the intestines and out the rectum to lay her eggs,
usually at night. This activity around the rectum causes intense itching that

 often awakens the child to scratch the egg-infested area around the anus,
buttocks, and vagina. These eggs are picked up under the fingernails and
transmitted to the child’s mouth, to other children, or to other members of
the household. The swallowed eggs then hatch in the intestines, mature,
mate, and repeat the life reproductive cycle.
Here are clues for nighttime worms:

itching and scratch marks around your baby’s
anus
vaginal irritation and/or frequent urinary tract
infections in girls
other members of the family with confirmed
pinworms
worms seen by you at night
Pinworms may cause no symptoms or may be a painful, itching
nuisance. If you suspect but can’t confirm pinworms, here’s how to tell: In
the dark, spread your child’s buttocks apart and shine a flashlight on the
anus. If you see the tiny creatures, don’t panic. A middle-of-the-night call to
your doctor is not warranted; the worms can wait until morning. Sometimes
you know they’re there, but you can’t see them. Place a piece of tape, sticky
side out, on a Popsicle stick or a tongue depressor and capture the eggs by
pressing the sticky side of the tape against the anus at night. The tape test
may also be performed immediately when your child awakens, before a

 bath or bowel movement. Take the tape to your doctor or a laboratory where
it can be examined under a microscope for pinworm eggs, and the condition
can then be appropriately treated.
Urinary tract infections. Any baby who suffers from frequent night
waking, especially if accompanied by signs of poor growth, vomiting, and
unexplained fevers, and who is not thriving well, should be evaluated for a
possible urinary tract infection.
Sensory processing disorder (SPD). A recently recognized cause of
frequent night waking is SPD. In this developmental disorder, a baby’s
mind doesn’t easily relax and succumb to the comforting sensations of
being rocked, nursed, or snuggled down to sleep, and the warmth and
comfort of clothing, blankets, sheets, and a soft bed are irritating to baby’s
sensory system. Instead of enjoying long periods of soothing sleep, baby
tosses and turns, fidgets, squirms, and wakes frequently throughout the
night. If evaluation and treatment of other medical causes of night waking
don’t bring relief, consider SPD. See here for more information on
diagnosis and treatment.
While it is true that night waking is more commonly due to behavioral
causes than medical causes, consider the preceding hidden medical reasons
for night waking. We have seen many babies who were too quickly assumed
to have poor sleep habits and who were victims of the unsuccessful cry-itout method who turned out to have one or more of the above medical

 reasons for night waking, which subsided once the cause was found and
treated. Like fever and pain, night waking should be considered a symptom
that needs the right diagnosis and treatment.

OceanofPDF.com

 Developmental Causes

Expect the previously steady sleeper to begin night waking while going
through a major developmental milestone, such as sitting up alone,
crawling, and walking. You may be summoned to your baby’s bed to find he
has crawled to the side of the crib, pulled himself up, but is left standing
and doesn’t know how to get down, or is sleepwalking around the crib.
Sometimes the beginning sleepwalker will sit up, half-asleep, then topple
over to a rude awakening.
What is the reason for these developmental night nuisances? Probably,
baby in some way “dreams” about his daytime accomplishments and tries to
practice them at night while partially asleep. Three A.M. is no time to show
off his new skills, and an appreciative audience is unlikely. If you find your
baby sitting up in bed half-asleep but on the verge of toppling over, gently
reposition her into her favorite sleeping posture before she fully awakens. If
baby is disoriented and upset, comfort and resettle her to sleep.
Separation anxiety is another developmental reason for night waking.
The eight-to-twelve-month-old, who was previously such a good sleeper,
now awakens frequently at night and clings more frequently to you during
the day. We believe this curious developmental phenomenon occurs because
baby’s body now tells him he has the capability to move away from mother
and father, but his mind says, “You need to stay close.” The normal daytime

 clinginess carries over into nighttime closeness as baby wakes up to connect
with home base. (See discussion of separation anxiety, here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Emotional Causes

Ever had a stressful day followed by a restless night? Babies do, too. If your
baby has a close attachment to you, and there’s an overall family closeness,
expect sleep disturbances when this harmony is interrupted by events such
as separation, divorce, family strife, and hospitalization. Expect more night
waking when your family’s usual routines are upset, as during a move. If
you are too busy during the day, expect baby to awaken for play and
attention at night. If you and your baby have a close attachment, expect her
to share your emotions. If you are upset, depressed, or wakeful yourself,
expect similar emotional and sleep disturbances in your baby. As one
mother in our practice put it, “When I’ve had a bad day and am restless at
night, so is my baby. When I get hold of myself and am more calm during
the day, my baby sleeps better.”

OceanofPDF.com

 Temperament and Sleep

You’re among other new mothers all bragging about how “good” their
babies are. The loaded question arises, “Is your baby sleeping through the
night?” Not wanting to appear left out of this restful circle you hedge a
feeble, “Well, almost.” Your misery wanted some company, but all you got
was a roomful of perfect mothers with perfect sleepers. Don’t lose any more
sleep over your friends’ good babies. The goodness of babies’ sleep is not a
measure of good mothering. Besides, they’re likely to be exaggerating their
babies’ nighttime goodness anyhow. Two mothers may be employing the
same parenting style: One has a night waker; one doesn’t. You may be
blessed with a high-need baby (whom you will meet in the next chapter)
who carries his daytime temperament into his night-waking habits. No two
babies look the same, eat the same, or sleep the same. Babies awaken
because of their temperaments, not because of your parenting abilities.

OceanofPDF.com

 SLEEPING WITH YOUR BABY—YES? NO?
SOMETIMES?
Is it all right to let your baby sleep in your bed? Yes! We are astonished how
many baby books flatly put thumbs down on this most time-tested universal
sleeping arrangement. Are they also against motherhood and apple pie?
How dare self-proclaimed baby experts discourage what science is proving
and veteran parents have long known—most babies and mothers sleep
better together. Sleep sharing isn’t for every family, and you are not less of
a parent if you don’t sleep with your baby. We simply want to validate this
nighttime parenting practice as a healthy option for many families.
Our (Dr. Bill and Martha’s) first three children slept in cribs. We were
young parents, and all our friends’ babies slept in cribs, so we joined the
crib-and-cradle set. They slept fine, and we had no reason to consider any
other sleeping arrangement. Then came our fourth baby, Hayden (you will
meet this special child in the next chapter), who broadened our previously
narrow view of nighttime parenting. In the early weeks and months Hayden
slept in a cradle next to our bed. Around six months we moved her into a
crib on the other side of our room. She began to awaken every hour each
night. Martha would breastfeed and comfort her back to sleep, only to be
summoned again by an anxious crib baby’s cry. Finally out of sheer

 exhaustion one night, rather than Hayden’s being dutifully returned to her
crib, Martha and Hayden fell asleep together in our bed. Both awoke
refreshed the next morning. Same routine the next few nights. Hayden was
telling us she needed to sleep next to us. I consulted all the baby books. Big
mistake. They all said no. Martha said, “I don’t care what the books say, I’m
tired, I need some sleep, and it works.”
At this time we were writing our first book, Creative Parenting, in
which we were stressing this point: Parents, don’t be afraid to listen to your
baby. Our own advice hit home. Hayden was telling us her nighttime needs,
and we listened. She remained in our bed for the next two years, after which
she gradually shifted to her own bed to sleep comfortably on her own.
Then we began to study why sleeping with babies works. At first we
thought we were doing something unusual, until we surveyed other parents.
Many others also slept with their babies; they just didn’t tell their doctors or
relatives about it. One evening we were at a party, and the subject of sleep
(or a lack of it) came up. We confided (in a whisper), “We sleep with our
baby.” Our listener smiled, looked around to be sure no one could hear her,
and said, “Me, too.” Why should parents have to hide this beautiful style of
nighttime parenting? That just doesn’t make sense.
We initially had to get over all those warnings about manipulation and
terminal nighttime dependency. You know, the long litany of you’ll-be-sorry
reasons. Well, we are not sorry; we’re happy. Hayden opened up a whole
wonderful nighttime world for us that we now want to share with you.

OceanofPDF.com

 What to Call It

Sleeping with your baby has various labels: “Co-sleeping” sounds like
something adults do, yet this seems to be the most popular term. The
“family bed” conjures up visions of lots of kids squeezed into bed and dad
somewhere on the couch or floor. We prefer to call this arrangement sharing
sleep, because you share, as you will see, more than just bed space. You
share sleep cycles, nighttime emotions, and lots of other good things that
occur between persons in nighttime touch.
First, sharing sleep is more than an issue of where baby sleeps. It is a
mind-set—a nighttime-parenting style that implies parents are open to
trying various sleeping approaches and settling upon one that works for that
stage of baby’s development and parents’ lifestyle. They are also flexible
enough to shift to another nighttime parenting style as circumstances
change. Every parent goes through nocturnal juggling acts until settling on a
sleeping arrangement that works. Sharing sleep reflects an attitude of
acceptance of your child as a little person with big needs. Your infant trusts
that you, his parents, will continually be available during the night, just as
you are during the day. Sharing sleep also requires that you trust your own
intuition that you have made the best decision for yourselves and your baby.

OceanofPDF.com

 Why Sleep Sharing Works

Babies go to sleep better. Especially in the early months, babies enter sleep
via the light sleep stage, in which they need parenting to sleep, not just
putting to sleep. Being held by, or lying down with, a familiar person in a
familiar bed winds baby down more easily. Baby clicks into a familiar
mental picture he has learned to love and trust. Being parented to sleep in
the arms of father or on the breasts of mother creates a healthy go-to-sleep
attitude. Baby learns not to resent going to sleep and not to fear staying
asleep.
Babies stay asleep better. Put yourself in the sleep pattern of baby. As baby
passes from deep sleep into light sleep, he enters a vulnerable period for
night waking, a transition state that may occur as often as every hour and
from which it is difficult for baby to resettle on his own into a deep sleep.
You are a familiar attachment person whom baby can touch, smell, and
hear. Your presence conveys an “It’s okay to go back to sleep” message.
Feeling no worry, baby peacefully drifts through this vulnerable period of
night waking and reenters deep sleep. If baby does awaken, she is
sometimes able to resettle herself because you are right there. A familiar
touch, perhaps a few minutes’ feed, and you comfort baby back into deep
sleep without either member of the sleep-sharing pair fully awakening.

 Mothers stay asleep better. Mothers in our survey who shared sleep with
their babies revealed they felt more rested the next day, although they might
have awakened during the night to comfort their babies. These mothers and
babies are in nighttime harmony. Baby’s and mother’s internal clocks and
sleep cycles are in sync with each other. Frequently a mother notices, “I
automatically awaken seconds before my baby does. When she starts to
squirm I lay a comforting hand on her and she drifts back to sleep.
Sometimes I do this automatically and I don’t even wake up all the way.”
Not all mothers achieve this perfect nighttime harmony, but this is the best
of both nighttime worlds: a full night’s sleep and a contented baby.
Contrast this nighttime harmony with the crib-and-nursery scene. The
separate sleeper awakens—alone. He is out of touch. First a squirm and a
whimper. Still out of touch. Separation anxiety sets in, and baby cries. In
time, baby’s nighttime cries will awaken mom. You jump up, stagger down
the hall, and the night-comforting scene turns into a major operation. By the
time you finally reach baby, his cries have escalated. He’s wide-awake and
angry. You’re wide-awake and angry. The comfort that follows becomes a
reluctant duty rather than an automatic response. It takes longer to resettle a
crying, angry baby than it does a half-asleep baby, but finally baby is
resettled in the crib. Now you’re too wide-awake and upset to resettle
easily. Also, because of long-distance sleeping, it is unlikely that mother’s
and baby’s sleep cycles are in harmony. If baby awakened when entering
light sleep but mother was still in deep sleep, out-of-sync night waking
results. Being awakened from a state of deep sleep to attend a hungry baby

 is what makes nighttime parenting unattractive and leads to sleep-deprived
mothers and fathers.
Breastfeeding is easier. Most veteran breastfeeding mothers have, for
survival,

learned

that

sharing

sleep

makes

breastfeeding

easier.

Breastfeeding mothers find it easier than bottlefeeding mothers to get their
sleep cycles in sync with their babies. They often wake up just before the
babies awaken for a feeding. By being there and anticipating the feeding,
mother can breastfeed baby back to a deep sleep before baby (and often
mother) fully awakens.
A mother who had achieved nighttime-nursing harmony with her baby
shared the following story with us: “About thirty seconds before my baby
wakes up for a feeding, my sleep seems to lighten and I almost wake up. By
being able to anticipate his feeding, I usually can start breastfeeding him
just as he begins to squirm and reach for the nipple. Getting him to suck
immediately keeps him from fully waking up, and then we both drift back
into a deep sleep right after feeding.” In this situation baby breastfeeds
through the vulnerable period for awakening and then reenters the state of
deep sleep. What might have happened if the mother and baby had not been
within touching distance? The baby would have awakened in another room
and cried loudly to signify his needs. By the time mother reached him, both
mother and baby would be wide-awake and have difficulty settling back to
sleep. (Note: There is no need to roll baby across your body to feed from
the other breast. Instead, turn your upper shoulder toward baby to adjust the
level of the upper breast.)

 Mothers who experience daytime breastfeeding difficulties report that
breastfeeding becomes easier when they sleep next to their babies at night
and lie down with baby and nap nurse during the day. We believe baby
senses that mother is more relaxed, and her milk-producing hormones work
better when she is relaxed or sleeping. Mothers sometimes relate how their
babies have gotten into the frustrating habit of wanting to breastfeed only
when lying down with them. In counseling, we encourage these mothers to
take seriously what their babies are communicating by this behavior, the
babies’ sensitivity to tension. Somehow babies know that if they can get
their mothers to lie down, the milk flows better and the “ambience of the
restaurant” is conducive to good digestion.
Sleep sharing fits in with busy lifestyles. Sharing sleep is even more
relevant for today’s lifestyles. As more and more mothers, of necessity, are
separated from their baby during the day, sleeping with their baby allows
them to be reunited at night. In counseling mothers who plan to go back to
work within a few months of their baby’s birth, we encourage them to
consider sleeping with baby. This arrangement gives the baby and mother
the closeness at night that they miss during the day. As an added benefit, the
relaxing hormones produced when mother night nurses help her wind down
from a busy day and enjoy a better night’s sleep (see “Waking Up After
Mother’s Return to Work,” here).
Slow starters can catch up. Sharing sleep is particularly valuable for the
mother-baby pair who has had a slow start, and was unable to bond in the

 early newborn period because of a situation such as prematurity or another
medical condition that separated mother and baby. Sharing sleep allows
catch-up bonding. Also, sleep sharing helps parents, especially mothers,
who have difficulty getting into parenting if the instinctive mothering
feelings have been slow to come. Here’s why: Mothering hormones may be
slower to develop for some moms. Three conditions increase mothering
hormones: sleeping, touching baby, and breastfeeding. A mother takes
advantage of all three of these conditions when sleeping with her baby.
Babies thrive. Over our years of observing all the good things that happen
to babies when they share sleep with their parents, one medical benefit
stands out—these babies thrive. In fact, one of the oldest “treatments” for
the slow-weight-gaining baby is taking baby to bed and breastfeeding. The
health benefits of sharing sleep have been recognized for many years. A
child-care book written in 1840, Management of Infancy, by A. Combe,
states that “there can scarcely be a doubt that at least during the first four
weeks and during winter and early spring a child will thrive better if
allowed to sleep beside its mother and cherished by her warmth than if
placed in a separate bed.”
Perhaps someday science will confirm what experienced baby watchers
have long known: Something good and healthful happens to babies (and
parents) when they share sleep.

 SPECIAL NOTE: The important issue in nighttime parenting is not where
your baby sleeps but how responsive you are to baby’s nighttime needs and
how open you are to finding the best sleeping arrangement for your family.

OceanofPDF.com

 Finding a Middle Ground When Bed Sharing Doesn’t Work

No one sleeping arrangement works for all families all the time. Sleep
sharing may not work if it is started too late. Parents have tried everything,
and baby still sleeps poorly. Reluctantly, months later, they take baby into
their bed, but they really don’t want him there. Also, if parents and baby
have not begun life in the bed together, they are not used to each other’s
presence and their sleep cycles are not in harmony. They may wake up
more.

 A co-sleeper allows parents and baby to have their own bed space and still
be within touching distance of each other.
Some babies and parents seem to have a critical sleeping distance; too
far or too close increases their night waking. In the case where sleeping too
close causes night waking in baby or parents, consider a co-sleeper, a
criblike bed that attaches safely and securely to the parents’ bed. A bedside
co-sleeper allows you and baby to have your own sleeping space, yet it
enables you to be within arm’s reach of your baby for nighttime nursing and
comforting. The high walls on three sides protect baby and the lowered rail
is at the same height as the adult bed mattress, which facilitates easy access
to baby. (For the best co-sleepers, see armsreach.com or call (800) 954–
9353.)

OceanofPDF.com

 HANDLING WORRIES AND CRITICISMS OF
SLEEPING WITH YOUR BABY
Our longstanding advocacy of sleep sharing as an important aspect of
nighttime parenting has made us aware of many of the questions about and
criticisms of this approach. Here are some of the questions we most
frequently encounter.

OceanofPDF.com

 Fear of Dependency

I’ve heard that once baby gets in the habit, he’ll never be able to go to
sleep on his own. Am I creating a bad habit?
While initially this seems true, eventually your child will be able to go to
sleep and stay asleep without your help. You’re creating a good habit. The
real question is, Which do you think your baby prefers: to drift off to sleep
peacefully at his mother’s breast or in his father’s arms, or to soothe himself
to sleep with a tasteless, emotionless rubber pacifier? The choice seems
obvious, although a few babies, from the very beginning, prefer to approach
sleep “Lone Ranger” style.
Consider the long-range benefits of sleeping together. One of the most
precious gifts you can give your child is a vivid memory of happy
childhood attachments. What a beautiful memory it is for a child to recall
how he was parented to sleep in the arms of his mother or father or to recall
how he awakened in the mornings surrounded by people he loved rather
than in his private room in a wooden cage, peering out through bars. We
will always remember how happy our children were when they awakened.
Every time we looked over at our baby sleeping next to us, we saw a

 contented look on her face that said, “Thanks, mom and dad, for having me
here.” You’re building intimate memories that last a lifetime.

OceanofPDF.com

 Becoming a Self-Soother

I’ve heard that if baby is used to going to sleep at my breast or in dad’s
arms, when he wakes up he will expect the same thing and won’t be able
to get himself back to sleep without us. Is this true?
True, true—and so what? This is a valid observation of nighttime
attachment parenting. But your baby is a baby a very short time, and this is
a stage when you are building foundations of trust. Consider what may
happen if a baby wakes up alone and is forced, before his time, to become a
self-soother.

GET BEHIND THE EYES OF YOUR BABY
Many kids ago we learned an important parenting principle when
confronted with the dilemma of how to respond to our children in certain
situations. Get behind the eyes of your baby and imagine you were a baby.
What would you need, and how would you want your parents to react? If
you were a baby, would you rather sleep alone in a dark, quiet room behind
bars or nestled close to your favorite people in the whole wide world, inches
away from your favorite cuisine and comforted by the familiar scent,
sounds, and movements of the people you trust? Ah, night life is good!
The style of parenting called self-soothing, which is creeping into the
“Let’s have babies conveniently” mind-set, emphasizes techniques of
teaching babies how to comfort themselves—by leaving them alone or

 setting them up to devise their own methods—rather than allowing babies
to rely on mother or father. On the surface this sounds so convenient and
liberating, but watch out for shortcuts, especially in nighttime parenting.
This school of thought ignores a basic principle of infant development: A
need that is filled in early infancy goes away; a need that is not filled never
completely goes away but recurs later in “diseases of detachment”—
aggression, anger, distancing or withdrawal, and discipline problems. We
have a practical rule of thumb for you to consider: During the first year, an
infant’s wants and needs are usually one and the same.
Nighttime offers a special time for closeness, whether you actually share
sleep with baby or not. Martha has fond memories of her nighttime
parenting of Peter (now Doctor Pete), who was our last baby to sleep in the
nursery. Here’s her story:

“In the first few months I attended to Peter’s needs for feeding rather
mechanically two or three times a night: Baby cried, I got up and trudged
down the hall, picked baby up, sat in the rocker, and did what it took to get
him back to sleep—usually a twenty-minute feeding, and more time spent
methodically changing the poopy diaper, gave him a second “top off” feed,
gingerly placed him back in his cradle, slipped out quietly, and eagerly
returned to my own warm bed (this was in the winter). What amazes me is
that I never once thought of taking him to bed during the night! After
several more months of this (and feeling quite desperate some nights if he

 woke again before I even got back to sleep) he finally got to where he would
only wake up once each night. I would look forward to this nighttime
togetherness because I was no longer so exhausted and I could begin to
appreciate what I was doing—being with my baby with the whole house
asleep, no interruptions or distractions—just the two of us. I learned not to
try to rush him so I could get back to sleep. I would take him from his crib
and go into the family room, get really comfortable and snug in a giant
beanbag, turn on some quiet music, and spend an hour in this special place
I had carved out of my busy life. It was so special to be alone with my baby
that I would often continue to sit and hold him long after he was asleep.
This was an important bonding time, and I didn’t even know it.”

A BABY NEEDS TO HAVE NEEDS
It is a natural, appropriate, and desirable part of development for a baby to
be dependent. A baby needs to have needs. A baby who’s forced into
independence (to become a self-soother) before his time misses the needs
stage. A baby needs first to learn to bond to people before things. If a baby
can’t have needs, who can? If the parents can’t fill those needs, who will?
Later in life you may be very distressed to see who or what will be used to
fill needs that went unmet in infancy.

OceanofPDF.com

 An Unusual Custom?

Isn’t sleeping with your baby an unusual custom?
Sleep sharing is not unusual or abnormal. I, Dr. Bill, was once asked by a
national TV network to consult on a show about children’s sleep problems.
The producer, learning that I favored babies sleeping with their parents,
asked, “Dr. Sears, how many parents do this new thing?” Puzzled about
what she meant by “this new thing,” I realized that she was talking about
sharing sleep. I informed her that the new thing was sleeping separately.
Cultures that do not have the “benefit” of experts regard sharing sleep as
a natural continuum from mother’s womb to mother’s breast to mother’s
bed. They never even consider any alternative. The mother of a patient of
mine studied family sleeping habits on the island of Fiji, as a research
project for the World Health Organization. Fijian babies sleep next to their
parents until weaning. The native women were surprised that the researcher
even asked where babies sleep and said, “Is it true American mothers put
their babies in cages at night?” Fortunately, we don’t export our parenting
ideas.
A separate nursery is a strange concept to most of the world’s parents. In
a survey of 186 traditional societies throughout the world, mother and baby

 shared a bed in most cultures, and none of the societies studied endorsed the
Western separate nursery. We have broken a worldwide sleeping tradition,
and we are losing sleep.
Suppose we spend an afternoon at the library reading about sleeping
customs and sleeping advice throughout the world. If you select books from
the anthropology section, all regard sleep sharing as the normal standard of
parenting, like breastfeeding and holding a baby. What’s all the fuss about
babies in parents’ bed? That’s where they belong, say anthropologists.
Not so the medical and psychology books, which conjure up all sorts of
reasons that this time-tested sleeping arrangement, present from the
beginning of mankind, is all of a sudden wrong. That such a natural human
custom should be controversial is ridiculous. In reality sleep sharing is
following the same trend as breastfeeding. In 1950 breastfeeding was
controversial! Now as more and more parents discard experts’ taboos,
breastfeeding has returned, and its relative, sleep sharing, is making its
rightful comeback.

OceanofPDF.com

 May Never Leave

We enjoy sleeping with our baby, and it’s working for us, but should we
worry? Our friends warn us that we’ll be sorry we let our baby into our
bed. She’ll never want to leave.
You won’t be sorry, and she will want to leave. True, your baby will not one
day announce, “I’m ready now. Please get me my own bed and my own
room.” You are years away from that. As with so many parenting questions,
look at it from your baby’s viewpoint. Get under your baby’s covers and
imagine how she feels about her cozy quarters. Of course baby won’t want
to leave. She fits where she is. Why hurry a baby into independence? A
child’s needs that are filled early will eventually go away; a child’s needs
that are not filled leave an empty space that can come back later as
anxieties. It is not your job to make your child nighttime independent, but
rather to create a secure nighttime environment and feeling of rightness that
allow your child’s independence to develop naturally. The important fact is
that for now you enjoy this arrangement and it’s working for you. When the
time comes, your child will wean from your bed just like all the other
weanings.

OceanofPDF.com

 Doctor Says No

We would like to have our new baby sleep with us, but my baby’s doctor
advises us not to. I’m confused. Who is right?
There are three questions you should not ask your doctor: “Where should
my baby sleep?” “How long should my baby breastfeed?” and “Should I let
my baby cry?” Doctors do not study the answers to these questions in
medical school, and much of their advice likely comes from their own
personal experience as mothers and fathers, not as professionals. You are
putting doctors on the spot when you ask them where your baby should
sleep. Doctors are trained in the diagnosis and treatment of illness, not in
parenting styles. If you want to sleep with your baby and feel that your
baby, your husband, and you will all sleep better with this nighttimeparenting style, this is the right decision for your family. Also, you will find
that most doctors are becoming increasingly flexible about parents sleeping
with their babies. Family doctors, pediatricians, and psychologists are now
realizing that they will not have to spend so much time correcting sleep
problems (or emotional problems) later if they spend more time helping a
baby create a healthy sleep attitude in the early months.

OceanofPDF.com

 Might Ruin Our Sex Life

The idea of sleeping with our baby sounds appealing, but how do we do
that and still have a normal sex life?
Sex and babies do mix, but as in choosing a name, mom and dad must agree
on having baby in their bed. If mother wants to, but dad doesn’t, he may
resent baby (and his wife) and feel he has to compete with baby for
nighttime attention. It’s up to the mother to not let the “baby’s coming
between us” scene occur. Talk it out. Before deciding on this arrangement
and periodically during the early months, have an “Is it working?” chat. Be
sensitive to each other’s feelings.
Tiny babies are too young to notice and are not aware of lovemaking,
but as baby gets older, parents may be inhibited by another person in bed,
even though sound asleep. You could move the sleeping baby into another
room or you could move to another room.
An alternative to putting baby to sleep in your bed is to put baby in his
own bed or crib first and then bring him into your bed after the first waking.
If baby is sleeping in your bed when the mood hits, you’ll discover that
every room in the house is a potential love chamber.

 Time your intimacy. Day’s-end, before-sleep sex is not the only way for
couples to be together. Besides, during the early months most mothers are
too tired by nighttime to do anything but sleep. As one mother put it, “I
need my sleep more than he needs sex.” If baby in the bed is a bit of a
turnoff, enjoy mornings, afternoons, or any other time when baby is
napping elsewhere.

OceanofPDF.com

 Nighttime Privacy

I’ve read a lot about sleeping with a baby. Many of my friends let their
babies sleep in their beds, but quite honestly I don’t want our new baby in
our bed. We have four other children, and by the time evening comes I’ve
had enough of kids. I want some time alone with my husband. Am I a
neglectful mother because I don’t want to sleep with my baby?
No, you are not being a neglectful mother. You are a wise mother to have a
realistic appraisal of your nighttime needs. Just as a breastfeeding mother is
not better than one who bottlefeeds, a mother who shares sleep with her
baby is not better than one who doesn’t. It sounds as though you honestly
feel that for your particular family situation it is necessary for you to have
this special time with your husband at night to nurture your marriage,
recharge your own batteries, and be a more effective mother by day. Our
advice is to choose whatever sleeping arrangement works best for all
members of the family. Don’t feel pressured into a nighttime-parenting style
that you don’t believe in simply because your friends endorse it. Besides,
you may have a baby who is not very separation sensitive at night and may
sleep quite well in his own crib or in his own room.

OceanofPDF.com

 Easing Baby Out

How shall we handle it when it’s time for our child to leave our bed?
You will probably be ready for your child to leave your bed before she is
ready. Weaning from your bed is like weaning from the breast. Do it
gradually. Between two and three years, most children accept weaning from
your bed. But don’t except your child to suddenly lose his need for you to
parent him to sleep.
To ease your child from your bed into her own, try this two-step
transition. First, make a fun trip to the store to let your child pick out her
“big-girl bed” or “special bed.” (In dealing with children you’ll get a lot of
mileage out of the term “special.”) Place this special bed (or just a mattress)
next to your bed. You may need to either lie in your bed next to her or sit or
lie next to her as you parent her off to sleep. Expect her to want to crawl
back into your bed when she wakes up at night. You can either allow this or
place her back in her bed and “shush” or comfort her back to sleep. Second,
once she feels comfortable sleeping in her own bed, move her bed into her
own or a sibling’s room. Getting her to accept this arrangement may take a
few months. Lie down with her in her room and parent her back to sleep
with a story, back rub, and some cuddle time. Then set nighttime rules.

 Keep a sleeping bag or futon at the foot of your bed and explain that if she
wakes up, she can come in, but she must “tiptoe as quiet as a mouse and not
wake up mommy and daddy because we need our sleep, otherwise we’ll be
a cranky mommy and daddy the next day.”
Certainly by three years of age children can understand that nighttime is
for sleeping and everybody needs to sleep. Eventually she will spend more
time in her own bed and come into your room only during times of stress,
such as illness, a move, or any of life’s little upsets that can disturb a child’s
sleep. Don’t worry, your child will eventually leave your bed.

Placing a futon or mattress on the floor in your room may be one step in
weaning your child from your bed.

 Dr. Bill notes: During an office visit with an eight-year-old boy, I asked him
why he occasionally crawled into his parents’ bed. Proudly he replied,
“Because my parents are in it!” That said it all.

OceanofPDF.com

 SLEEP SAFETY
Whether your baby sleeps in your bed, a crib, or a combination of these
arrangements, be sure to provide your baby with a safe sleeping
environment. Take the following safe-sleep precautions:

Place baby to sleep on his back. Alternatively,
you can place baby on his side (preferably the left
side) in certain situations, such as if baby suffers
from reflux, but only if advised by your doctor.
Don’t put an infant under nine months to sleep on
her tummy unless there is a doctor-recommended
reason for doing so.
Don’t put baby to bed on a soft surface, such as a
waterbed, beanbag, or any other squishy surface
that could obstruct baby’s breathing passages.
Don’t leave baby sleeping alone unsupervised in
an old carriage. An older child may caringly, but
unsafely, snuggle a stuffed animal next to baby’s
head. Also, carriage mattresses tend to be less
cared for than other bedding, and they tend to
collect dust and other allergens. Clean them as

 needed. Carriages are a common site of
smothering in babies, second only to cribs.
Don’t use deep-pile (more than 1¼ inches or 3
centimeters) sleeping mats, such as lambskin.
These not only collect dust and other allergens,
but also can obstruct baby’s breathing passages,
especially if they get wet from drool or spit-up.
Don’t cover baby’s head with a hat after the first
day or two. This is a baby’s primary path of
normal heat loss. Covering the head risks
overheating the baby. (Very premature
hospitalized babies often need their heads covered
to maintain their body temperature, but the
medical staff monitors this.)
Never smoke in the room where baby sleeps.
Smoke irritates baby’s sensitive breathing
passages.
If either parent is a smoker, do not sleep in the
same room as your baby. Research has shown that
even the odor and chemicals that emanate from
you can increase the risk of SIDS by twenty-five–
fold.
Be particularly vigilant when traveling, since
baby will be sleeping in an unfamiliar and
potentially unsafe environment. Bring along a

 portable crib or a roll-out safe-sleeping mat.
These are safer sleeping alternatives than soft
adult mattresses, such as the ones used on sofa
beds or rollaways in motels. If you are using a
hotel-provided crib, do a safety check (see here).
Be equally vigilant when letting baby nap in a
stroller. Observe the same precautions as you
would anywhere else. Place infant to sleep on her
back or side, and remove any potentially
dangerous objects from the stroller.
Keep baby’s environment as fuzz-free as possible,
especially if your baby is prone to respiratory
allergies. Besides removing stuffed animals,
avoid using bedding that is likely to collect lint,
such as deep-pile lambskin or fuzzy wool
blankets. Hypoallergenic mattresses and mattress
covers are available for allergy-prone infants.
Never fall asleep with baby on a sofa or recliner.
Most accidental suffocations occur in these
settings.
OceanofPDF.com

 Safe Crib Sleeping

If your baby sleeps in a crib, follow the safety suggestions listed here.

OceanofPDF.com

 TROUBLESHOOTING:

SOLVING

YOUR

BABY’S SLEEP PROBLEMS
If you’ve been through all the nighttime-parenting steps and your baby is
still a restless sleeper, here’s what to do:

First, decide if night waking is a problem. Is it
simply a nuisance that you can live with until
your baby is old enough to get to sleep without
your help? (Most eventually can.) Or is night
waking interfering with your baby’s optimal
development and daytime behavior? Are you so
tired the next day that you don’t enjoy daytime
parenting and are becoming increasingly resentful
of nighttime parenting—and of your whole child?
In short, are you ready to resign at bedtime?
Go through the checklist of possible causes of
night waking (see here). Match the most likely
solutions to the causes, and one by one try these
solutions until you find something that works.
You may need to try different solutions at

 different stages of your baby’s development or
during lifestyle changes.
If you have excluded all the causes of night
waking on the list, realize there is no quick fix. It
may take a few weeks to improve your baby’s
sleeping habits. Remember your long-range goal:
to help your baby develop a healthy sleep
attitude. While babies need some consistency in
bedtimes and rituals, get your baby used to a
variety of sleep associations that help her get to
sleep and stay asleep without always relying on
the same parenting-to-bed props.
SAFE CO-SLEEPING
Parents often worry about rolling over onto their baby during the night.
Sleep sharing is safe. Mothers we have interviewed on the subject of
sharing sleep notice they are so physically and mentally aware of their
baby’s presence even while sleeping that they feel they would be extremely
unlikely to roll over on their baby. And if they did, baby would put up such
a fuss they would awaken in an instant.
Fathers, on the other hand, do not enjoy the same keen awareness of
baby’s presence while asleep, so it is possible that they might roll over on
baby or throw out an arm onto baby.
The following precautions will help you share sleep safely:
Place babies to sleep on their backs.
Place baby between mother and a guard-rail (available at babyfurniture stores or in catalogs) or push the bed flush against the wall
and position baby between mother and the wall, not between the

 parents (see illustration here). Toddlers tend to turn 360 degrees during
the night and often awaken father if sleeping between the parents. Be
sure there is no crevice between the bed and wall or the guardrail and
mattress. Fill in any gaps with a rolled-up baby blanket.
Do not sleep with your baby if you are under the influence of any drug
that diminishes your sensitivity to your baby’s presence, such as
alcohol or tranquilizing medications.
Avoid overheating from overbundling. This may occur if baby has
been bundled appropriately to sleep in his own bed and then is brought
next to a warm body as an added heat source (see signs of overheating,
here).
Use a big bed with few sleepers. Too small or too crowded a bed space
is also an unsafe sleeping arrangement for a tiny baby. A queen- or
king-size bed is a must for safely sharing sleep. Avoid letting an older
sibling sleep with a tiny baby.
Put away your bed frame, leaving your mattress on the floor. If baby
manages to roll out of bed, the short fall won’t cause any serious
injury.
Do not sleep with baby on a very wavy water bed. He may sink down
too far in a crevice between the mattress and the frame or alongside
mother. Don’t leave a tiny baby on a wavy water bed alone. His neck
muscles aren’t strong enough to clear his face out of the sinking
surface and he may suffocate. Firm or “waveless” water beds are safer,
providing you make sure all crevices are filled.
Take precautions to prevent baby from rolling out of bed, even though
it is unlikely, especially when baby is sleeping next to a parent. Like
heat-seeking missiles, babies automatically gravitate toward the parent.
But to be safe, especially if baby is sleeping alone in your bed, use a
guardrail.

OceanofPDF.com

 Healthy Sleep Associations

A key to understanding your baby’s wakefulness is understanding the
concept of sleep associations—the persons, things, and events that a baby
associates with going to sleep and getting back to sleep. We all have our
favorite sleep associations: a book, a warm bath, music, and so on. But the
difference between adults and babies is that an adult is able to go back to
sleep when awakened without the same prop that was used to get to sleep.
When you awaken during the night you can usually resettle simply by
changing positions or fluffing your pillow. On the other hand, when babies
awaken, they cannot get back to sleep without the same crutch that put them
to sleep. When an infant or a child achieves sleep maturity, they are able to
resettle, like an adult, without needing the same persons or props that
helped them go to sleep.
Consider the implications of the sleep-associations concept. If your baby
is used to being rocked, fed, massaged, cuddled, that is, parented to sleep,
when she awakens she will expect and/or need the same warm and human
touches to get back to sleep. If, on the other hand, you put a baby into a
crib, alone, and do not help her go to sleep, she will learn to put herself to
sleep by her own props. Then when she awakens at 3:00 A.M., she will be
able to get back to sleep without your help.

 This basic sleep fact has birthed two dissenting schools of nighttime
parenting: One school believes a baby should be parented to sleep; the other
teaches that a baby should be put to sleep alone. Whether to parent or to put
is the basic nighttime question. Our approach combines both. We believe
that for a baby to develop a healthy sleep attitude, she must first go through
the parenting-to-sleep stage and ease into the put-herself-to-sleep stage. To
force a baby to become a self-soother before her time risks a baby’s
developing a fear of sleep and sets baby up for long-term sleep problems. It
also deprives babies and parents of an important period of growing together,
when babies develop trust and parents develop sensitivity. Most babies who
have been attachment parented to sleep and given responsive nurturing back
to sleep gradually learn to get themselves back to sleep without anybody’s
help.
Some babies, however, get to enjoy night nurturing, increase their desire
(or need) for it, and by two years of age show no inclination to give up their
nighttime desires. This is especially true with busy babies and busy parents.
Nighttime is quiet time. Baby has mom or dad all to herself and, especially
if breastfeeding, will “milk” this quiet time for all she can get. What was
initially a need becomes a habit, which becomes a nuisance and escalates
into parental resentment. In this situation nighttime parenting has gotten out
of balance and gradual night weaning may be necessary.

NIGHTTIME PARENTING TIP
If you resent going to bed because it’s work rather than rest, that’s a clue
you need to make some changes. Otherwise, you’ll become so sleep
deprived that you won’t be able to function during the day.

 PUT YOURSELF BEHIND THE TIRED EYES OF
YOUR BABY
When faced with the quandary “Should I let my baby cry it out?,” get
behind the eyes of your baby and ask yourself, “If I were my baby, how
would I want my mother/father to respond? Would I want to be left alone,
behind bars, in a dark room, or would I want to be comforted back to sleep
by the most trusted people in my life?” When it comes to how quickly and
how sensitively to respond to a baby’s cry, the person who shared the
umbilical cord with that baby will nearly always get the decision right.

OceanofPDF.com

 Should Baby Be Left to Cry It Out?

New parents often say to us, “I saw a technique on television that advised
parents to let their baby cry longer and longer each night until he learned to
fall asleep on his own. This approach doesn’t feel right to me. Does it
work?”
Well, Yes, it does “work” in that baby may eventually learn to put
herself to sleep without you. But it comes at a price, as we explain in the
following pages. This advice has been around for nearly a hundred years,
and each decade we see baby books advising variations of this sad theme.
Going to your baby after five, then ten, then fifteen minutes of crying may
sound humane or reasonable, but the result is usually the same: a strung-out
mother and an angry baby, who will eventually exhaust himself to sleep—
but at what price? We wish to put the cry-it-out approach to sleep—forever.
We have written articles about the cry-it-out controversy, debated it on
national television, and, for the benefit of tired but vulnerable parents, we
have thoroughly researched what is at the top of our hit list of bad baby
advice. Here’s what we found.

Doesn’t Feel Right

 To learn how parents feel about this question, we surveyed three hundred
mothers. One of the questions was: What advice do you get from friends
and relatives about what to do when your baby awakens at night? The most
common advice was “Let baby cry it out.” We also asked mothers how they
felt about this advice. Ninety-five percent of the mothers replied, “This
advice doesn’t feel right.” Our conclusions: 95 percent of mothers can’t be
wrong, and there is real confusion created by the advice a mother hears and
what she feels.

It Sells

We interviewed publishers and TV producers who print and air this
approach. Their defense: “It sells. Parents want quick recipes and quick
results.” Moms and dads, there are no quick fixes, no crash courses on baby
calming and baby sleeping. Like all good long-term investments, creating a
lasting healthy sleep attitude (our goal in this chapter) requires the gradual
step-by-step approach we propose.

A CHECKLIST FOR TIRED PARENTS
Night-Waking Causes

Separation anxiety
New skill being practiced
Temperament—a high-need baby

 Family upsets
Move to another house
Depressed parents
One parent away from home
Irritating sleepwear
Teething
Wet or soiled diaper
Diaper rash
Hunger
Stuffy nose
Too hot
Too cold
Nasal irritants
cigarette smoke
perfume
powder
hair spray
animal dander
dust, lint
fumes
Milk or food allergy
Noisy bedroom
A cold
Ear infection
Fever
Gastroesophageal reflux
Pinworms
Urinary tract infection
What to Do

 Sleep close to baby
Wear down in a sling
Nurse down
Massage before bed
Rock
Cuddle up
Use the neck nestle
Try a warm fuzzy: dad’s chest
Lay on hands
Use a swaying cradle, rolling crib
Bathe in warm water
Warm the bedsheets
Play soothing music
Use white-noise sounds
Play back-to-the-womb sounds
Feed before bed
Take a car ride
Try a mechanical mother
Put cotton sleepwear on baby, or try organic cotton
Schedule a doctor’s examination
We are not saying that the cry-it-out approach is always wrong, doesn’t
work, and you should never use it. Instead, we wish you to be careful about
jumping right into this method before you deeply understand its
ramifications and have carefully considered less drastic alternatives. The
following discussion will help you do just that.

Why Mothers Can’t

 First understand what is in a baby’s cry. A baby’s cry is designed for the
thriving of a baby and the development of the parent. Let’s look again at
that laboratory experiment we described in Chapter 1, which measured a
mother’s biological response to her baby’s cry. When baby cries, the flow of
blood to mother’s breasts and to the nurturing center of the brain increases,
accompanied by an intense urge to pick up and nurse (meaning comfort) her
baby. No other signal triggers such strong emotions in a mother as her
baby’s cry. This is the reason mothers confide, “I just can’t stand to hear my
baby cry.”
So the first arrow we shoot at this so-called scientific method is: The
cry-it-out advice goes against a mother’s basic biology. Not only does it
make no sense to sensitive mothers, but it makes no scientific sense. In
recent years, research has revealed that stress hormones skyrocket,
especially during extended emotional upsets such as prolonged, unattendedto, panicked crying. Brain researchers also fear that the immature brain of a
tiny baby is particularly vulnerable to the damaging effects of prolonged
stress hormones. This stress effect even has a name: glucocorticoid
neurotoxicity, which sounds like a preventable disease you don’t want your
baby to get.

Feeling Guilty

One morning I, Dr. Bill, received a call from a weepy mother whose baby
was waking up frequently. She had seen the cry-it-out approach seductively

 packaged and delivered on television. She opened her call, “I’ve been trying
it. It didn’t work and this morning we’re both a wreck. Am I a bad mother?
I feel so guilty.”
I reassured her, “You’re not a bad mother. You’re a tired mother. Your
overwhelming desire to get some sleep pressured you to succumb to socalled expert advice over your own intuition.” I went on to explain, “As a
result you set off an internal alarm that is shouting ‘Not right.’ This feeling
of unrightness is what you call guilt. This means that you are a sensitive
person. This inner sensitivity is your fail-safe signal. Listen to it. It won’t
fail you.” I worry more about the mothers who are not bothered by their
baby’s nighttime crying.

Breaking Baby’s Night Waking—And More

By breaking baby from waking up, does mother break other valuable
connections? Suppose, despite her feelings of guilt and intuitively knowing
the cry-it-out approach is not for her, a mother persists because she is
advised to. Nights of crying continue, but each night baby cries less and
mother’s tolerance increases. Finally baby’s night crying no longer bothers
the mother, and baby begins to sleep longer. See, it works. Wrong! Would
you toilet train your baby by forcing him to stay on the potty until he goes?
By persisting with the cry-it-out approach, the mother breaks her trust in
herself and her trust in her baby’s signals. She desensitizes herself, and
insensitivity is what gets a mother into trouble. Baby loses trust in his

 mother’s availability and ability to comfort him and loses trust in his own
ability to influence her comforting behavior to meet his needs. Perhaps he
senses that he is now a less valuable person even though that is not your
intention. Sensitive parents overnighting with friends who have trained their
babies to sleep alone report that these babies do cry for help during the
night. They are dismayed to learn that the parents simply do not hear their
babies crying.
The sensitive connection that mother and baby had when mother was
bothered by the cry is now broken. Because both baby and mother have less
trust in each other and in themselves, the parent-infant connection is
devalued from an atmosphere of trust to that of mistrust, which will carry
over into other aspects of their relationship. More detachment will follow,
and this mother will buy into a parenting mind-set that a few weeks earlier
would have been foreign to her.

THE DETACHMENT SNOWBALL
Mark and Kelly were first-time parents who were blessed with a high-need
baby—especially at night. They were sensitive and responsive parents, but
one day a friend gave them a cry-it-out book, with the admonition, “Now
you’ll be tempted to give in, but harden your hearts and in a few nights he’ll
sleep.” As their one-year-old baby screamed, these sensitive parents stood
sweating and hurting outside his door, afraid to go in and “break the rules.”
Each night baby’s night waking decreased, as did the parents’ attachment.
Baby cried in a feeling of mistrust and cried the sensitivity right out of the
parents. Previously Mark and Kelly had taken baby Matthew with them
everywhere because they wanted to and it felt wrong to leave him. Well, it
was now easier to leave him. Getaway weekends extended to getaway
weeks. A distance developed between parents and baby. More was cried out
of the family than only night waking.

 Missing the Real Cause of Night Waking

This nighttime “hands off, let baby resettle on his own” approach has other
flaws: It keeps parents from searching for the real causes of night waking
and seeking out more sensitive and long-term solutions. It presumes the
only reason baby wakes up is that he is “spoiled.” He has not learned to put
himself to sleep because you always help him. If you didn’t help him get
back to sleep, he would have to learn self-comforting techniques. What’s
the implication? It’s your fault your baby wakes up, which is not true.
Cindy, a sensitive and very attached mother, consulted us about her oneyear-old’s recent change from a restful sleeper to a restless night waker. She
opened by saying, “I know my baby, he’s waking for a reason. Something’s
wrong and I’m not going to let him cry it out, as my friends advise me.” We
gave Cindy the checklist of causes of night waking. By the process of
elimination she identified polyester sleepwear as the nighttime irritant. The
night she changed baby to all-cotton sleepwear, her baby again slept well.
The cry-it-out advice often covers up medical causes of night waking. In
our pediatric practice, we frequently see infants who wake up at night
because they hurt, often from a medical condition such as gastroesophageal
reflux (see here).
This is why you can’t separate daytime parenting from nighttime
parenting. A mother who starts off practicing attachment parenting becomes
so sensitive to her baby that the whole cry-it-out approach is foreign to her
parenting mind-set, and she intuitively seeks out the reasons for her baby’s

 night waking and finds more sensitive solutions. A mother who buys into a
more restrained style of parenting, however, is more easily lured into the
cry-it-out approach. It is not so foreign to her mind-set, and she may more
easily succumb to it.

Sink or Sleep

In teaching a baby to swim, you don’t throw him in and force him to sink or
swim. Likewise, you don’t just put a baby in a crib alone and expect him to
go to sleep. You first build baby’s confidence that water is not something to
be afraid of, then you help baby create an attitude that water is pleasant to
be in. Then you teach swimming skills. Learning to sleep is a nighttime
discipline and skill that begins with learning not to fear sleep; next baby
discovers that sleep is a pleasant and not a lonesome state to enter (and
reenter); and finally you teach baby the skills to maintain sleep.

Two Mothers’ Stories

For some babies with easy temperaments, the cry-it-out approach may
work, at least on the surface. For high-need babies (whom you will meet in
the next chapter) it seldom works. By not responding to a baby’s cries, you
are not really teaching the baby to sleep; you are teaching your baby that

 crying has no communicative value. By not “giving in” to your baby you
are teaching him to give up. We have great difficulty with the wisdom of
this approach. It is night training, not nighttime parenting. We train pets—
we parent children. Consider these parents’ stories.
Laurie, an exhausted but attached mother of a night-waking baby, in
desperation succumbed to the restraint advice.

“I plugged my ears and let him cry. Soon my husband had to hold me down,
as I deeply wanted to go pick him up. My baby’s cries got louder and louder
and finally I couldn’t stand it any longer and went to him. Boy, was he mad!
I’ll never do that again.”

Another failure of the cry-it-out approach was shared with us by a
mother who was advised to let her night-waking baby cry:

“I couldn’t stand it any longer, and finally I went in to nurse him back to
sleep. We both sat there in the rocking chair crying together, and it took me
twice as long to nurse him back to sleep than if I’d gone to him immediately.
The next day he was clinging to me all day long.
“As I read the ‘cry book’ I had to memorize when to soothe the child,
when to hold him, how to act around him, when to put him to sleep, how
many seconds I could comfort him, etc. Sure parenting is a learning game—
but not like that! Parenting shouldn’t end up a science. It should be natural,

 guided with intuition. I am sure the cry-it-out advice is not right for me—for
us.”

OceanofPDF.com

 Alternatives to the Cry-It-Out Approach

Rather than the cold turkey approach to letting baby cry it out or the
measured (and less inhumane) approach of letting baby cry with
intermittent comforting, consider the following modifications of these
approaches—ones that maintain parent-infant trust and the mutual
sensitivity between babies and parents.
Like weaning from the breast, when to ease baby out of your bed and
resort to a variety of sleep props varies from baby to baby and according to
parents’ lifestyles. We are concerned about the rigid approach the cry-it-out
books take. A whole list of do nots permeate this approach. For example,
“Do not give in and pick up baby.” The only do not in our approach is “Do
not rigidly follow anyone’s method but your own.” Babies are too valuable
and individual for that. Instead, here are some basic suggestions from which
you can build your own helping-baby-sleep approach.

Be Flexible

If you pick a system from a book, you don’t have to buy into it 100 percent.
You can try part of an approach, keep what works, discard what doesn’t.
Each time you try a sleeping method, you build a nighttime experience file.

 It’s not as if night waking will go on for years if you don’t break it in the
next two nights. Each month that you try something, you are wiser, and
baby is more mature. Time is on your side. The rigid cry-it-out approaches
require you to use the system 100 percent. This is not right. How can
anyone write something for general readership that is 100 percent right for
your individual baby? Easing into a system of sleep training makes baby
less alarmed by a change of nighttime management.

Use Baby as a Barometer

Use your baby to gauge whether your approach is working, not someone
else’s schedule in a book. If it isn’t working, pull back and try a month later.
A problem we have with many of the cry-it-out approaches is that they
ignore the baby’s input. Your baby is a partner in your approach. Consider
your baby’s daytime behavior as a barometer. If you are thrilled with baby’s
behavior and don’t get any vibrations that baby is disturbed or that your
sensitivity is weakened, go on to the next step of nighttime weaning. If, on
the contrary, early symptoms of premature detachment occur (anger,
distancing, clinginess, tantrums), pull back and alter your course.
Kim and Allen were sensitive nighttime parents, but the consistent night
waking of their two-year-old high-need baby, Jeremy, was getting to them.
Parents were tired; baby was tired. A change of nighttime routine was
definitely needed. These parents had practiced the attachment style of
parenting. They knew their child, and the child trusted his parents. Now

 when Jeremy awoke, instead of rushing to immediately comfort him, they
would give him time and space to resettle by himself. They put no time
limit on how long to let him cry and set no rigid rules on “not giving in.”
They played each night by ear. If Jeremy’s cries had a panic sound that
touched their red-alert button, they trusted themselves to respond. Each
night they waited a bit longer, and when they did go to comfort Jeremy they
gave a simple “It’s okay” message. Also, the parents increased their daytime
attachment to Jeremy. They used their baby as a barometer of whether their
method was working. If Jeremy showed any daytime upset or became more
distant from them, they would pull back on their nighttime-weaning pace.
They did not let themselves become insensitive. Within two weeks Jeremy
slept longer, as did the parents.
Why did this work? First, the parents and child had built the foundation
of trust and sensitivity. Second, the parents did not lock themselves into a
rigid schedule on how long they would let their baby cry. Baby became a
partner in the approach as they eased him into nighttime independence.

Take Baby Steps

Vicky and Jack were sensitive parents of a nine-month-old night-waking
baby, Michelle. A friend gave them a cry-it-out book that laid down an
insensitive schedule of how long to let her cry. After two nights of cry it
out, Vicky noticed the following changes in their baby. “She cried a lot all
day. Sometimes she was more clingy; other times she was distant.

 Something we had before was gone.” Jack concluded, “She doesn’t trust
you anymore.”
These parents consulted us, asking for help in fixing their child’s
daytime behavior. Here’s what we advised: “You see by your baby’s
negative daytime behavior that you pushed her too far too fast. You wisely
realize that your baby’s emotional well-being and your trusting relationship
are at stake. She is not ready for such a giant step. Going from your bed to a
crib in her own room with no or only partial response from you was too
much. So you tried it—that’s okay—and you see you need to back off. Give
yourselves a few nights to get back in harmony, then consider taking some
smaller steps that you all can live with. First, since she’s been waking
hourly, there could be a physical cause for the night waking. Go through the
checklist of possible night-waking causes. Next, have your husband lull her
to sleep after you’ve nursed her, and have him put her down asleep in her
crib—or your bed if you choose to go a little slower. Then on her first
waking you decide if you or your husband should comfort her back to sleep.
When you are ready for bed, go ahead and take her into your bed at the next
waking and nurse—it’s easy to nurse once or twice at night—you decide.
Ask your husband to alternate dealing with her as she awakes. Several
nights of this should be all it takes for a return to a nighttime regimen that
you can handle.”

What We Did

 Here is what we did if our babies showed persistent night waking. First, we
regarded teaching a baby how to sleep as nighttime discipline. Just as we
programmed ourselves against spanking as a daytime discipline technique,
we vowed we would not use the cry-it-out approach as a nighttime
discipline technique. This mind-set meant that we were highly motivated to
find the real cause of our baby’s night waking and seek, by trial and error,
alternative approaches. Just as spanking keeps a parent from learning the
real cause of a child’s misbehavior and finding a more appropriate method,
so the cry-it-out approach keeps parents from finding the real cause of the
child’s night waking and trying healthier alternatives.
Next, we decided on just how much night waking we could handle,
making allowances for changing situations (illness, moves, and so on). For
example, at nine months we could handle one to two night wakings and
easy resettlings or an occasional bout of more-frequent night waking about
every three weeks. More than that (unless baby is sick) meant we put “the
system” into effect—meaning we went through our checklist of nightwaking causes and altered the middle-of-the-night response accordingly.
One night twenty-month-old Matthew woke up wanting to nurse—for
the third time in three hours. “Neee,” Matthew said. “No,” Martha
responded. “Neee,” Matthew said louder. “No!” Martha said louder. I
awoke at the peak of this “neee-no” dialogue and realized that Matthew had
pushed Martha too far.
Martha had trained Matthew to be satisfied with her body next to him,
but not always with an available breast. Sometimes a pat or a back rub
would do, or just holding him extra close as he struggled and fussed. Then

 he would gradually get the message “no nurse” and would give up and go
back to sleep. On this occasion, yet another approach seemed in order; it
was my turn to take over as comforter. The important point is to use a
variety of comforting techniques that satisfy baby’s need to relax.

Dad as a Co-comforter

While nighttime purists might advise the mother to just “keep on nursing;
he’ll grow out of it,” this does not work for some parents. Lack of sufficient
sleep undermines even the most committed parents. It’s an advantage to
moms for dads to develop comforting skills early on, so when the nighttime
crises hit, the buck doesn’t stop with mom. When our babies were fussing in
my arms, Martha was comfortable. If the crying was escalated, she resumed
the role of primary comforter. We did not persist with a failing experiment.
This is different from the cry-it-out approach, in which the baby is not
allowed to have any effect on the parents.
Beth and Ed practiced the attachment style of nighttime parenting, and it
worked. Baby Nathan awoke every few hours during the night, but Beth
nursed him back to sleep. Both were in nighttime harmony and reasonably
well rested the next day. While most babies of this style gradually lengthen
their sleep stretches as they get older, Nathan continued his frequent nightnursing requests. At eighteen months of age, he still wanted to nurse every
two to three hours at night. What began as nighttime parenting evolved into
nighttime turmoil. Beth began to resent Nathan’s night nursing and, because

 she was tired the next day, was not a sensitive daytime mother. Dad was a
blur at work. They went through the checklist of night-waking causes and
solutions, but nothing worked. Clearly Nathan had associated going to sleep
with breastfeeding. He was hooked. When he awakened, he would settle for
nothing but the breast to get him back to sleep.
Nathan needed to learn other associations to gradually wean from
frequent night nursing. We saw Beth and Ed in counseling, and we went
through the following steps.
Recognizing the problem. The first step, and sometimes the hardest, is for
sensitive and responding parents to realize they have a problem that needs a
solution. “Just continue to meet your baby’s needs and he’ll outgrow it”
wasn’t working. In this instance, the parents sincerely felt that their baby’s
continued night feedings were no longer a need but a preference. So the first
hurdle was for the parents to come to grips with the reality that a change in
nighttime-parenting style was needed.
Teaching baby different sleep associations. Instead of Beth nursing
Nathan to sleep every night, we advised Ed to “father-nurse” Nathan to
sleep. Ed wore his baby in a sling in the neck nestle position (see here),
walked, rocked, and sang to Nathan. When his baby was asleep he lay down
with him on a futon next to their bed for ten to fifteen minutes, until he was
sure Nathan was in a deep sleep.

 Using father as comforter. Like clockwork, two hours later Nathan
awakened and expected an instant breast. Instead, Ed became the pacifier,
trying to comfort Nathan with the least amount of fuss. Sometimes only a
pat on the back was needed. Other times, Ed would walk, rock, and neck
nestle Nathan back to sleep.
Initially, Nathan didn’t buy this change of nighttime management. He
fussed—but he did not fuss alone. He was in dad’s arms. Nathan would
plead for “num-nums,” but on each night waking, Ed would reaffirm:
“Mommy go night-night, Daddy go night-night, num-nums go night-night,
and Nathan go night-night.” Nathan got the picture that when it’s dark
everyone sleeps—including num-nums. A couple of nights dad couldn’t
pacify Nathan, and Beth came to the rescue in the middle of the night. After
a week Nathan consistently settled for dad, even though this was not his
preference. After two weeks Nathan only awakened once. And after a
month he slept for seven-to-eight-hour stretches.

From Mom to Dad to Soothie

Bill and Susan were caring and responsive parents, day and night. At
eighteen months, baby Natalie began frequent night waking. These parents
had decided they would do everything possible to help Natalie develop a
healthy sleep attitude. As a child, Susan had feared sleep and vowed, “I
don’t want her growing up like me, afraid of sleep.” But Susan was three
months pregnant with her second baby and didn’t have the energy to get up

 with Natalie—and she had the wisdom to recognize this. Bill parented
Natalie to bed. He lay down with her on a mattress in her room or
sometimes on a futon at the foot of their bed. Natalie snuggled to bed with
daddy on one side and her favorite teddy bear, Bear-bear, on the other. As
they drifted off to sleep, dad would frequently interject “Night-night,
Natalie, and night-night, Bear-bear.” When baby was asleep daddy would
pick up baby (and Bear-bear) and put them into the crib or sometimes let
them sleep on the futon. When Natalie awoke crying in the other room, dad
would go in and pat her back, put her arm around Bear-bear, and “nightnight” them back to sleep. After a while when Natalie awoke she would
reach over and snuggle with Bear-bear and put herself back to sleep.

A SLEEP TIP
Teach baby to accept a variety of sleep associations when going to sleep and
getting back to sleep; otherwise the primary sleep comforter, usually mom,
will wear out. If baby always breastfeeds or bottlefeeds off to sleep, he will
always expect the same comforter to get back to sleep, even when he’s
feeding more for comfort than for nourishment. During the writing of the
first edition of this book, we shared nursing our baby to sleep. One night
Martha would breastfeed Stephen, and I would father-nurse him when he
woke up. The next night I would wear Stephen down in the baby sling, and
Martha would take the later shift. As Stephen grew older and our sleepinducing repertoire widened, he began to ease into self-comforting ways of
getting back to sleep.
Nighttime purists may be offended by teaching a baby to use T. Bear as
a pacifier instead of mommy or daddy. But there are family circumstances
(pregnancy, illness, working schedules) in which the parents are worn-out,
and for them a substitute nighttime parent is a salvation. Besides, like all
healthy weaning, a gradual weaning from the real parents to a soothie (a

 teddy bear, a blanket, a doll) is a normal part of a child’s sleep maturity.
Every age has its props.

Consider a Physical Cause

If after trying these techniques your baby is still night waking, consider a
physical cause. Because of the emphasis on bad habits as a cause of night
waking, parents and doctors forget to search for physical causes. Seek
consultation with your doctor about the possible physical causes of your
baby’s night waking. (See “Hidden Medical Causes,” here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS ABOUT
SLEEP PROBLEMS
The following are real-life nighttime-parenting situations that we have
encountered in our mail, on our website, AskDrSears.com, or in personal
nighttime counseling. We have also experienced most of these situations
ourselves.

BABY AND MOTHER ARE OUT OF SYNC

Our two-month-old wakes up every couple of hours. I can’t stand to let
him cry, but by the time I do get to him and nurse him he’s upset and so
am I. It’s taking me longer to resettle him and get back to sleep myself.
My baby doesn’t seem tired the next day, but I’m exhausted. What’s
wrong?
You and your baby are out of nighttime harmony with each other, and you
need to be within touching distance. Remember, your baby has shorter sleep
cycles than you do. Around every hour, as he ascends from the stage of
deep sleep into light sleep, he goes through a vulnerable period for night

 waking. Some babies wake up during these vulnerable periods; others do
not. It sounds as if you have a light sleeper who wakes up each time he
changes sleep cycles. He wakes up during his light-sleep cycles while you
are aroused out of your deep-sleep cycles. The way a person wakes up, not
the frequency of waking, causes sleep deprivation. This is the reason you
are more tired than your baby.
Try these steps to achieve nighttime harmony with your baby: Take baby
into your bed either initially or after the first night waking and breastfeed
him to sleep. On the next waking first try just patting him or placing your
hand on his head or back, because he may not be hungry. If he needs to suck
he’ll let you know. After a week or more of this you will notice that you and
your baby are beginning to get your sleep cycles in sync with each other, so
that as your baby enters the state of light sleep and starts to wake up, so do
you. You can then roll over and feed or pat your baby through this
vulnerable period for night waking. You will both drift back into the state of
deep sleep without having fully awakened. Eventually your baby won’t
wake at each change of sleep cycle because just your closeness will smooth
his transition from deep to light and back to deep sleep without his waking
at all.

SLEEPS TOO MUCH?

Can an infant sleep too much? My baby is four and a half weeks old, and
I have to wake him up to feed him every three to four hours. Is this

 normal?
Oh, how many mothers would love to have your “problem”! Sleep patterns
in infants are extremely variable. Babies with easy temperaments tend to be
easy sleepers; high-strung infants are often frequent wakers. But it’s
possible for excessive sleep to keep an infant from thriving. “Thriving”
means more than just getting bigger, it means that your baby is developing
to his fullest potential physically, mentally, and emotionally.
Babies are born with attachment-promoting behaviors (such as crying)
that cue their caregivers to the quantity and quality of touch and feeding
they need in order to thrive. Infants who sleep too much may not initiate
interaction, so you have to do it (as you’ve been doing when you wake him
up to feed).
We suggest that you continue to schedule your baby’s feedings at least
every two to three hours during the day, but let him wake you at night. Be
sure to have him weighed frequently by your doctor to be sure he is gaining
enough weight. Because they are not demanding babies, heavy sleepers
often do not get enough to eat. This is why you are wise to take charge of
the feeding routine and continue to awaken your baby for meals every two
to three hours during the day.
In addition to ensuring that your baby gets adequate food, it’s also
important to make sure he gets enough touch. Demanding babies often cry
if somebody doesn’t hold them, but easy babies often sleep right through
potential holding times. One way to address this is to wear your baby

 around the house in a baby sling at least a couple hours a day to provide
touch and stimulation.
In the meantime, enjoy your full night’s sleep while it lasts!

WAKES UP AS SOON AS I PUT HER DOWN

Our six-month-old baby won’t go to sleep by herself. I know she’s tired
when she falls asleep in my arms. But as soon as I put her into her crib
and try to tiptoe out of the room, she wakes up and screams.
Try this nighttime-parenting style: Comfort your baby to sleep as you are
now doing, but for a longer time, until she has drifted through the state of
light sleep (you can recognize if she is still in this state by facial grimaces,
partially clenched fists, muscle twitches, fluttering eyelids, and overall tense
muscle tone). Lie down with your baby on your bed or anyplace that allows
both of you to snuggle close to each other if you are breastfeeding. If you
are bottlefeeding, a rocking chair works well. Nurse (either breast or bottle)
your baby until you notice that the signs of light sleep are no longer present
and she has slumbered into the state of deep sleep, which you can recognize
by her almost motionless face, regular breathing, still eyelids, and
especially the limp-limb sign—arms dangling weightlessly at her sides,
hands open, and muscles relaxed. After your baby shows signs of reaching
deep sleep, you can put her down. Try having the crib sheet warm if she
startles awake. Or you may find that you need to lie down with her on your

 bed to keep her asleep until you can ease away. In this case you will wind
up with her sleeping in your bed, which may be what she really needs for a
while anyway.

WAKING UP AFTER MOTHER’S RETURN TO WORK

I have recently returned to work, and my four-month-old has begun to
wake up more frequently. I’m still breast-feeding him part-time. I’m up
and down all night trying to resettle him into his crib. I’m so tired that it’s
hard to work the next day. Help!
This is a common nighttime nuisance when mothers return to work. We
frequently hear of the following scenario: Mother picks her baby up at the
baby-sitter’s and the baby-sitter boasts, “My, what a good baby. He slept all
day.” Your baby may be tuning out the baby-sitter during the day and
sleeping in order to save his prime waking time to be with you at night. You
may feel that your baby is deliberately getting his days and nights mixed up.
Remember that babies do what they do for a reason. They don’t wake up
purposely to annoy or deprive you of sleep.
Your baby is probably telling you, “Mommy, I need more time with
you.” Here’s how to give your baby more touch time and yourself more
sleep: Take him into your bed and enjoy sleeping side by side. Snuggle next
to each other and enjoy the nighttime closeness. You may find that he
awakens less, and even if he does continue to awaken, it will be much easier

 to resettle both of you if you are in closer touching distance. Some night
feeding is necessary in order to keep up your milk supply if you are away
from him during the day, and we recommend that you continue to
breastfeed after returning to work. Your bond will be stronger because of it.
As an added benefit, night feeding allows the natural sleep-inducing
substances present in your milk to help baby sleep and gives you a higher
level of the natural tranquilizing hormones that help you unwind. Take
advantage of these sleep inducers and enjoy sharing sleep with your baby.
You are likely to have a better night’s sleep and a better day’s work—
besides giving your baby a special nighttime touch.

DAYS AND NIGHTS MIXED UP

Our newborn likes to sleep a lot during the day but wakes up a lot at
night. How can we reverse this habit?
Many newborns come into the world with their sleep-wake cycles
established for day sleeping and night waking. In the womb, babies sleep
when mom is awake, mainly because motion lulls babies to sleep. And,
babies awaken and kick when mom goes to sleep. Here’s how to teach your
baby that daytime is for feeding and interacting, and nighttime is for
sleeping.
During the day, wake your baby for a feeding every two to three hours,
so that she does not sleep longer than a three-hour stretch. Interact with her

 with eye contact and touch after each feeding for as long as she can stay
awake. The more often you feed and interact with your baby during the day,
the longer stretches she is likely to sleep at night.

WAKING UP TO PLAY

Our baby sleeps with us, and we really enjoy it, but sometimes he wakes
up in the middle of the night bright eyed and bushy tailed and ready to
play. Initially this was funny, but now we’re tired of it. How can we stop
this habit?
Your baby needs nighttime conditioning. He needs to learn that a bed is for
sleeping, not for playing. We solved this semiamusing nighttime nuisance
by “playing dead.” When our baby woke up eager to play, we pretended that
we were still asleep and ignored his desire to play. Lie quietly with your
eyes closed and preferably with your back to baby. This is tough to do,
since your baby will probably start pawing at you and crawling all over you
trying to get attention, especially since you initially encouraged him. If you
persist long enough, though, he will eventually get bored and also get the
message that nighttime is for sleeping and not for playing.

NAPTIME PARENTING

 Our two-year-old just doesn’t seem to need a nap, but I need a break. Do
two-year-olds need naps? How can I get her to nap so that I can get
something done?
Yes, most two-year-olds need naps, and their parents need them to need
naps. In the first year most babies need at least a one-hour nap in the
morning and a one-to-two-hour nap in the afternoon. Between one and two
years most babies have dropped the morning nap, but still require a one-ortwo-hour afternoon nap. Most children require at least a one-hour afternoon
nap until around the age of four. Sleep researchers feel that napping does
have restorative value. Some children and adults actually fall asleep more
quickly and sleep more efficiently during a short nap than they do during
the night.
Here are ways to encourage the reluctant napper. Plan a car ride around
naptime and your toddler is almost sure to fall asleep. Or nap with her. Even
if your child doesn’t want to nap, she may need a little downtime. Choose a
consistent time of the day (preferably a time when you’re the most tired)
and set your child up for a nap. Take her into a dark, quiet room, turn on
some soft music, nestle together in a rocking chair, or lie down on a bed.
Set aside a special quiet time every day, during which you read a story
together or give her a massage to condition her into a nap.
My ten-month-old refuses to take a morning nap and usually doesn’t get
more than a half-hour nap during the day. How much of a nap do babies
need?

 Both babies and parents need naps. Ten-month-old babies need at least a
one-hour nap in the morning and a one- to two-hour snooze in the
afternoon. Between one and two years, some babies drop the morning nap
but still require one in the afternoon.
You can’t force your baby to sleep, but you can create conditions that
allow sleep to overtake him. Try the following:
Nap with baby. You probably look forward to your baby’s naptime so you
can “finally get something done.” Resist this temptation. Naps are as
important for you as they are for your infant.
Establish a routine. To get him on a predictable nap schedule, set aside
time in the morning and in the afternoon to nap with him. This will get your
baby used to a consistent pattern.
Set the scene. A few minutes before naptime, cuddle your baby in a dark,
quiet room. Play soft music and nestle together in a rocking chair, or lie
down on a bed. This will set him up to expect sleep to follow. Once he’s in a
deep sleep you can ease him into his crib, continue napping with him, or
slip away.
We have a two-and-a-half-year-old and a six-month-old. How can I get
them to nap at the same time?

 This is a challenging situation, since toddlers and infants have different
sleep patterns and different needs, and the mother of both a toddler and a
baby has a reason to be doubly tired. First, try to get them on a similar nap
schedule. At least once a day try to get them to sleep at the same time. What
helped us when we were trying to get our baby to nap at the same time that
we were chasing down a busy toddler was the trick of creating a “nap
nook.” Try a large box with a cutout door, a card table with a blanket over
the sides, or a mat under a grand piano. Settle your older child into his
“special place” reserved just for napping. Once he’s asleep, you can then lie
down with your baby wherever it’s most comfortable.
Try napping with your baby and toddler. Pick a consistent time during
the day when you are the most tired. Lie down on your bed and feed or
cuddle your baby to sleep on one side while singing your toddler to sleep on
the other. If your toddler is reluctant to give in to a nap, put your infant in a
sling and stroll around until he falls asleep. Then entice your toddler into
the bedroom for a sleep-inducing story and music. Market this as quiet time.
Two-year-olds are old enough to understand the concept of daily “quiet
time.” Eventually your toddler may actually look forward to these special
snuggle times with mom, and you’ll get a much-needed nap yourself.
One of the most difficult parts of parenting is realizing that you can’t
always be all things to all of your children. Parenting is a juggling act in
which you try to give each child what he needs according to his stage of
development and your energy level. Although mothers often seem to defy
many laws of mathematics, you just can’t give 100 percent to each child all
the time. You may need to call in some reserves. In this case, you might get

 your two-and-a-half-year-old involved in a playgroup for a few afternoons
each week or hire a teen to baby-sit your toddler after school. When
possible, mom and dad can do shift work. Dad takes the older child while
mother naps when the baby naps.

NIGHT WAKING IN PREVIOUSLY GOOD SLEEPER

Our one-year-old used to sleep through the night, but now he’s waking up
every night. He stands up and rattles his crib. Why is he doing this, and
what should we do?
Anytime a previously sound sleeper wakes up, consider what’s new in
baby’s development or in your family situation that would cause night
waking. Expect night waking when babies achieve a major developmental
skill such as sitting up, crawling, or walking. Babies seem to awaken to
“practice” this new skill. Your beginning walker may walk around his crib
half-asleep and awaken when he bangs into one side.
Try to resettle your crib walker with a minimum of fuss. First, try to get
him back to sleep without taking him out of the crib—soothing words, a pat
on the back, a lullaby—and as he sinks back down onto the mattress
continue to pat his back around sixty beats per minute in gradually
diminishing touches until he’s fast asleep.

 SQUIRMS TOO MUCH IN OUR BED

We enjoy having our three-month-old sleep in our bed, but now she’s
beginning to squirm so much that nobody’s getting any sleep. Help!
Some babies, and parents, are too sensitive to sleep snuggled against a
warm body. They need some space. Some babies seem to have a critical
sleeping distance from parents: too close and they wake up, too far and they
also wake up. Try putting just the right distance between you and your baby
at night. Place a rolled-up blanket or a foam bolster between you and baby.
These props may cushion the contact on your back from your nighttime
squirmer. If a few feet more of distance is needed, try a co-sleeper (see
here) or put her crib adjacent to your bed. In this way baby has her own bed
space, and you have yours, but you are still within close touching and
nursing distance.

TOO NOISY AT NIGHT

We want to sleep with our new baby, but it isn’t working. She’s too noisy,
and I’m too aware of her presence. She sleeps great, but I don’t, and my
husband wakes up every time she whimpers. Will she grow up insecure if
we don’t sleep with her?

 The fact that you are responsive enough even to consider sleeping with your
baby indicates that you are nurturing parents, and it’s likely that your baby
will grow up secure even if she sleeps separately. Sharing sleep is just one
part of the overall style of attachment parenting.
Wherever all family members sleep the best is the right arrangement.
Sometimes it takes a few weeks for parents to get used to sharing sleep,
especially dads. Give this arrangement a thirty-day free trial.
If it still isn’t working, try gradually increasing the distance between you
and baby until you both are not awakened by her nighttime noises. Place her
between you and a guardrail, not between you and your husband (see
illustration here). Or try putting her crib next to your bed. If you are still
supersensitive to her sounds, put her crib or cradle at the foot of your bed or
across the room. As the weeks pass, you’ll gradually discover a comfortable
sleeping distance. Giving some time to adjust to this new little person in
your night life is important. Things worthwhile are rarely achieved
instantly. Soon you will get used to these normal sounds. While a silent
bedroom is impossible with a new baby, you can block out some noises by
playing a continuous tape of soothing environmental sounds such as
running water and ocean waves.

HOW MUCH SLEEP?

My daughter is thirteen months old and sleeps from ten at night to seven
or eight in the morning. She also has one or two forty-five-minute naps

 during the day. Is this enough sleep? How much sleep should she be
getting?
Most thirteen-month-old babies sleep eleven to twelve hours a day,
including naps, so your daughter is probably getting enough sleep. If she
seems well rested, this may be enough sleep. But if she seems tired or
irritable or nods off to sleep frequently during the day, she needs more
sleep. While the optimal amount of sleep varies greatly from child to child,
below is a chart of average sleeping times for children at different ages.

AFRAID TO SLEEP ALONE

Our eighteen-month-old awakens every two hours. By the time I get to his
room, he is standing up in the crib reaching out for me. As soon as I try to
put him back down, he clings to me. But he used to sleep so well. Should I
just let him cry it out?
No! There’s a better solution. Between twelve and eighteen months a baby’s
normal separation anxiety intensifies. He becomes clingy during the day
and more aware of his separation and loneliness at night (see “Separation
Anxiety,” here, for a detailed explanation). Don’t be afraid to listen to your
baby. You are neither spoiling him nor being manipulated. He needs to be
parented through this high-need stage rather than have you succumb to the
trust-shattering and insensitive cry-it-out approach.

 Your baby is telling you that he can’t sleep alone. He misses you. Here
are your options. You can continue going in every time he wakes up and
offer periodic “It’s okay” reassurances; but you’re going to be very tired,
and this nighttime nuisance is going to wear thin after a while. Or you can
get right to the heart of the problem and provide nighttime company. Move
a mattress or a roll-away bed into your baby’s room and lie down next to his
crib when he goes to sleep. Then leave. Sometimes having a parent there
when baby goes to sleep is enough to pacify the night waker. If he continues
to awaken, you and your husband can try taking turns sleeping in his
bedroom—if you sleep well there. Or move his crib into your bedroom. Or
let him sleep at the foot of your bed on his crib mattress or a futon on the
floor.
Age
Hours of Sleep per Day
birth to 3 months 14 to 18
3 to 6 months
14 to 16
6 months to 2 years 12 to 14
2 to 5 years
10 to 12
When this nighttime separation-anxiety period lessens, gradually ease
baby back into his own room, or leave him in yours for a few more months
if this arrangement is working. Playing musical beds is a normal and
passing stage of nighttime parenting.

“NURSING” BABY TO SLEEP AT DAY CARE

 My six-month-old daughter will be entering day care part-time, and I’m
concerned about naptime. At home she either nurses to sleep or I take a
drive with her. How can I teach her another way to go to sleep?
Talk to your childcare provider about how he or she can create an
environment for your daughter that mimics her home environment as
closely as possible. It will also be less confusing for your baby if the
childcare provider can use a parenting style that’s similar to yours.
Even if your infant can’t be nursed to sleep, she can still be lulled to
sleep in the arms of her childcare provider. Nursing is about comforting, not
just breastfeeding, especially at this age. Anyone can nurse a baby to sleep
in this sense. Explain to the childcare provider that your infant is used to
being nursed to sleep and that you would like her to go to sleep in the
caregiver’s arms, either by rocking, singing, or with someone lying next to
her, if possible.
A nap-inducing trick that works well in day care is “wearing down.”
Show the childcare provider how to wear your baby in a carrier—preferably
a sling-type carrier—as naptime nears. Babies love to fall asleep in a sling.
Once your baby is in a deep sleep, the childcare provider can ease her out of
the sling and into the crib. (See “Wearing Down to Sleep,” here, and
“Babywear in Day Care,” here.)

NURSING ALL NIGHT

 Our six-month-old sleeps with us, and she used to wake up once or twice
a night to breastfeed. I could handle that, but now she wants to nurse all
night. I feel like a human pacifier. I’m exhausted.
You are right. Your baby is using you as a pacifier—“pacifier” meaning
“peacemaker.” But the human pacifier can wear out, and baby needs to
learn that there are nighttime pacifiers other than breastfeeding. First, let’s
get into your baby’s mind to understand why she does this. During the first
six months your baby has developed a familiar mental picture: Distress is
followed by comfort. When she’s hungry, thirsty, lonesome, anxious,
teething—relief is spelled B-R-E-A-S-T. By reflex you give her the breast
within seconds of her wakening. Perhaps your baby needs a few minutes to
resettle by herself without the breast.
First, increase her feeding during the day. Between six and nine months,
babies are often so busy playing they forget to feed. But at night hunger
pangs overcome, especially when the all-night diner is so convenient. At
least every three hours during the day take her into a quiet, unstimulating
room and get down to the business of feeding. Offer solids two to three
times a day. Baby needs to learn daytime is for playing and feeding;
nighttime is for sleeping.
When she awakens, instead of breastfeeding her by reflex, try nursing
her back to sleep without breastfeeding. Use calming techniques that work
with the minimal amount of fuss and arousal:

Lay on hands and pat her tummy.

 Hold her securely and cuddle awhile.
Try a nighttime lullaby to accompany either of the
above soothers.
Treat teething pain (see here).

JUST SAY NO

I’m trying to wean our eighteen-month-old from night nursing, because
I’m wearing out. But she’s not buying it, and I’m not a good martyr.
This baby is an older relative of the previous one. As we’ve said before,
babies are takers, and parents are givers. That’s a realistic fact of nighttime
life. But like many aspects of parenting, this is a question of balance.
Sometimes babies become “overtakers.” Some mothers, because they are
sensitive and giving, continue letting baby drain them until they give out.
This scene is not what attachment parenting is all about. Fortunately, it
sounds like you have a realistic appraisal of how much you can give and
when to stop. That’s part of maturing as a giving parent.
If you continue the nighttime-parenting level that you are resenting and
from which you are becoming too exhausted, you will carry this resentment
—and your tiredness—into your daytime relationship with your baby and
your spouse, and the whole family will lose. For suggestions for dealing
with all-night nursers, see the boxes here.

 WAKES UP FOR BOTTLE

Our fifteen-month-old won’t go to sleep without his “ba-ba.” Then he
wakes up twice during the night screaming for his bottle. I’m getting to
hate “ba-ba,” and I wish he did.
Babies like to feed off to sleep either by breast or bottle. And, in fact, many
toddlers need a before-bed feeding to set aside their hunger until morning.
There are a couple of problems with night bottles. Baby always associates
going to sleep with the bottle, just as the breastfeeding baby associates sleep
with breastfeeding. As we’ve stated elsewhere, an important fact of sleep is
called sleep associations: The object or person baby associates with going to
sleep is the same prop baby expects in order to get back to sleep. The key to
keeping babies asleep is giving them various sleep associations so that they
don’t get hooked on one.
Parents also get into a sort of nighttime rut. The bottle or breast works so
well that they stick to it. This is okay if you’re going to offer the same prop
every time baby wakes up. But if you want baby to learn to resettle himself
without “ba-ba,” offer a variety of go-to-sleep props. For example, give him
his bottle in a rocking chair, then help baby snuggle to sleep with one arm
around a teddy bear and the other around mommy or daddy. When he
awakens, cuddling the bear may be enough to resettle him.

WON’T WIND DOWN

 Our nine-month-old just won’t wind down. We know he’s tired, but he
won’t give up. How can we get him to go to sleep without so many
hassles?
You can’t force a baby to go to sleep; but here are some sleep-inducing
hints that allow sleep to overtake your baby: Avoid before-bed activities that
rev up baby. An evening wrestle with daddy is okay, and may burn off
excess energy, but not just before bedtime. A warm bath, a soothing
massage, quiet music, calmly looking at two or three books you keep just
for bedtime, are time-tested winding-downers.

NIGHTWEANING TODDLERS:
11 Alternatives for the All-Night Nurser
Frequent night nursing is characteristic of high-need babies. They regard it
like going to their favorite restaurant. The ambiance is peaceful, the server
is familiar, the cuisine is superb, and they love the management. Ah, life is
good! Who can blame the all-night gourmet?
Before seeking a solution to the problem, ask yourself how much of a
problem the frequent night nursing is. This stage of high-level night
nurturing will pass. Both you and your baby will someday sleep through the
night. On the other hand, if you are sleep deprived to the degree that you are
barely functioning during the day, you are resenting your nighttime
parenting style (and your baby), and the rest of your family relationships are
deteriorating, you need to make some changes in your nighttime feeding
schedule. Here is a parenting principle we learned many kids ago: IF YOU
RESENT IT, CHANGE IT!
Even if you can’t get your baby to sleep through the whole night, you
can help him cut back on nighttime nursing, making the situation more
tolerable for you. Try these solutions for dealing with all-night nursing:

 1. Tank your baby up during the day. Toddlers love to breastfeed, yet
they are often so busy during the day that they forget to nurse, or mom is so
busy that she forgets to nurse. But at night, there mom is, only inches away,
and baby wants to make up for missed daytime nursings. (This is a common
scenario when a breastfeeding mother returns to work outside the home.)
Finding more time to nurse during the day may make the breast less needed
at night.
2. Increase daytime touch. Wear your baby in a sling or otherwise give
your baby more touch time during the day. When babies get older, it’s easy
to greatly decrease the amount of touching time without realizing it. Allnight nursing can sometimes be a baby’s signal reminding mothers not to
rush their baby into independence. As a child develops a healthy
independence, she leaves and comes back, lets go and clings, step by step
until she is going out more than she is coming back. Many mothers have
noticed that babies and toddlers show an increased need for nursing and
being held right before they begin a new stage of development, such as
crawling or walking.
3. Awaken baby for a full feeding just before you go to bed. Rather than
going off to sleep only to be wakened an hour or two later, get in a feeding
when you retire for the night. This way, your sleep will be disturbed one
fewer time, and (hopefully) you’ll get a longer stretch of uninterrupted
sleep.
4. Get baby used to other “nursings.” Try wearing baby down to sleep in
a baby sling. After baby is fed but not yet asleep, wear him in a baby sling
around the house or around the block. When he’s in a deep sleep, ease him
onto your bed and extricate yourself from the sling. This is a good way for
dad to take over part of the bedtime routine. Eventually your baby will
associate father’s arms with falling asleep, and he’ll be willing to accept
comfort from dad in the middle of the night as an alternative to nursing.
Other ways to ease your baby into sleep without nursing him include patting
or rubbing his back, singing and rocking, or even dancing in the dark to
some tunes you like or lullabies you croon.

 5. Make the breast less available. Once your baby has nursed to sleep, use
your finger to detach him from the breast. Then pull your nightgown over
your breast and sleep covered up. A baby who can’t find the nipple quickly
may just fall back to sleep. If you can stay awake long enough to put the
breast away, he may not latch on again so soon.
6. “Nummies go night-night.” Between twelve and eighteen months, your
child has the capacity to understand simple sentences. Program your toddler
not to expect to be nursed when she awakens, saying, for example, “We’ll
nurse again when Mr. Sun comes up.” The key is to get baby to associate
“it’s dark outside” with “the kitchen is closed,” except, perhaps, for the
initial nursing down to sleep. Also, consider nursing in a rocking chair and
no longer nursing in the bed so that she no longer associates the bed with
nursing. Expect to have several rough nights. Remember, though, that you
are there for her and not letting her cry by herself. This won’t damage your
trust relationship, because you are still there.
When you nurse her to sleep (or have the first or second night nursing),
the last thing she should hear is “mommy go night-night, Daddy go nightnight, baby go night-night, and nummies go night-night” (or whatever she
dubs her favorite pacifiers). When she wakes during the night, the first thing
she should hear is a gentle reminder, “Nummies are night-night. Baby go
night-night, too.” This program may require a week or two of repetition.
Soon she will get the message that daytime is for feeding and nighttime is
for sleeping. If “nummies” stay night-night, baby eventually will too. To
reinforce this teaching, here is an idea we got from several moms: Put
together a picture book of babies sleeping without a breast nearby. Several
times during the day review these pictures and talk to her about how the
babies sleep without “nummies.”
7. Offer a sub. High-need babies are not easily fooled; they don’t readily
accept substitutes. Yet it’s worth a try. Remember, nursing does not always
mean breastfeeding. Honor your husband with his share of night “nursing,”
so your toddler does not always expect to be comforted by your breasts.
This gives dad a chance to develop creative nighttime fathering skills and
the child a chance to expand her acceptance of nighttime comforters.

 Martha notes: One of the ways we survived a toddler who wanted to nurse
frequently during the night was for me to temporarily go off night call. Bill
would wear Stephen down in a baby sling, so he got used to Bill’s way of
putting him to sleep. When he woke up, Bill would again provide the
comfort Stephen needed by rocking and holding him in a neck nestle
position, using the warm fuzzy and singing a lullaby. After three or four
nights of father nursing, Stephen was back to nursing only once or twice.
Babies may initially protest when offered father instead of mother, but
remember, crying and fussing in the arms of a loving parent is not the same
as crying it out. Dads, realize that you have to remain calm and patient
during these nighttime fathering challenges. You owe it to both your wife
and baby not to become rattled or angry if your baby resists the comfort
you offer.
Try this weaning-to-father arrangement on a weekend, or another time
when your husband can look forward to two or three nights when he doesn’t
have to go to work the next day. You will probably have to sell him on this
technique, yet we assure you that we have personally tried it and it does
work. Be sure to use these night-weaning tactics only when baby is old
enough and your gut feeling tells you that your baby is nursing at night out
of habit and not out of need.

8. Increase the sleeping distance between you. If the above suggestions
do not entice your persistent night nurser to cut back, but you still feel you
must encourage him to do so, try another sleeping arrangement. Try putting
him on a mattress or futon at the foot of your bed, or even in another room
with a sibling. Dad or mom can lie down beside baby to comfort him if he
awakens. Mom can even nurse, if necessary, and then sneak back to her
own bed if continued closeness seems to encourage continued waking.
9. Just say no! When our son Matthew was twenty months old, Martha felt
desperate for sleep if awakened more than two times. I often woke up to the
following: “Nee” (his word for nurse)… “No!”… “Nee!”… “No!”…
“Nee!”… “No, not now. In the morning. Mommy’s sleeping. You sleep
too.” A firm but calm, peaceful voice almost always did the trick. You can

 manage to stay peaceful in this situation when you know you are not
damaging your very secure, attachment-parented child.
10. Sleep in another room. If your baby persists in wanting to nurse all
night, relocate “Mom’s All-Night Diner” to another room and let baby sleep
next to dad for a few nights. He may wake less often when the breast is not
so available, and when he does wake, he will learn to accept comfort from
dad. Use this “move out” technique as a last resort.
11. Let baby be the barometer. When trying any behavior-changing
technique on a child, don’t persist with a bad experiment. Use your baby’s
daytime behavior as a barometer of whether your change in nighttime
parenting style is working. If after several nights of working on night
weaning you feel that your baby is her same self during the day, then
continue with your gradual night weaning. If, however, she becomes more
clingy, whiny, or distant, take this as a clue to slow down your rate of night
weaning.
Babies will eventually wean, and someday they will sleep through the night.
This high maintenance stage of nighttime parenting will pass. The time in
your arms, at your breast, and in your bed is a relatively short while in the
life of a baby, yet the memories of love and availability will last forever.
What works best in our family is wearing down. Suppose around eightthirty you are marketing sleep, but baby is not buying it. Place baby in a
sling-type carrier and wear him around the house, or around the block in
warm weather, while singing a slow, repetitive tune like my favorite, “Old
Man River.” Add a touch of the neck nestle, and it’s “night-night.” (See
related sections on wearing down, here, and the neck nestle, here.)

BEDTIME PROCRASTINATOR

 Our two-year-old doesn’t want to go to bed until nine or ten o’clock.
We’re tired after a day’s work, and we’re ready to go to sleep before he is.
What time should a two-year-old go to bed?
Every family needs to arrive at a bedtime that gets baby enough sleep and
enough quality time with the parents. Early bedtimes were more common
years ago when rural families went to bed early and got up early. If you
both work outside the home during the day, expect your baby to want a later
bedtime. Picture this situation: Mom and/or dad return home from work
around 6:00 P.M. expecting baby to be ready for bed by 8:00 P.M. That
gives you two hours with baby, and it’s anything but quality time. The time
before bedtime is often a cranky period for baby, not the best time of the
day for you to enjoy being with him.
Consider this alternative. Have the caregiver give baby a later afternoon
nap so that he is well rested and fun to be with when you arrive home. Opt
for a later bedtime. Make evening time prime family time.
Bedtime rituals are the salvation of tired parents. Babies, like adults, are
creatures of habit. Before-bed rituals condition baby to recall a mental
picture that when a certain activity begins (warm bath, wearing down,
massage, story, and cuddle), sleep is soon to follow. The older the child and
the busier the daytime parents, the longer the bedtime procrastination.
Children have a way of extracting from parents the very thing they have the
least of—time.

NIGHTTIME BOTTLE SAFETY

 Going off to sleep with a bottle of milk, formula, or juice can damage the
teeth—a condition called bottle mouth (see here). To ease baby off the
nighttime bottle, try watering down: Gradually dilute the bottle contents
with increasing amounts of water until baby figures out it’s not worth
waking up and fussing for a bottle of water. Also, don’t bottle prop. Though
it is tempting to leave a bottle in the crib for a 3:00 A.M. self-serve, don’t!
Not only does this practice contribute to tooth decay, baby can choke on the
contents, with no one there to help.

Dr. Bob’s tip: After spending a month of wasting two hours each evening
trying to nurse Andrew down to sleep at eight P.M. (he would keep
squirming and waking up), we just let him stay up with us. The afternoon
nap left him happy and playful, and he would roam around the house as we
all enjoyed our evening together. Then we would all go to bed together at
eleven P.M., and Cheryl and baby would sleep until nine or ten A.M. No
time was wasted, and we got some time together as a couple (when Andrew
was happy on his own) and as a family. This works only if baby is happy
during the evening and mom does not have to get up early.

WON’T GO TO BED

Our baby won’t go to bed before midnight. What do we do?

 Take charge! You are the parents, and that gives you the privilege of
deciding what bedtime needs to be for your family. Try these suggestions:

Push the afternoon nap back to an earlier time so
that baby is truly tired. If baby naps too much or
too late in the day, he may not be tired enough to
be a student in your slumber school.
Stick to a bedtime ritual—winding down and
wearing down, brushing teeth, a lullaby, and
lights out—so that baby expects sleep to follow
this routine.
Try the cuddly approach: Lie down next to baby
with a lullaby tape, give him a massage, lay on a
comforting hand. Try whatever you can think of
to get baby to relax and enjoy this new way of
being together. Remember, he is used to being up
in his bright and stimulating world or playing
with someone. Now you are asking him to give in
to sleep.
Try the adult-in-charge approach. If despite all
your soothing strategies baby still protests
succumbing to sleep, calmly but firmly lay hands
on baby, saying, “It’s okay… go to sleep… go
night-night.” You communicate that this is sleep

 time and your only agenda for the moment is to
usher the two of you into dreamland.
“Play dead.” If, even after you minister to him,
baby still fusses and fumes, use your final ploy—
pretending to sleep. Lie next to baby and play
dead (see “Waking Up to Play,” here). Baby will
eventually wind down and join you in slumber. It
may take a week or two, but eventually baby will
get the message that this is the routine in your
home. If baby won’t stay in bed with you, try a
mattress on the floor of an empty spare bedroom
or baby’s bedroom with the door closed. Baby can
wander around the room without hurting himself
while you model sleep in the bed. Even if it takes
a few hours at first, be patient. Over the weeks,
baby’s boredom should bring him into bed to
snuggle to sleep with you, and he will eventually
learn to come to bed right away.
Bore him to bed. If your toddler has been away
from you during the day or is going through a
stage of separation anxiety, he may not want to
separate from you at night and turn off at a
preassigned bedtime. If you sense that your child
is not tired or will definitely not go to bed on his
own and you yourself are not ready to go to bed,

 simply do the preparing-for-bed ritual and then go
about your adult agenda. Eventually you will
notice baby crumpled sound asleep in the middle
of the living room floor. Let baby crash wherever
he wishes. Pick him up and place him in bed.
Sometimes during the second and third year,
children go through periods of separation anxiety
where they do not want to drift off to sleep
without you. Snuggle down together in front of a
soothing video. I, Dr. Bill, have spent many
nights with our babies watching Lady and the
Tramp. Actually, I got to enjoy this special time.

DELAYING THE EARLY RISER

Our two-year-old wakes up at sunrise and comes into our room. Then he
wakes us up to play. How can we get him to sleep in?
Through the open shade comes the first ray of morning sunlight and wakens
your little rooster. Here’s how to catch an hour or so more sleep. Put
blackout drapes in your baby’s sleeping room. Lay down rules for noiseless
waking with the older siblings. Leave a box of fun toys, and even an
occasional surprise toy, at baby’s bedside to entice him to stay in his room

 and play quietly by himself. A nibbly snack on a bedside table may tide the
hungry baby over until breakfast. If baby persists in coming into your room
(in the morning or during the night), lay down some entry rules: Put a
sleeping bag at the foot of your bed with the admonition “quiet as a mouse.”
Show your child how to quietly slip into the sleeping bag for some extended
sleep. These going-to-sleep-and-staying-asleep techniques are temporary
strategies. Your child will eventually learn to leave your bed, go to sleep
and stay asleep on her own, and adjust to a regular bedtime. As with the
other aspects of attachment parenting, the need to be parented to sleep lasts
such a short while, but your message of love and security lasts a lifetime.

SEARS PARENTING LIBRARY ALERT
For a complete guide to helping you and your baby get a good night’s sleep,
and for solving any sleep challenges you may face, see The Baby Sleep
Book.

OceanofPDF.com

 16

OceanofPDF.com

 Parenting the Fussy or Colicky Baby

Some babies enter the world with unique qualities that early on merit
labels such as “fussy.” These challenging babies will extract from their
caregivers every ounce of patience and creativity and will leave all those
who have had the privilege of caring for them a bit wiser and more
sensitive. Let’s now meet these special little persons.

OceanofPDF.com

 FUSSY BABIES
Our first three babies were so easy that we wondered what all the fuss was
about difficult babies. Enter Hayden, our fourth, who turned our relatively
peaceful home upside down. Hayden came wired differently. What worked
for our other babies, she didn’t buy. For eating and sleeping, the term
“schedule” was not in Hayden’s vocabulary. She was a constantly in-arms
and at-breast baby. She wailed when we put her down, settled when we
carried her—usually. Playing pass-the-baby became a Sears family game.
Hayden spent hours being passed from arms to arms. When Martha’s arms
gave out, I held her. Wearing her in a baby carrier usually worked, but not
always.
If we tried to leave her for a much-needed baby break, she was
inconsolable. The family motto became “Everywhere that Bill and Martha
went, Hayden was sure to go.” Hayden was glued to us day and night, and
she carried her daytime fussiness into the night. She vehemently rejected
the crib; she could only sleep next to a warm body in our bed. The crib,
which had comfortably housed our first three babies, soon found its way to
a garage sale. The only consistent behavior from Hayden was her
inconsistency: What worked one day didn’t work the next. We were always
trying new ways of comforting her. “Demanding” became her label, and she
wore it well.

 Our feelings toward Hayden were as erratic as her behavior. Some days
we were sympathetic; some days we were exhausted; other days we were
just confused and angry.
If she had been our first baby, we would have felt it was our fault and
wondered what we were doing wrong. But by this time we were
experienced parents, so we knew it wasn’t us! Then we were bombarded
with conflicting advice: “You carry her too much.” “You’re spoiling her;
just let her cry.” “She’s manipulating you.” We fielded these attacks on our
parenting styles by carrying on with what worked and what felt right.
Lesson number one in parenting this type of baby: Babies fuss primarily
because of their own temperament, not because of your parenting abilities.

WHAT’S IN A NAME?
In this chapter you will meet three types of babies who merit three different
titles: fussy babies, high-need babies, and colicky babies. While all three
share many similar features and respond to similar comforting techniques,
they are different.
Fussy babies is the general tag that is given to babies who fuss to be
picked up but are easily comforted and satisfied as long as they are held.
These babies cry and protest for a variety of reasons during the first few
weeks but then mellow out as they get used to life outside the womb.
High-need babies is a kinder and more descriptive term than “fussy
babies.” These babies crave physical contact. They like to be held
constantly and will protest loudly when put down. They are supersensitive,
intense, have difficulty self-soothing, and can be very demanding and
draining on parents. High-need babies are, however, generally happy when
their needs (as they perceive them) are met. These “Velcro babies,” as we
dub them, are blessed with persistent personalities that encourage parents to
keep working at a caregiving style until they find the one that works.
Colicky babies don’t just fuss, they hurt! A colicky baby will scream
inconsolably for hours, or will generally be unhappy and appear to be

 hurting in the evening or all day every day, no matter how much soothing,
bouncing, and holding you do. Oftentimes, as you will soon learn, they hurt
because of a medical cause. In the Sears Family Pediatric Practice we
seldom use the term “colicky baby”; we prefer a more accurate term, the
“hurting baby.” This term motivates both parents and doctor to keep
searching for a reason baby hurts and to come up with a comforting
solution.
It’s not as important to tag your baby with the right term as it is to
understand why your baby fusses and to learn what you can do about it.
Within weeks after her birth we knew we had a special baby with special
needs who needed a special kind of parenting—and we were determined to
give it to her. But how? We believed that Hayden would thrive if we
developed a more sensitive and creative parenting style. But it was tough.
We could have nicknamed Hayden “More.” She needed more of everything,
especially holding and nursing, except sleep. We soon learned that Hayden
was not the standard baby, and standard baby advice wouldn’t work for her.
Once we viewed her not as a behavioral problem to be fixed but as a
personality to be nurtured, living with her became much easier.

OceanofPDF.com

 A High-Need Baby

One of our earliest confusions was how to describe Hayden. We didn’t like
the usual terms “difficult” and “fussy.” These were negative and demeaning.
Besides, they implied one or both members of the parent-infant pair were
failing: Something was wrong with the baby or something was wrong with
the parents, and we didn’t accept that. We kept justifying Hayden’s behavior
and our parenting styles by saying, “She has a high level of needs,” and we
had heard many other parents with similar babies say the same. One day the
light went on. “Let’s call her a high-need baby.” We lived with this term for
a while and tried it on many other babies and parents. It fit, and we stayed
with it. This term was the turning point of our acceptance and appreciation
of Hayden.
Redefining Hayden in more positive terms helped us focus on her
exciting qualities rather than her inconvenient ones. Our job was to accept
rather than squelch Hayden’s unique personality, appreciate her special
traits, and channel those traits into behaviors that would work for her, and
for our family. We learned to open ourselves up to be flexible enough to
keep working at a style of parenting that helped all family members thrive.
The parents who are most frustrated by high-need babies have difficulty
unloading the baggage of a control mind-set.

 “High-need baby” says it all. It’s a term that accurately describes why
these babies are so demanding and the level of parenting they need. It’s a
positive, uplifting term, sounding intelligent and special. It relieves the guilt
from parents and gives these special babies the recognition they deserve.
Parents of fussy babies, don’t you feel better already?
“But she’ll outgrow it,” friends kept reassuring. Yes and no. Once we
understood and accepted the baby we had and adjusted our parenting styles
accordingly, life with Hayden became easier. But her needs didn’t diminish
with age; they only changed. She graduated from a high-need baby to a
high-need toddler to a high-need child and a high-need teen. She was slow
to wean from her three favorite places of security: bed, breast, and arms.
But she did wean. How did we discipline her? Sensitively.
Thirty-four years later Hayden is a wonderfully creative, deeply
sensitive, and delightfully exuberant person who is caring and giving to
others and to us. What Hayden taught us:

Babies fuss primarily because of their own
temperament (meaning their basic tendency to
behave a certain way), not because of their
parents’ parenting abilities.
Every baby comes wired with a level of needs,
and requires a certain level of parenting for all
members of the parent-infant relationship to bring
out the best in one another.

 To accept and appreciate that high-need babies
have unique temperaments and require a unique
style of parenting. She taught us to be more
sensitive, a quality that has carried over into our
professional, social, and marital relationships.
What we taught Hayden:

Her caregivers are responsive to her needs.
She has value (it’s okay to have needs).
Her caregiving world is a warm and trusting place
to be.
We have gathered from our own experience and from hundreds of highneed babies (and their surviving parents) many insights on why babies fuss
and what to do about it. Here are the strategies that work for most babies
and parents most of the time.

OceanofPDF.com

 Features of High-Need Babies

To help you recognize if you are blessed with a special type of baby, here
are the most common characteristics mothers note in describing their highneed babies.
“Supersensitive.”

High-need

babies

are

acutely

aware

of

their

environment. They are easily bothered by changes in their secure and
predictable environment and do not readily accept alternatives. They startle
easily during the day and settle poorly at night. This sensitivity enables
them to form deep attachments to trusted and consistent caregivers, but
don’t expect them to readily accept strangers or baby-sitters. They have
selective tastes and definite mind-sets. This sensitive personality trait,
which may seem exhausting early on, is likely to profit the baby when
older. These babies are more capable of forming deeper and more intimate
relationships.
“I just can’t put him down.” Lying peacefully in a crib and needing to be
picked up only for feeding and changing—this is not the profile of a highneed baby (or of most babies). Motion, not stillness, is a way of life for
these babies. These are in-arms, at-breast babies who seldom accept much
down time in a crib.

 “Not a self-soother.” This baby is not known for his ability to self-soothe.
Parents confide, “He can’t relax by himself.” Mother’s lap is his chair,
father’s arms and chest his crib, mother’s breasts his pacifier. These babies
are very choosy about inanimate mother substitutes, such as cuddlies and
pacifiers, and often forcefully reject them. This expectation of a higher
standard of soothing is a personality trait that enables a high-need baby to
become a people person rather than a thing person—a forerunner to
developing the quality of intimacy.
“Intense.” “He’s in high gear all the time,” observed a tired father. Highneed babies put a lot of energy into what they do. They cry loudly, laugh
delightedly, and are quick to protest if their “meals” are not served on time.
Because they feel things more deeply and interact more forcefully, these
babies are capable of forming deep and lasting attachments and are
disturbed if these attachments are broken. These babies are likely to become
enthusiastic individuals. Of the many labels these babies receive, we have
never heard them called boring.

THE HIGH-NEED BABY—A BLESSING OR A
TRIAL?
One day we were comparing our babies’ temperaments when we realized
that high-need babies have a good thing going for them. Consider which
baby gets the higher standard of care and the most out of life. The high-need
babies get held more because they demand it. The high-need babies get
taken more places because they are difficult to leave with anyone else. And
who gets more touch, more hands-on comforting, more time at breast, and
cozier sleeping quarters? These babies fly first-class. Which parents know
their babies best? Which parents have, for survival, developed more

 creative parenting styles? You guessed it. Parents of high-need babies get
the prize. As a matter of fact, we believe that all infants have some traits of
the high-need baby.
“Wants to nurse all the time.” Expect a feeding schedule to be foreign to
this baby’s mind-set. She will try to marathon breastfeed every two to three
hours around the clock and enjoy long periods of comfort sucking. Not only
do these babies feed more often, they suck longer. High-need babies are
notoriously slow to wean and usually breastfeed into the second or third
year.
“Awakens frequently.” “Why do high-need babies need more of
everything but sleep?” asked a tired mother, groaning. They awaken
frequently during the night and seldom reward parents with a much-needed
long nap during the day. You may feel that your baby has an internal light
bulb that cannot easily turn off. Perhaps this is why these babies are often
labeled “bright” as older children.
“Unsatisfied, unpredictable.” Just as you figure out what your baby needs,
expect a change of plans. As one exhausted mother put it, “Just when I think
I have the game won, baby ups the ante.” One set of comforting measures
works one day but fails the next.
“Hyperactive, hypertonic.” These babies squirm a lot while being held,
until you find their favorite holding position. Nursing nuisances are
frequent as these babies arch their backs and attempt to do back dives while

 feeding. “There’s no such thing as a still shot,” remarked a photographerfather of his high-need baby. While holding some high-need babies, you can
feel their muscles tense.
“Draining.” Besides putting their own energy into what they do, these
babies use up parents’ energy, too. “He wears me out” is a frequent
complaint.
“Uncuddly.” These are the most difficult high-need babies, because they
don’t always accept the old standby of constant holding. Whereas most
babies melt into the arms and mold into comfortable positions while being
held, the uncuddly baby arches his back, stiffens his arms and legs, and
withdraws from intimate holding. Most tiny babies crave physical contact
and settle when held tightly; uncuddly babies are slower to soften into a
comfortable nestle in parents’ arms. Eventually most do if the mother
persists in her efforts to bond, offering baby a safe, firm holding place that
baby can give in to.
“Demanding.” Babies with high needs have high standards and have a
strong personality to get what they need. Watch two babies raise their arms
as a “Pick me up” gesture to their parents. If parents miss the cue, the
mellower baby may put his arms down and begin to satisfy himself in play.
Not so the high-need baby, who at the unacceptable thought that the parent
missed his cue will howl and continue his demands until he is picked up.

 Be prepared for this demanding personality trait to set you up as a target
for destructive advice such as, “She’s manipulating you.” Consider for a
moment what would happen if the high-need child were not demanding. If
baby had a strong need but did not have a strong temperament to persist
until the need was met, perhaps baby would not thrive to her full potential.
The demanding trait of a high-need baby may be a forerunner of the later
label “the strong-willed child.”
Exhausted parents often ask, “How long will these traits last, and what can
we expect as he grows?” Don’t be too quick to predict the person your child
will become. Some difficult babies show a complete turnabout in
personality later in childhood. But in general, the needs of these babies do
not lessen; they only change. While these early personality traits may sound
somewhat negative and initially cause parents to feel a bit discouraged, as
life with a new baby progresses most parents who adopt our approach to the
high-need baby change their tune to include more positive labels, such as
“challenging,” “interesting,” “bright.” Those same qualities that at first
seem to be such an exhausting liability often turn out to be an asset for the
child and the parents if the cues of the high-need baby have been accurately
read and appropriately responded to. The intense baby may become the
creative child; the sensitive infant, the compassionate child. The little taker
may later become the big giver.

OceanofPDF.com

 WHY BABIES FUSS
Now that you have met this special person, how do you handle the highneed baby? To learn how to parent these special babies, you first need to
understand why babies fuss. Very simply, babies fuss for the same reasons
adults fuss: They hurt, either physically or emotionally, they need
something, or they want something.

OceanofPDF.com

 Babies Fuss to Fit

While in the womb, the preborn baby fits perfectly into his environment.
Perhaps there will never be another home in which he fits so harmoniously
—a free-floating environment where the temperature is constant and his
nutritional needs are automatically and predictably met. In essence, the
womb environment is well organized.
Birth suddenly disrupts this organization. During the month following
birth, baby tries to regain his sense of organization and fit into life outside
the womb. Birth and adaptation to postnatal life bring out the temperament
of the baby, so for the first time he must do something to have his needs
met. He is forced to act, to “behave.” If hungry, cold, or startled, he cries.
He must make an effort to get the things he needs from his caregiving
environment. If his needs are simple and he can get what he wants easily,
he’s labeled an “easy baby”; if he does not adapt readily, he is labeled
“difficult.” He doesn’t fit. Fussy babies are poor fitters, who don’t resign
themselves easily to the level of care they are being given. They need more,
and they fuss to get it.

OceanofPDF.com

 Missing the Womb

Another reason young babies fuss is that they miss the womb environment
they once had. Baby expects life will continue as before, but things are not
right and he does not feel right. Baby wants to adapt to his new
environment and has an intense desire to be comfortable. The conflict
between wanting comfort and not being able to achieve it causes inner
stress and outward behavior that is termed “fussy.” Baby’s fussings are
pleas to his caregivers to help him learn what makes him feel right, a sort of
“Give me my womb back” plea until he is old enough to develop his own
self-comforting measures.

OceanofPDF.com

 The Need-Level Concept

All babies need holding, feeding, stroking, and other responsive attachment
behaviors, but some need more than others, and some babies communicate
their needs more. It was while trying to figure out why some of our babies
behaved differently although they received the same level of care that we
came up with the need-level concept. We believe that every baby has a
certain level of need, which, if met, enables baby to reach his full potential,
emotionally, physically, and developmentally. It also stands to reason that
every baby would come with a corresponding temperament to be able to
communicate this level of need.
Suppose a baby has medium needs that must be met in order for him to
feel he fits. He fusses only a little and gets held and soothed just the right
amount to keep the fussiness in check. This baby may be labeled an “easy
baby.” Suppose he needs a lot of holding. He continues to fuss when he’s
put down so he gets held more, sort of like a baby who demands an upgrade
from coach to first class. This baby receives the label “demanding.” But
once in first class (lots of holding, frequent feedings, and day and night
attachments) he fusses less and less. He’s now where he fits, and there is no
longer a need to fuss. Both babies are normal, both fit, and one is not better
than the other. They just have different levels of need and a corresponding
temperament to get their needs met.

 OceanofPDF.com

 A Sense of Oneness

The demanding baby who “cries whenever I put her down” needs to
continue her sense of oneness with the mother. Before birth this baby had a
oneness with the mother. After birth mother knows the baby is now a
separate person, but baby does not feel separate. Baby still needs to feel
connected to mother, birth having changed only the manner in which this
connection is expressed. This baby will protest or fuss if her attachment to
mother is disrupted. She needs to continue the attachment a bit longer, and
fortunately she has the ability to demand this. If this baby’s needs are heard
and filled, she fits; she is in harmony with her environment. She feels right.
When a baby feels right, her temperament becomes more organized, and she
becomes a “more settled” baby.

OceanofPDF.com

 Glued or Unglued

Mothers often refer to this sense of oneness as “My baby seems glued to
me.” They also use the term “unglued” to describe the way their babies
crumble when they lose this sense of oneness with their environment.
Nancy, a mother who had worked long and hard to develop a strong
attachment bond with her high-need baby, told us, “When my baby
becomes unglued and seems to be falling apart, I now feel I can pick up the
pieces and glue him back together. It has been a long, tough struggle, but I
am finally beginning to cash in on my investment.”

OceanofPDF.com

 MATCHING BABIES AND PARENTS
While it is true that babies begin to fuss primarily because of their own
temperament, not because of the parents’ skills, parents are not completely
off the hook. How quickly parents pick up on their baby’s need level and
how sensitively they respond can influence the intensity of baby’s fussing
and whether or not their baby’s demanding temperament is channeled into
desirable or undesirable personality traits. Babies need a central attachment
figure to organize their behavior; this person is usually mother. Without this
organizing influence, baby remains disorganized, and fussy behavior
results. This means changing our mind-set from regarding newborns as
separated persons to viewing the mother-baby relationship as one. For some
high-need babies outbursts of fussy behavior, commonly called colic, are
withdrawal symptoms resulting from the loss of the regulatory influence of
mother as an organizer.

OceanofPDF.com

 Bringing Out the Best in Your High-Need Baby—And Yourself

Child-care specialists have long debated the nature versus nurture question:
whether it’s primarily a baby’s genes or his home that determines how an
infant behaves. It’s really both. Baby’s temperament isn’t a blank slate onto
which caregivers can write a set of rules that will cause the baby to act any
way they wish. Neither is a baby’s temperament permanently cast in
cement. While all babies come equipped with a certain temperament, the
caregiving environment can influence a child’s personality (how a baby
feels and reacts in certain situations). One of the most exciting new areas of
research is the awareness of how the quality and quantity of mothering and
fathering can affect a child’s personality.
An even newer and more exciting area of research is the way the
temperament of a baby affects the parents. A mother of a high-need baby
once confided to us, “Our fussy baby absolutely brings out the best and the
worst in me.” This is certainly true. Just as babies come wired with different
temperaments, mothers and fathers also start out with varying levels of
nurturing abilities (depending on how they themselves were nurtured). For
some mothers, nurturing is automatic and is proportional to the need levels
of their babies. Other mothers are slower to match their responsiveness to
the need level of their babies and require a boost. Baby provides that boost.

 Both mother and baby are endowed with mutual temperaments that, if they
get the right start, bring out the best in each other.

OceanofPDF.com

 Baby’s Temperament—Parents’ Responsiveness

As we’ve said, every baby is born with a certain level of need. To help them
convey the level of care they need, babies possess attachment-promoting
behaviors (APBs), those “irresistible” qualities and behaviors that draw the
caregiver toward the baby and promote responsiveness: smiling, cooing,
clinging, eye gazing. The strongest of these APBs is the baby’s cry.
Every parent, especially the mother, begins his and her parenting career
with a certain level of nurturing abilities. The key to parenting the highneed baby is to match the nurturing abilities of the parents with the need
level of the baby. The infant becomes an active participant in shaping the
parents’ behavior so they can fit into a style of parenting that brings out the
best in their baby and themselves. Here’s how this matching system works.

HANDLING CRITICISM OF YOUR PARENTING
Early in your parenting career, expect to be on the receiving end of wellmeaning advisers giving you the subtle (and sometimes not-so-subtle)
message that their way is better than yours. This is especially likely to be
the case if you are blessed with a high-need baby. You may feel that
criticizing your way of parenting is like attacking your personhood. Here
are some ways to cope with criticism:
Lessen your exposure. Nothing divides friends like a difference of opinion
regarding parenting styles. Surrounding yourself with like-minded parents
is the best way to avoid criticism.

 Be confident. Confidence is contagious. When a would-be adviser is about
to pounce, exude conviction. (“It’s working for us.”)
Consider the source. The attachment style of parenting may threaten the
person who believes otherwise. You may push guilt buttons. They wish they
had the courage to follow their own instincts as you have.
Respect your parents. Most criticism is likely to come from your parents
or in-laws. Remember, they grew up in the “spoiling” era, when some
parents placed more trust in experts than in themselves. Acknowledge that
times and experts change. Admit that in another time and place you might
have used a different approach yourself. Tell them you think you turned out
pretty well! Assure them that your “new and radical ways” are really old
ways tried and true. Grandmother had her shot; now it’s your turn. To make
grandparents your allies, focus on issues where you do have something in
common. Try to understand your parents’ feelings. Every time you do
something with your child that is different from the way they did with you,
they may take it as implying that you are raising your baby better than they
raised you.
Defend your child. Most people don’t understand a high-need child. To
them a baby who needs to be held a lot is simply spoiled. You may have to
do a bit of educating. But avoid giving the impression you think your way is
the only way and their way is wrong. Convey to your criticizer that you
respect her way of child raising if it is working for her, and ask her to
respect your way as long as it is working for you.
Don’t set yourself up. Getting involved in a discussion about the “big
three” (discipline, extended breastfeeding, and sleeping with your baby) is
like waving a red flag in front of people with a different mind-set. Stress
that parenting styles are a matter of personal choice and take care not to
preach judgments that one style may in all circumstances be better than
another. If you have developed a healthy balance in all the aspects of
attachment parenting, the ease with which you go about your parenting and
the behavior of your children will be your best witnesses.

 Use “the doctor” as a scapegoat. Sometimes it is wise to take the heat off
yourself and make the point that you have researched your approach to
parenting and modern research validates what you are doing. You may want
to add, “My doctor advised me that for our family situation and the
temperament of our baby this parenting style will work best for us.” In
some cases you may have to let the information in this book be your
“doctor.” But don’t overwhelm people with quotes from the literature, for
then you may be criticized for doing things too much by the book.

The Matchup: Easy Baby Plus Responsive Mother

The Outcome: This combination is usually a good match. Mother is likely
to be delighted with her baby’s behavior because mothers tend to feel that
the “goodness” of their babies reflect their goodness as a mother (which is
not always true). Because easy babies are less demanding, they do not have
the forceful attachment-promoting skills to initiate a high level of
interactions with their caregivers. For example, since they don’t fuss when
put down they may be held less. But the intuitive and responsive mother
realizes that her baby may need more than he demands and makes up for
this by initiating interactions with her baby. Mother takes the initiative and
in so doing helps baby develop more readable cues, and the mother-baby
pair’s communication operates at a higher level.

The Matchup: Easy Baby Plus Restrained Mother

 The Outcome: This may not be a good match, and a strong bond may not
develop. Because the mellow baby is not very demanding, mother may
interpret her baby’s behavior as “He doesn’t seem to need me much.” As a
result, this mother may seek more challenging interactions outside of her
life with baby. She may devote relatively little energy to developing
creative interactive skills. In this match, not only does mother fail to bring
out the best in the baby, but the baby does not bring out the best in the
mother. Sometimes this match leads to the delayed fusser, a baby who starts
out easy and then around four to six months (or whenever mother’s energies
are diverted) shows a turnabout in personality. He becomes a fussy baby
and releases a burst of attachment-promoting skills to demand a higher level
of interaction with his caregivers. It’s important for parents to be open to
their baby and pick up on a sudden shift of behavior as a signal to shift their
parenting style.

The Matchup: High-Need Baby with Good Attachment-Promoting Skills
Plus Responsive Mother

The Outcome: This is usually a good match, and a strong bond develops.
Mother and baby are likely to bring out the best in each other. Baby gives a
cue, and mother, because she’s open to her baby’s cues, responds. Baby
enjoys the response and is then motivated to give more cues because he has
learned that he will get a predictable and rewarding response. The result is
that mother and baby grow accustomed to each other. Even when she is

 confused and may not be able to read her baby’s cues easily and identify the
needs, mother experiments with different responses until she finds one that
works. Baby learns to communicate better, mother learns to nurture better,
and the relationship operates at a high level, as baby and mother become
mutually sensitive to each other. Because mother is able to listen better,
baby learns to cry better and develops nonfussing ways of communicating
her needs.

The Matchup: High-Need Baby with Poor Attachment-Promoting Skills
Plus Responsive Mother

The Outcome: This can also be a good match, but it is more difficult to
achieve than the preceding one. Labeled “uncuddlers” or “slow-to-warm-up
infants,” these babies may appear to be easy babies, but in reality they are
high-need babies in disguise. Instead of demanding close contact, fussing to
get picked up, and melting gratifyingly in your arms, these babies withdraw
from snuggling. They need to be held and nurtured but do not have the
attachment-promoting skills to communicate this. Because baby doesn’t
gush forth appreciation of her efforts, mother may not feel gratified with her
mothering and may seek alternative sources of fulfillment away from baby.
The pair drifts apart. But a mother may approach her noncuddler in a better
way. With the help of interaction counseling mother learns to read baby’s
more subtle cues. She experiments with various baby-soothing interactions
until she finds baby’s preference. Mother woos her baby into cuddling. She

 initiates interaction, arriving at the right balance, knowing when to come on
strong and when to back off. Eventually baby likes being held, and parents
like holding baby. Consequently, baby develops better attachmentpromoting skills, and parents develop more baby-reading skills. The pair
fits.

The Matchup: High-Need Baby Plus Restrained Caregiver

The Outcome: This situation is at the highest risk for not becoming a good
match. This is a lose-lose situation. Neither baby nor mother brings out the
best in the other. This baby has good attachment-promoting skills and starts
life by demanding the level of care he needs. The mother, however, instead
of being open to baby and following her intuition (even shaky intuition gets
more steady if practiced), buys into a more restrained style of parenting.
She makes a science out of parenting and succumbs to detachment advice:
“He’s manipulating you.” “Let him cry it out. You’re making him too
dependent.” “You’re spoiling him.” Mothers of high-need babies, beware of
advice that suggests you restrain yourself from responding to your baby. If
you are getting lots of this kind of advice, you’re running around with the
wrong crowd of advisers. The restraint advice will tear down a mother-baby
relationship because it confuses new mothers who are particularly
vulnerable to any advice that promises to work. Beware especially of quick
and easy solutions that suggest adhering to rigidly scheduled feedings and
periods of crying. This seldom works for any baby, but it can be especially

 disastrous for the high-need baby. A mother is using so much energy trying
someone else’s method that she has little left for experimenting with her
own comforting skills for her own baby.
What happens to baby? A high-need baby whose signals are not falling
on receptive ears and arms may respond in two ways. Baby may fuss more
and fuss louder until finally someone holds and attaches to him. Eventually
baby will break through the restraint-parenting barrier, convincing parents
to try a more nurturing approach, but not without a cost. Baby may expend
so much energy fussing that little is left for overall development. He may
not thrive. Or baby may give up, shut down his signals (“See, it worked, he
finally shut up,” some misguided adviser may conclude), and withdraw into
himself, attempting to survive emotionally on a variety of self-soothing
habits.

OceanofPDF.com

 SOOTHING THE FUSSY BABY
Exhausted parents will try everything. And that’s the key—try everything.
Most soothing actions can be grouped into four categories:

motions that mellow
sounds that soothe
sights that delight
touches that relax
Calming fussiness is not only what you do to or for baby, it requires
some parent training, too. All the calming techniques we discuss are aimed
at four goals:

mellowing the temperament of the baby
easing the discomfort of the baby
improving the sensitivity of the parents
making living with a fussy baby easier for parents

OceanofPDF.com

 Attachment Parenting Calms Babies

This high-touch style of cue parenting (reading and responding to baby’s
cues) lessens a baby’s need to cry. Attachment parenting is an intuitionbuilding style of parenting that also boosts parents’ sensitivity, helping them
to cope better with a fussy baby and to persevere, detectivelike, to find the
cause and the treatment. Practice either the whole package or as many of the
following attachment concepts as you can. The three parenting activities
that have been shown to calm fussy babies best are feeding frequently,
responding quickly to baby’s cries, and carrying baby a lot.
Feeding baby frequently. Studies have shown that babies who are fed
frequently cry less. In fact, cultures that have the fewest fussy babies feed
their babies every fifteen minutes. This may sound like the “Velcro mother
and baby,” especially to Western parents of the three-to-four-hour-feedingschedule mind-set, but it works.
Responding promptly to baby’s cries. Studies have also shown that babies
whose cries are promptly responded to cry less.
Wearing your baby. Stacy, an experienced baby settler, related her success:
“I put him on in the morning and take him off at night. As long as I carry
him in the sling, he’s calm.” While few mothers and fathers can carry their

 babies constantly, wearing your baby in a baby sling tops the list of wombduplicating baby soothers. (See Chapter 14, “Babywearing,” for a thorough
discussion of how this age-old custom helps keep babies from fussing and
calms them when they do.)

A GOOD CRY
Ever have an occasion when your baby or child is crying and nothing works
to stop her? Take heart! It’s not your fault she is crying; nor is it your urgent
responsibility to stop the cry. In fact, research has shown that crying is a
healthy part of the recovery process—a physiologic aid to releasing stored
stress. Tears produced to wash away irritants in the eye and those secreted
as an emotional outlet have different chemical compositions. Emotional
tears contain breakdown products not found in irritant tears, namely stress
hormones, which increase during painful experiences.
These fascinating findings indicate there may be a physiologic basis for
the expression “to have a good cry.” Grief and hurt may be released through
tears. Why be so quick to get babies and children to hold back their tears?
Frantic hushing and admonitions like “Stop crying,” or “Big boys don’t
cry,” train children to stifle pent-up emotions that, by a good cry, could be
carried down the river of tears. Lucky is the child who feels the freedom to
cry without rebuke. Wise is the parent who gives a supportive presence.
There is a big difference between allowing your baby to cry (without panic
on your part!) and leaving her to cry alone and uncomforted. Give your
child the message, “It’s okay to cry; I’m here to help you.”

 Babywearing can have a calming effect on fussy babies.

In essence a mother who is a frequent feeder, quick responder, and
babywearer is more likely to have a contented baby.

OceanofPDF.com

 Slings, Swings, and Other Things

Dancing with your baby snuggled close to you provides the kind of
rhythmic motion and comforting contact that infants like. Most parents soon
learn to improvise their own dance routines to cope with a fussy baby. For
some parent-tested techniques and ideas, see “The Colic Dance,” and “Colic
Carries,” here—here. Here are some other effective baby soothers.
Swings. The table is set for your long-awaited dinner for two. But there’s a
fact of new-parent life that your childbirth instructor didn’t tell you. Babies
fuss most from 6:00 to 8:00 P.M. Surviving parents call this “happy hour.”
The quiet dinner for two may be an event of your childless past. Enter an
automatic mechanical swing. Baby swings while parents eat. Dinner music
it’s not, but, in addition to the motion, the monotonous ticktocking of the
swing (or some swings come with a lullaby at a slight additional charge)
helps to soothe baby. At the twist of your wrist, you wind baby up, or down,
for the next course.
Sometimes all the fuss-fixing projects in the world will not convince
baby to settle for anyplace but your arms. A dinner for two becomes a
dinner for three. Mother holds and feeds baby cradled in her lap, while dad
serves and even cuts up mother’s meat. Sometimes even the best-laid dinner
plans go astray during baby’s fussy time. While not at all romantic, shift

 eating is sometimes the only path to fussy-hour survival. Mom eats while
dad paces with baby and vice versa.
Play ticktock. Dan, a chiropractor father of a fussy baby, came up with this
fuss fixer. Hold baby at his hips and swing him upside down at sixty beats
per minute, like the pendulum of a grandfather clock. According to
chiropractic research, upside-down swinging has a calming effect. Don’t
hold a baby under six months upside down by the feet or legs because of the
possibility of dislocating baby’s hips. Holding baby at the hips is safest.
Perhaps one reason ticktocking works is that baby has been upside down for
months inside mother—another good womb memory.
Magic mirror. For a baby over the age of two months, here is a scene that
has pulled us through several fussy ordeals. Let baby reflect on her antics.
Hold baby in front of a mirror to witness her own performance. If the image
itself does not turn off the tizzy, as an added touch place her bare feet
against the surface of the mirror. We have seen our frantic baby settle within
seconds after seeing herself in the mirror, as if so distracted by what she
sees that she forgets to fuss.

 Magic mirror.

Moving attractions. Sometimes the mover wears out before the fusser, and
you need a baby-calming break. Baby may settle for watching moving
things rather than being on the move herself. Place baby upright in an infant
seat and set her before a bubbling fish tank, the swinging pendulum of a
clock, or similar attractions. One of our babies stopped fussing and settled
in her infant seat while watching me exercise on a cross-country-ski
machine. When you’ve exhausted all the in-house entertainment, try a car
ride.
A walk for two. “Oh, how I look forward to our daily walk!” revealed a
mother who learned how to survive and thrive with her high-need baby.
Secure baby in a sling and take a long walk. Not only will the exercise relax
you, but the motion, closeness to a caregiver, and the moving attractions of

 cars, trees, and kids playing in a park will often help baby forget to fuss. A
morning walk helps start the day on a fuss-free note. A late afternoon walk
can detour the evening fusser.
Feeding on the move. Some babies settle easier and feed better on the
move. Settle your infant in the baby sling and take a walk around the house
or around the block while feeding. (See techniques of breastfeeding while
babywearing, here.)
Sounds that soothe. See here for a list of musical medleys and household
sounds that soothe fussy babies.

OceanofPDF.com

 Right Touches

Skin-to-skin contact ranks right after motion on the baby-calmer list. Here
are a few of baby’s favorite touches.
Infant massage. There are times when massage may be a fuss saver. If
baby has predictable fussy times (usually late afternoon and early evening),
get into a massage routine just before the usual fussy time. Untensing baby
before “happy hour” may entice baby to forget to fuss. Abdominal massage
can be a colic favorite. Use the “I Love U” (see here for technique) to give
the right touch before the expected evening blast.
Nestle nursing. Curl up, womblike, around your baby and snuggle, skin to
skin, off to sleep.
The neck nestle. (See the explanation and illustration here and here.)
The warm fuzzy. Mothers do not have the only “womb” in the house. This
fuss preventer really makes dads shine. Lie on the bed, floor, or grass.
Drape your bare-skinned but diapered baby flat, tummy to tummy, over
your bare chest. Place baby’s ear over your heart. Feel the tension release.
The rhythm of your heartbeat plus the up-and-down motion of your
breathing can make even the most upset baby forget to fuss. “Nursing”

 means “comforting“; not just breastfeeding. So fathers can also “nurse”
their baby.
A warm bath for two. This one’s for mom. First, comfortably immerse
yourself in a half-full tub. Have dad or someone else hand your baby to you.
Let baby nestle against your breast, or breastfeed (your breast being just a
couple inches above the water line). The combination of warm water, a freefloating feeling, and mom should untense baby. An additional tub tip: Leave
the drain partially open and a warm-water faucet running slightly. This
provides the soothing sound of running water and keeps the water
comfortably warm.

OceanofPDF.com

 Right Diagnosis

While most high-need babies who are generally happy don’t have a medical
reason for their behavior, those who are extra fussy and needy may.
Consider the following possibilities:
Food or formula intolerance. In our experience, cow’s milk (through
breast milk or formula) and gluten (through mom’s diet) are two foods that
may turn a happy high-need baby into a fussy one. Such a baby will likely
have intestinal symptoms of food allergy (green, runny, mucousy stools).
Consider an elimination diet or formula change to improve your baby’s
mood (see here).
Sensory processing disorder (SPD). With this neurodevelopmental
disorder, an infant’s sensory system is irritated by various sounds, touches,
and positions. Instead of being soothed by rocking, snuggling, caressing,
and other experiences typical of infant life, the baby with SPD will be fussy
and unsettled because his nervous system is overloaded with various
sensations. A form of occupational therapy called sensory integration
therapy can be used to soothe baby’s sensory system and train baby to
accept the normal sensations of daily life. Ask your health care provider for

 a referral to an OT who specializes in sensory integration therapy. See here
for more information.

OceanofPDF.com

 THE COLICKY BABY, ALIAS THE HURTING
BABY
You’re holding your two-week-old happy baby—the model of a thriving
infant, apparently without a care in the world. Suddenly and unexpectedly
he stiffens his limbs, arches his back, clenches his fists, and lets out earpiercing shrieks. Like a person who hurts and is angry at the hurting, he
draws up his flailing limbs against a bloated, tense abdomen and continues
the unrelenting, agonizing screams. Even his face cries “ouch”: wide-open
mouth, almost a perfect circle, with furrowed brow and tightly closed or
widely opened eyes, as if yelling, “I hurt and I’m mad.” As baby’s tension
mounts, your frustration escalates, and you are driven to the edge by feeling
as helpless as baby in determining the cause and alleviating the pain. He’s
inconsolable, and you are both in tears. You hurt together.
Stretched to the limits, he shuts down his agonizing screams and
withdraws into a spent sleep, retreating from system overload and giving a
momentary reprieve to his puzzled parents. A friend enters during the calm
before the next storm and exclaims, “What a healthy-looking baby. You’re
so lucky!” You reply, “You should have seen us a few hours ago when we
were both a wreck.” Your friend leaves, naturally feeling that you are
imagining things. Surely there couldn’t be anything wrong with such a

 cherubic-looking baby. Then as though someone turned on a startscreaming switch, the violent outbursts resume, this time lasting more than
an hour. Round two of baby’s fight with himself begins. You try to cuddle,
baby stiffens in protest; you try to nurse, baby arches and pulls away; you
rock, sing, ride. The soothing techniques that worked yesterday aren’t
working today. And you replay the familiar worry, “What’s wrong with my
baby; what’s wrong with me?” as you excuse yourself from the company of
the perfect mothers with their perfect babies.
“How could such a good baby two hours ago be in such a snit now?”
you wonder. He’s like Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. By some strange quirk of
justice your baby is worse toward the end of the day, when you are least
able to cope. Your sweet morning baby turns sour in the evening.
Enter the cure-alls from the unending stream of well-meaning friends.
Baby still screams, and you feel, more and more, it’s a reflection of your
mothering, yet somehow you know it’s not. He hurts; he’s mad; you don’t
know why, and probably neither does baby.

 A colicky baby in full voice.
By the time you go through all of Aunt Nancy’s herbal teas, the doctoradvised feeding changes, and every conceivable holding pattern, as
mysteriously as the fight began, around three to four months of age it stops,
and life goes on. Baby seems none the worse for wear, and you close one of
the most difficult chapters in life with your new baby.
That’s colic!

OceanofPDF.com

 Is Your Baby Colicky? How to Tell

If you wonder whether or not you have a colicky baby—you don’t! The
violent, agonizing outbursts of prolonged inconsolable crying leave no
doubt about colic. Sometimes when parents think they have a colicky baby,
we’ll send them to visit a few members of the “colic club”—parents in our
practice who truly have colicky babies. They often return relieved, saying,
“We don’t have a colicky baby after all.” Around 20 percent of all babies
have some daily outbursts of crying during the early months.

OceanofPDF.com

 What Is Colic?

“Colic” is a description, not a diagnosis. While no one agrees on the cause
or the definition of colic, physicians regard a baby as colicky if sudden and
unexplained outbursts of inconsolable crying

last at least three hours a day, occur three days per
week, and continue for at least three weeks
begin within the first three weeks of life
seldom last longer than three months
occur in an otherwise healthy, thriving baby
We sometimes refer to this as “the rule of threes.”
Over the past forty years, we have grown to realize that most colicky
babies fit into one of two categories: the evening-only colicky baby and the
all-day colicky baby.
Evening-only colic. Also known as the “P.M. fusser,” this baby is generally
happy during the day. Friends would never know that baby has colic unless
they come over after dinner. She will smile, make eye contact, and coo and
gurgle like any other baby during the day. Then comes the evening blast! As
if some internal alarm clock goes off, baby suddenly begins to fuss.

 Fussiness escalates into more intense screaming, and then into full-blown
colic, as previously described. It lasts anywhere from one to four hours.
Often baby screams nonstop, with only a few brief interludes of quiet. Baby
finally falls asleep, exhausted, as do the parents. This may occur four to
seven nights each week for the first few months. The good news about this
type of colic is that baby generally sleeps well, and mom and dad get to
enjoy the rewards of parenting a happy baby during the day. Another bit of
good news is that, unlike with all-day colic, there is rarely an underlying
medical cause for evening-only colic. (See “Un-Happy Hour!,” here.)
All-day colic. This baby is rarely happy. He spends most of the day fussing,
squirming, or screaming. He may have several hours, usually in the
evening, when the crying is more intense and continuous. Most babies with
this type of colic will also be restless sleepers, with frequent night wakings.
A few, luckily, may be so exhausted that they sleep well at night. In this
situation, we ask parents, “Is your baby ever happy?” The answer is often
no! This baby has very little happy, quiet time. He is always busy, either
eating, sleeping, or fussing. There is little opportunity for parents to bond
with baby, make intimate eye contact as baby gazes peacefully at their
faces, or enjoy the rewards of parenting. Besides being the most severe type
of colic and the most difficult for parents to cope with, this intense type of
colic merits the term “hurting baby,” and it is the type for which parents and
doctor are likely to detect an underlying cause.

OceanofPDF.com

 Why Colic?

The most frustrating feature of colic is not knowing why baby screams and
why what worked one day doesn’t work the next. If you have a colicky
baby, it’s normal to go through the mental torture of “Why me, what am I
doing wrong?” And because your baby hurts, you hurt. You are vulnerable
to all the well-meaning friends offering their own personal diagnosis: “It
must be your milk.” “He’s spoiled.” “You’re holding him too much”—or
not enough. Let’s turn a critical eye toward exposing the most popular
myths about colic.

The Tense Mother–Tense Baby Myth

Fussy and colicky behaviors come more from the temperament of the baby
than the nurturing abilities of the parents. Research has taken the pressure
off mothers. There seems to be no proof that tense mothering causes tense
babies. But mothers who are tense during pregnancy have a slightly
increased chance of producing colicky babies. Also, some studies suggest
that having a colicky baby is a self-fulfilling prophecy. Mothers who expect
to have colicky babies often do. In our experience, the mood of the mother

 influences how she handles her colicky baby rather than being the cause of
the colic. A tense baby doesn’t settle well in tense arms.
If parents caused fussy babies, you would expect firstborns to win the
Most Fussy Baby title. Not true. Fussy and colicky babies show no respect
for birth order. Our fourth baby was the fussiest, and she was born
following one of our most relaxed pregnancies and least hectic family
situations. Nor is colic a social disease. We cannot blame baby’s behavior
on hurried lifestyles. Anthropologists report that babies born into cultures
that hold their babies almost constantly and give prompt nurturing
responses to babies’ cries are less fussy than those in other cultures, but all
cultures are blessed with colicky babies. The Chinese refer to this behavior
as “the hundred days’ crying.”

Deflating the Gas Myth

“But he’s so full of gas!” a mother reports. Many babies are gassy during
the early months. Put your hand on the bloated tummy of a recently fed,
happy one-month-old, and you are likely to feel rumblings that pass just in
time for the next feeding. A baby may cry for five to ten minutes while
passing some extra gas, then settle down happily again. That’s not colic. Xray studies cast doubt on gas as the culprit of colic. Abdominal X rays of
most babies, whether colicky or not, frequently reveal a lot of gas. X rays
taken of colicky babies reveal no gas during the bout but gas after the fit.
Researchers believe that babies gulp air during the crying, and gas is the

 result rather than the cause of colic. Although gas may be conducive to
discomfort in some babies, this research takes the wind out of the gas theory
of colic.
What does this research mean to comforting parents? Aborting a crying
fit or promptly intervening on the opening note of the scream may lessen
the amount of air baby swallows. Colic cries promote air swallowing.
Watch a baby during one of these angry spells. Notice how baby holds his
breath during a prolonged crying jag, sometimes even turning blue around
the mouth, causing parents to join baby’s panic. Then after holding this note
seemingly forever, baby takes a sudden, forceful catch-up breath (and so do
you); some of that air gets gulped into the stomach. This excess air bloats
the intestines, perhaps prolonging the colicky episode.

UN-HAPPY HOUR!
Plan ahead for the P.M. fusser. One of our babies fussed predictably around
five o’clock most afternoons, an exhausting time we dubbed “happy hour.”
We figured that she was just releasing pent-up tension, but we feared that
she was getting conditioned to regard the end of the day as a painful time.
So we decided to plan ahead with a before-colic ritual to condition her to
expect an hour of comfort rather than an hour of pain.
At least an hour before expected blast-off, either lie down with your
baby and take a nap for two or enjoy an infant massage, preferably on the
floor with baby warmed by a ray of sunlight coming through the window.
Immediately after the nap or massage, nestle baby in a baby sling and take a
walk. As you stroll past moving cars, moving people, and up and down
hills, baby often gets so interested in her environment that she forgets to
fuss. And if your baby is still going to fuss, she might as well fuss outside in
an environment that’s therapeutic for both of you. It’s also helpful to
prepare the evening meal in advance, when possible. Frozen precooked
casseroles and colicky babies mix well.

 OceanofPDF.com

 TRACKING DOWN HIDDEN CAUSES OF
COLIC
My perspective on colic changed one day when a mother consulted me
about her inconsolably crying baby. After I diagnosed colic, she challenged
me, “Do you call it colic when you don’t know why a baby is hurting?”
This mother was right. Professionals and parents tend to lump all outbursts
of crying into “colic.” When an adult hurts, we play detective and track
down the cause of the hurt and fix it. What has been frustrating about colic
is that we seldom know the cause, nor do we know how to fix it. At least
until now! To determine what’s bothering your baby, consider three general
possible causes: medical, dietary, and emotional. Here is a three-step
approach to tracking down hidden reasons for a baby to be hurting and
suggestions for treatment.

GETTING THE WIND OUT OF GASSY BABIES
Swallowing air and passing gas is a normal part of growing up. But
excessive intestinal gas can make a young baby miserable. A mother of one
of our gassy little patients describes these bloated episodes: “When my
daughter is trying to pass gas, it is like a mother going through a difficult
labor.” Try these ways of getting the air out.
Letting Less Air In

 If breastfeeding, be sure baby’s lips form a good seal far back on the
areola.
If bottlefeeding, be sure baby’s lips are positioned on the wide base of
the nipple, not just on the tip.
Tilt the bottle at a thirty-to-forty-five-degree angle while feeding so
that air rises to the bottom of the bottle; or try collapsible formula
bags.
Eliminate fuss foods from your diet if breastfeeding (see here).
Feed baby smaller amounts more frequently.
Keep baby upright (at about a forty-five-degree angle) during and a
half-hour after feeding.
Avoid prolonged sucking on pacifiers or empty bottle nipples.
Respond promptly to a baby’s cries.
Getting More Air Out
First and foremost, be sure to burp baby during and after feedings (see
burping tips here). You can also try the following techniques and remedies
(see “Comforting Colic,” here, for more about these):
abdominal massage
baby bends
simethicone drops
glycerin suppositories

OceanofPDF.com

 Step One: Seek Help from Your Doctor

In our pediatric experience, the two most common hidden medical causes of
colic are:

1. gastroesophageal reflux disease
2. food or formula sensitivities
If you find the cause, you’re likely to find a cure. Suspect that your baby
has an underlying medical cause for the pain if any of the following is true:

Baby’s crying pattern suddenly changes to more
painful outbursts.
Baby frequently awakens in pain.
The crying occurs in frequent, long, inconsolable
bouts and is not limited to evening time.
Your parent’s intuition tells you, “My baby hurts
somewhere.”
If you have determined that a visit to the doctor is in order, there are a
number of measures you can take to ensure that you get the most out of it.

 Make a Fuss List

Before your appointment make a list addressing the following items:

Is the baby in enough pain to be distressed and to
distress you? Or is he just fussing?
When did the episodes start, how long do they
last, and how often do they occur?
What triggers the colic episodes, and what turns
them off? Do they occur at night?
Describe the cry.
Where do you feel the pain is coming from? What
do your baby’s face, abdomen, and extremities
look like during the episode?
Is the crying related to feeding? Give the details
about feeding: breast or bottle, frequency, air
swallowing. What changes of feeding techniques
or formulas have you tried? What worked? Do
you hear your baby gulping air?
Does your baby pass a lot of gas?
What are your baby’s bowel movements like—
easy, soft, or hard—and how frequent are they?
Does your baby spit up? How often, how soon
after feeding, and with how much force?

 Does your baby have a persistent diaper rash, and
what does it took like? Is there a red, inflamed,
ringlike rash around baby’s anus? (This suggests a
food sensitivity.)
Elaborate on your home remedies. What has
worked and what hasn’t?
Volunteer your diagnosis.

Keep a Colic Diary

Record in your fuss book, in vivid detail, as much information as you can
about your baby’s painful episodes, using the preceding list as a guide. You
might be surprised at what correlations you uncover. One mother noticed,
“On days I wear him most of the time, he forgets to fuss come evening.”

Make a Distress Video

To help your doctor appreciate how devastating these colicky episodes are,
record one of your baby’s crying jags. Because there is so much body
language that accompanies the screaming, if you want to get your point
across, make a video of you and your baby during a colicky episode so that

 your health care provider can truly witness a mother-infant pair in distress.
We have found it very therapeutic for the parents to view their own video
periodically to appreciate their baby’s distress and to see how they are
coping.

Tell It Like It Is

Don’t hold back how much your baby’s crying bothers you. Both mother
and father should attend the doctor’s visit. Fathers keep mothers honest,
preventing them from downplaying how much their baby’s crying upsets
them. Perhaps they fear that such a revelation will shatter their perfectmother image in the eyes of their pediatrician. Fathers usually tell it like it
is. During one case of colic counseling I didn’t appreciate the magnitude of
the problem until the father volunteered, “I had a vasectomy last week.
We’ll never go through this again!” I got the picture. (Dad was subsequently
reconnected and fathered two more babies.)
Don’t lose faith in your doctor if he or she cannot determine why your
baby is hurting or cannot cure your baby’s colic. When I see parents and
their colicky baby, I hurt for them, I hurt for their baby, and I also feel like a
failure when I cannot pinpoint the cause and prescribe instant treatment.
Oftentimes the best your doctor can do is take a detailed history, administer
a thorough physical exam, and, unless an underlying medical problem is
uncovered, prescribe trial-and-error dietary elimination and detective work
along with the tincture of time. (But we believe it is important to first

 approach colic as a medical problem in the general category of the hurting
baby; otherwise treatable painful problems may be missed.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Step Two: Investigate the Possibility of Gastroesophageal
Reflux

In our pediatric experience, the most common medical cause of the “hurting
baby,” next to food intolerance, is gastroesophageal reflux, also called
GERD (gastroesophageal reflux disease), acid reflux, heartburn, acid
indigestion, and just plain “reflux.” In this painful medical condition, the
acid-containing stomach contents regurgitate back into the esophagus.
Normally, once swallowing is over and all the food has entered the stomach,
a circular band of muscle called the lower esophageal sphincter (LES),
where the esophagus joins the stomach, contracts like a door that closes to
keep stomach contents and stomach acids from regurgitating, or refluxing,
back into the esophagus. Reflux is basically an immaturity of the LES. If,
instead of closing, the LES remains open, stomach acids reflux back into
the esophagus and irritate, or “burn,” the sensitive lining of the esophagus,
causing pain. Not all babies with reflux spit up. Babies may spit up a little
or a lot. If the stomach contents reflux just partway up the esophagus, baby
may hurt but may not spit up or vomit. This is called silent reflux.
Sometimes the refluxed gastric contents enter the back of the throat, causing
a sore throat, choking, gagging, coughing, and erosion of dental enamel,
and can even be aspirated into the lungs, causing respiratory infections,
wheezing, and asthma-like symptoms.

 Usually infants associate feeding with comfort, but the baby with reflux
may associate feeding with pain, and so refuse to feed and show poor
weight gain. Or, because breast milk and formula neutralize the stomach
acids, the infant may want to “feed constantly” and may gain weight well or
even overgain. Because gravity holds the stomach contents down and
lessens reflux, babies are often more comfortable when upright but shriek in
pain when put down or during sleep.
Not only does reflux hurt babies, it hurts parents, who may be led to
believe that their baby cries a lot because she is just a “fussy baby” or that
something is wrong with their parenting, which is not true. Undiagnosed
and untreated reflux often results in the “hurting family.”
In the early months, two-thirds of all babies have some degree of reflux,
which accounts for the frequent spitting up that most babies do. Spitting up
does not usually bother these babies, dubbed “happy spitters.” It is not
painful, does not slow weight gain, and is more of a laundry problem than a
medical one. Reflux becomes a problem when it causes painful irritation or
damage to the esophagus, interferes with growth and development,
interferes with feeding and sleeping, or contributes to respiratory problems.
Reflux usually starts in the newborn period, peaks around four months,
and begins to subside around seven months of age, when babies begin
spending most of their days upright and start eating solid foods, and by the
law of gravity, food stays down better. Most infants outgrow reflux by one
year of age (We call this “walking away from reflux”). Yet in some children
reflux continues throughout childhood and sometimes into adulthood,

 where it is manifested more by “heartburn” and “wheezing” episodes. Don’t
always assume the reflux is gone when the spitting up stops.

Clues That Baby Suffers from Reflux

A baby with reflux may have many or only a few of the following signs.
Sometimes baby may regurgitate only partway up the esophagus and
thereby not visibly spit up. The best clue is your gut feeling telling you that
your baby “hurts somewhere.”

frequent blasts of inconsolable, painful crying
—“unlike the usual baby cries”
frequent episodes of spitting up, which may
include forceful regurgitation through the nose
frequent inconsolable bouts of abdominal pain,
day and night
painful bursts of night waking
fussiness after eating; drawing up legs, knees to
chest
arching or writhing as if in pain
diminishing fussiness when carried upright,
sleeping prone (on the stomach), or propped up at
least 30 degrees

 frequent unexplained colds, wheezing, and chest
infections
stop-breathing episodes
frequent “wet” or “sour” burps, throaty or
swallowing noises, gagging, or hiccupping
excessive drooling

Detecting Reflux

Your doctor may suspect reflux based upon your observations. Parents need
to be keen observers and accurate reporters. Go through the above list of
clues and write down which of these your baby has and how often. Be clear
about the severity of these symptoms. (To measure how much your baby
spits up spill a tablespoon of milk on a plate as a gauge of the amount of
spit-up.) Does baby suffer only an occasional spitting up or the odd restless
night? Or is it a daily, even hourly, occurrence, enough to interfere with
your infant’s well-being—and yours? To describe how much your baby
truly is hurting, show your doctor a video recording. Let your doctor know
how much of a problem this is for your family. One patient said to me, “I
am camping out in your office until you find out what’s wrong with my
baby.”
Oftentimes a doctor will diagnose the problem as GERD and begin
treatment based upon a parent’s history alone and not do any tests. If the

 diagnosis is in doubt, however, a doctor may order one or more of the
following tests:
Barium swallow X ray (fluoroscopy). In this test, also known as an “upper
GI series,” baby swallows some barium, which outlines the esophagus,
stomach, and upper intestines. The main reason for this upper GI study is
not to diagnose reflux, but rather to exclude other causes of vomiting, such
as anatomical abnormalities of the stomach or intestines that could
contribute to or cause a partial obstruction.
pH probe. A thin, flexible tube is placed through your baby’s mouth or
nose into the esophagus and down to just above the entrance to the stomach.
The tip of the tube measures stomach acid that is regurgitated up into the
esophagus. The pH probe is the most sensitive test for measuring the
frequency and degree of acid reflux. The probe is left in for twelve to
twenty-four hours. The insertion can be done either overnight in the hospital
or in your own home. A technician skilled in probe placement comes to
your home (or to the hospital or doctor’s office), places the probe in baby’s
esophagus, and attaches it to a small recording machine. The recording is
then monitored for twelve to twenty-four hours.

Dr. Bill suggests: A useful diagnostic tool I have found is to have parents
record the severity, frequency, and timing of their baby’s hurting episodes
while the pH probe is in place. I then see if there is a correlation with the
probe readings of acid reflux. If there is, this suggests acid reflux is indeed

 the cause of baby’s hurting. Newer probes have buttons that parents push to
signal crying, vomiting, and so on.

Scintography. Baby is fed a bottle of breast milk or formula that contains a
mildly radioactive substance. A computerized scan of baby’s abdomen
reveals if the stomach takes a long time to empty (called “delayed gastric
emptying”), which contributes to reflux. This scanning technique is not
considered reliable for showing the presence or degree of reflux; it merely
shows if delayed gastric emptying is contributing to reflux. It can also show
aspiration of reflux material into the lungs.
Endoscopy (esophagoscopy). This procedure is done on an outpatient basis
while baby is under light general anesthesia. A pediatric gastroenterologist
inserts a flexible tube with a fiber-optic camera at the tip into baby’s
esophagus, stomach, and upper intestine. The doctor then examines these
areas for abnormalities and especially looks at the lining of the esophagus
for inflammation, called esophagitis. The presence and degree of reflux
esophagitis give a clue to the severity of the reflux and guide the doctor in
deciding how aggressive the treatment regimen should be.

Dr. Bill notes: I recently saw a nine-month-old baby for fussy-baby
counseling. His mother had been advised to let him cry it out. She was told
she was anxious and overreacting, and that he was just manipulating her.

 Mother’s instincts said, “I know something is wrong with him.” After
listening to her, I suspected severe GERD and referred the infant for an
endoscopy. The endoscopy showed severe erosion and ulcerations of the
lower end of the child’s esophagus. The damage from the reflux was so
severe that baby needed surgical correction. Mother knows best! Lose
points for the let-him-cry-it-out crowd!

When Is Testing for Reflux Necessary?

A hurting baby who frequently spits up probably has reflux and may not
need any tests to confirm this. The above tests are, however, useful in the
following situations:

To diagnose “silent” reflux. With this type of
reflux, baby has many of the above signs but does
not spit up.
In complications from reflux. If baby is suffering
from any complication of acid regurgitation, such
as failure to thrive or respiratory problems, testing
may be appropriate.
When reflux does not improve with positional and
feeding strategies (see below) or increasing doses

 of medication. Tests may reveal an anatomical
problem in the gastrointestinal system that needs
additional treatment.

Consider Surgery for GERD

Surgical correction of GERD is now more common for two reasons: the
debilitating nature of GERD has become more widely appreciated, so that
doctors are now becoming more knowledgeable and aggressive about its
treatment; and surgical procedures have become safer and more refined, and
now can often be done through laparoscopy, sparing the child from a large
abdominal incision and prolonged postoperative recovery. The general term
for GERD surgery is fundoplication, in which a band of upper stomach
muscle is wrapped totally or partially around the lower esophagus, in effect
tightening the valve and lessening reflux. In the Nissen procedure a total
360-degree wrap is performed, whereas in the Thal procedure a partial wrap
is performed. Because with the total wrap a child can lose the protective
ability to vomit or burp, the partial wrap is often the preferred choice.
Surgery is considered particularly beneficial for infants with GERD who are
neurologically impaired.
The main criteria that doctors use in deciding when and if to perform
fundoplication surgery are how much the GERD is bothering the child,
whether the GERD is increasing in severity and frequency, how much

 esophageal damage is seen on the endoscopy, and whether the more
conservative treatment regimens are working. Ideally, fundoplication is
performed before severe esophageal damage occurs, which if untreated can
lead to lifelong debilitating narrowing of the lower esophagus (called
“esophageal stricture”).

Twenty Ways to Comfort the Baby with Reflux

How long and how aggressively reflux is treated depends upon the severity
of the reflux and how much it is interfering with an infant’s growth and
well-being. The doctor will supervise and prescribe medications, but parents
are responsible for a lot of the treatment. Babies with reflux require parental
intensive care, as you will soon learn. Treatment for reflux is aimed at
keeping baby comfortable and thriving and minimizing possible esophageal
damage until the natural intestinal maturity enables baby to outgrow this
condition. The basis of reflux treatment is:

Developing a feeding pattern and choosing foods
that keep the stomach emptying rapidly and the
food going down instead of up.
Positioning your infant—day and night—in a way
that allows gravity to help keep the food down.
Developing a parenting style that lessens crying,
since crying puts pressure on the stomach, which

 worsens the reflux.
Here are ways you can comfort your baby with reflux:
1. Practice attachment parenting. This high-touch style of parenting
decreases baby’s need to cry (remember, crying increases reflux) and
increases parents’ ability to cope. Less crying and more coping is the basic
recipe for living with reflux. Attachment parenting (especially the three
baby B’s of breastfeeding, babywearing, and belief in the signal value of
baby’s cries) not only comforts the hurting baby, but helps parents more
intuitively read their baby’s pre-cry, or about-to-reflux body language, and
intervene appropriately. Attachment parenting also increases the maternal
hormones prolactin and oxytocin, which have a calming and relaxing effect
on mother. Above all, shun the cry-it-out crowd. Babies with reflux cry
because they hurt. Unattended-to crying aggravates reflux. Consider your
nurturing response to your baby’s cry as baby’s best medicine. (See Chapter
1 for detailed information on how this style of parenting helps parents and
babies thrive.)

Dr. Bill notes: Don’t take it personally that your baby cries a lot. A baby
knows that his parents are there and care, even if they can’t always relieve
his pain.

 2. Keep baby semi-upright, especially during feedings. Gravity helps
minimize reflux by helping the food stay down instead of go up. Wear your
infant in a baby sling most of the day (see here for instructions). Don’t leave
a baby with reflux sitting for long periods in a car seat or infant seat. Sitting
positions bend baby in the middle, put pressure on the stomach, and
increase reflux in some infants. (See also “Colic Carries,” here.)
3. Keep baby quiet after feedings. Cuddle with your baby or wear your
baby in a sling for at least thirty minutes after a feeding. Sway, don’t
bounce. Above all, don’t jostle or vigorously play with baby after feedings.
This can cause stomach contents to splash around and increase reflux.
4. Offer smaller feedings more frequently. Follow Dr. Bill’s rule of reflux
feeding: Feed half as much twice as often. Less food in the stomach at one
time lessens reflux. Feeding frequently stimulates more saliva production.
Saliva contains a healing substance called epidermal growth factor, which
helps repair the damaged tissues in the esophagus. It also neutralizes
stomach acid and lubricates the irritated lining of the esophagus.
5. Burp baby efficiently. Excess swallowed air aggravates reflux. If
breastfeeding, burp baby when switching breasts. If bottlefeeding, burp
baby after every few ounces of formula. Some newer feeding systems
reduce air bubbles collecting in the bottle.
6. Breastfeed your baby. Breast milk is appropriately dubbed the “easy-in,
easy-out” meal. Reflux is typically much less severe in the breastfed baby,

 and a breastfeeding mother is able to cope better for the following reasons:

Breast milk empties from the stomach much
faster than formula.
Breast milk is more intestine friendly than
formula.
Breastfed babies naturally feed more frequently,
and breast milk is a natural antacid.
Breastfed babies have softer and easier-to-pass
stools.
Mothers enjoy the relaxing effect of maternal
hormones while breastfeeding.

A parent notes: At age five months and four pediatricians later, Jacob was
diagnosed with gastroesophageal reflux. I am forever grateful I did not give
up in my search to find out why he was hurting! The goal of one of Jacob’s
reflux meds was to help digestion, so he would not reflux. I figured, what
could be better for him than the most easily digested food for babies?…
mom’s milk! When the specialist to whom our doctor referred us first met
Jacob, he was shocked to see him looking so happy. He told me that most
babies with Jacob’s degree of reflux failed to thrive and were very sickly. I
am convinced that Jacob thrived because he was breastfed. Thank you, Dr.
Sears.

 7. Consider food or formula intolerance. The food causes of colic
discussed in the next section (here) may also contribute to GERD. If
breastfeeding, make some diet changes. Eliminate dairy and wheat products
first, and then consider the fuss foods list here if symptoms persist. If using
formula, talk to your doctor about a formula change.
8. Don’t bottle-prop or leave baby unsupervised during feedings. Babies
with reflux can gag, choke, and have stop-breathing episodes during a
feeding.

Dr. Bill advises: The stress of mothering a colicky baby can itself decrease
your milk supply, which then may contribute further to baby’s fussiness and
cause you to give up breastfeeding. Remember our Parenting 101 advice:
Baby needs a happy, rested mother. Get help from a lactation consultant to
keep up your milk supply, get help at home, and carve out de-stress time just
for yourself.

9. Try a pacifier. While the most effective pacifiers will be your breast and
your holding, some infants with reflux are helped by the frequent use of
pacifiers. Nonnutritive sucking can often ease reflux. This is why

 breastfeeding mothers often find that their babies with reflux want to
“nurse” constantly. (On the other hand, some babies with severe GERD
refuse to feed often because they associate feeding with pain.) Frequent
sucking stimulates saliva production, which, as mentioned above, eases the
irritation of reflux. Be aware, though, that in some cases vigorously sucking
on pacifiers can aggravate reflux by increasing air swallowing. So, learn to
read your baby for what style of sucking works.
10. Minimize air swallowing and gas. If breastfeeding, be sure baby has
formed a tight seal (see “Positioning and Latch-on Skills,” here). If
bottlefeeding, try bottles and nipples that minimize air swallowing.
Simethicone drops are marginally effective. This substance breaks large
stomach bubbles into smaller stomach bubbles, which are easier to pass.
Excess air in the stomach and intestines acts as a pneumatic pump, so when
a stomach full of bubbles contracts, it can cause stomach contents to reflux.
(See “Getting the Wind Out of Gassy Babies,” here, and “Baby Bends,”
here.)
11. Try one-sided breastfeeding. The breast milk that baby gets during the
first few minutes of nursing is called “foremilk” and is higher in lactose
sugar. Babies who nurse for ten minutes or less on each breast during one
feeding are more likely to spit up, as the foremilk tends to cause more gas
and stomach bloating. Keep baby on one breast for twenty to thirty minutes,
so he also gets the high-fat, low-lactose “hindmilk” that is easier to keep
down. Talk to your doctor, breastfeeding support person (such as a La

 Leche League leader), or a lactation consultant about using this technique—
often referred to as “block feeding”—to lesson your baby’s reflux. See here
for more.
12. Avoid constipation. By increasing abdominal pressure while straining,
constipation can aggravate reflux. Also, food that can’t move down into
overly full intestines can bounce back up. (See “Treating Constipation,”
here.)
13. Thicken feedings. If your baby is bottlefeeding and ready for solids
(around six months of age), and if recommended by your doctor, thicken
baby’s feedings with 2 or more tablespoons of rice cereal in each 8-ounce
bottle. Heavier food tends to stay down more easily. Thickened feedings
help some infants with reflux but may aggravate reflux in others. I’m not
convinced thickened feedings help, and too much rice cereal can be
constipating.

Dr. Bill advises: Since many infants with GERD are also allergic to milkbased formulas, if bottlefeeding try a hypoallergenic formula (see here),
which empties from the stomach faster than standard formulas.

14. Work out a reflux-friendly sleeping position. While it is always safest
to put infants under six months of age to sleep on their backs to reduce the

 risk of SIDS, babies with severe reflux often sleep more comfortably on
their left side. (The gastric inlet on the left side of the body is higher than
the outlet, which helps gravity keep the food down.) Discuss with your
doctor whether the reflux is severe enough to warrant side or tummy
sleeping. Otherwise put your baby to sleep on her back. Try these other
reflux-lowering helpers during sleep:

Use a box or chair to elevate the head of baby’s
crib at least 30 degrees.
Try the Tucker Sling. This sling fits around the
upper part of the crib mattress like a contour
sheet. A diaper-shaped part goes between baby’s
legs and fastens around the waist with Velcro. The
sling, designed by a mother whose infant, Tucker,
suffered from severe GERD, keeps baby from
sliding down to the foot of the mattress when the
mattress is elevated.
If baby sleeps in your bed, try placing baby on a
reflux wedge, available at infant product stores.
For information on reflux wedges and slings, see tuckersling.com.
15. Don’t smoke around baby. Nicotine stimulates gastric acid production
and opens the lower esophageal sphincter.

 16. Don’t dress baby in clothing that is tight around the waist.
17. Try medications for GERD: While the following medications can
certainly help ease the discomfort of reflux and minimize esophageal
damage, they should always be used in addition to, not instead of, most of
the above parenting, positioning, and feeding suggestions.

Antacids. These over-the-counter medicines
neutralize stomach acids. Given three or four
times a day with a feeding (product and dosage to
be determined by your child’s doctor), they start
working rapidly, but the neutralizing effect lasts
only a couple of hours or less. For older children,
chewables work better because they stimulate and
mix with the saliva to help the antacid stick to the
lining of the esophagus where it can better
neutralize stomach acids. Long-term use of some
antacids can contribute to constipation or
diarrhea.
Acid suppressors or reducers. These medicines
(e.g., Prevacid, Zantac) block varying degrees of
stomach acid production. They can take anywhere
from thirty minutes to a couple of hours to take
effect, but they may last for eight hours. They are

 usually given twice a day. If reflux tends to wake
your child, give a dose one hour before bedtime.
Motility medicines. These remedies work by
increasing muscle tone and therefore tighten the
lower esophageal sphincter muscle or increase the
movement of the muscles of the stomach and
upper intestines, thereby speeding up gastric
emptying. They are sometimes referred to as
prokinetics. Whereas antacids and acid blockers
do not decrease reflux but rather just make it less
painful and lessen the damage to the esophagus,
motility medicines do decrease the amount of
reflux but may have more side effects.
Be sure to work closely with your infant’s doctor and/or pediatric
gastroenterologist to develop the reflux management regimen that works
best and is safest for your child. Be sure not to exceed the dosage
recommended by your doctor or even use over-the-counter antacids without
your doctor’s advice. All medicines have a risk-benefit ratio, and medicines
that neutralize stomach acid or interfere with its production should be used
only if the reflux is severe enough that it truly bothers baby and/or could
damage the lining of the infant’s esophagus. Yet untreated reflux may have
serious long-term consequences, such as esophageal damage or asthma.
One reason for antacid caution, for example, is that stomach acids have a
beneficial effect. They help digest proteins and aid in the digestion of many

 vitamins and minerals. Stomach acids also kill harmful bacteria and help
keep the normal bacteria of the gut in balance. Finally, the right amount of
stomach acids balance the hormones that promote stomach emptying.
Consider using an antacid only if your baby’s GERD has not responded to
the suggestions above.
18. Keep a diary. You need to be a keen observer and accurate reporter of
your child’s symptoms, since the doctor will often gauge the aggressiveness
of the treatment regimen based upon your reporting. The doctor also relies
upon your recording and reporting to modify treatment, such as changing
medications or adjusting dosages. In a reflux diary list the main symptoms
your child has, the treatment regimen, and the progress (better, worse, no
change).
19. Get support. Ask your doctor for the names of parents whom you can
consult who have children with reflux. Join a support group for parents of
children with reflux, such as the Pediatric/Adolescent Gastroesophageal
Reflux Association (PAGER), at reflux.org. Because reflux is being
increasingly recognized as an underlying cause of infant illnesses such as
colic, frequent respiratory infections, and asthma, both the understanding of
this condition and its treatment are enjoying rapid advances. For current
updates, consult our website, AskDrSears.com.

Advice from a parent: Never stop searching for answers to why your baby
hurts. Be persistent in getting proper medical help.

 20. Additional reflux tips for toddlers and older children. While most
babies outgrow reflux by about one year of age, some children continue to
suffer throughout childhood. Try these tips for toddlers and older children:

Chew-chew-chew. Teaching your child how to
take small bites, chew food well, and eat slowly
results in less air swallowing. Also, food chewed
into smaller particles empties from the stomach
faster.
Let your child graze. Small, frequent mini-meals
are easier to digest than fewer large ones. (See
“Getting Your Toddler to Eat,” here, for tips on
offering your child a nibble tray.)
Sit and stand still and eat. Jostling causes
stomach acids to splash up into the esophagus.
Encourage your child to sit or stand still for thirty
minutes after eating.
Lessen before-bedtime eating. Eat dinner earlier
in the evening and serve low-fat, mushy rapidtransit foods for the evening meal and bedtime
snack. Adults with reflux often remind
themselves, “Don’t dine after nine.”

 Get friendly with your blender. Fruit-and-yogurt
smoothies and blended vegetables pass through
the stomach quickly and are therefore less likely
to cause reflux. (See our family’s smoothie recipe
here.)
Keep your child lean. Obesity aggravates reflux.
Avoid foods that linger in the stomach or increase
acid production and may aggravate reflux.
OceanofPDF.com

 Step Three: Track Down Fuss Foods

Do gassy foods cause gassy babies? Every experienced breastfeeding
mother has a fuss-food list—foods that she eats that may cause colicky
behavior in her baby. Suspicious foods include gassy vegetables, dairy
products, caffeine-containing foods, certain grains and nuts, among others.
(See “Upsetting Foods in Breast Milk,” here, for a discussion of colicpromoting foods in the breastfeeding mother and ways to identify them.)
Not only can what’s in mother’s milk upset baby, but how it’s delivered
can cause a bloated abdomen. Overfeeding is an uncommon but subtle
cause of excessive intestinal gas. Feeding too much milk too fast may
produce lactose overload and increased intestinal gas from the breakdown
of the excessive lactose. Offering smaller volumes of formula more
frequently or offering one breast at a feeding may be easier on baby’s
digestion (providing, of course, baby gets adequate nutrition in this change
of feeding pattern).

The Colic–Cow’s Milk Connection

New research supports what old wives have long suspected. Some babies
show coliclike symptoms if their breastfeeding mothers drink cow’s milk.

 Researchers found that the potentially allergenic beta-lactoglobulin in cow’s
milk is transferred into baby through the breast milk. This allergen causes
intestinal upset just as if the baby had directly ingested the cow’s milk. One
study showed that eliminating cow’s milk products from a breastfeeding
mother’s diet lessened colicky symptoms in around a third of the babies.
Another study showed no relationship between cow’s milk that mothers
drank and the colic that those babies had. Many mothers in our practice
report their baby’s fussiness and colic remarkably subside when they
eliminate dairy products from their diet, and the colicky symptoms reappear
after they reintroduce cow’s milk into their diet. If your baby’s colicky
behavior is due to dairy or other food products in your diet, the colicky
symptoms usually appear within a few hours of your eating the suspected
food and disappear within a day or two after you discontinue it.
Some mothers need to eliminate all dairy products totally, including ice
cream, butter, or margarine made with whey (check labels for dairy
contents: casein, whey, and sodium caseinate). Others can simply reduce the
quantity of milk they drink, yet still eat yogurt and cheese without causing
colicky behavior in their baby. Perhaps one of the reasons that colic
disappears around four months is that this is the time when a baby’s
intestines mature enough to keep many of the food allergens from entering
the bloodstream. (For an alternative to drinking cow’s milk, see the almond
milk recipe here, or use a rice or soy beverage or goat’s milk.)

Be Objective

 In your eagerness to pin the cause of colic on something, along with
everyone else’s zeal to find the magic cure, it is easy to cloud your
objectivity in labeling dairy products or other foods as the culprit. In our
experience, if a baby is allergic enough to dairy products to cause colic,
baby will often show other signs of allergy—for example, rashes, diarrhea,
runny nose, night waking—signs that persist after the “colic” is gone.
Here’s another fuss-foods clue. Sensitivities to food or dairy products in
a breastfeeding mother’s diet or sensitivities to formula usually are reflected
in baby’s stools. Frequent green, mucousy stools (or the opposite—
constipation) accompanied by a red allergy ring around baby’s anus suggest
a food sensitivity. When you eliminate the offending food or dairy product,
baby’s stools become more normal, and the sore rash around the anus
disappears.

Consider Transient Lactase Deficiency (TLD)

In our practice, we see many infants improve when the breastfeeding
mother follows our GERD feeding advice; when mom takes cow’s milk
products, wheat, or other fuss foods out of her diet; or when the baby begins
GERD medication. Yet some infants don’t improve, and it’s heartbreaking
to see these babies continue to hurt. A common misconception in such
situations is that baby is “allergic” to mom’s breast milk, and weaning to a
formula is the next best option. We don’t advise our patients to wean at this

 point, as a true breast-milk allergy is virtually unheard-of. An emerging
theory in colic research that Dr. Bob has been exploring at the time of this
writing is the possibility that some infants may experience colicky
symptoms because of the lactose sugar that naturally occurs in breast milk.
We do know that some children and adults are lactose intolerant and
experience gas, bloating, and abdominal pain when they eat milk products.
We also know that some babies will develop colicky symptoms from too
much “foremilk,” the high-lactose milk that comes out during the initial
letdown. The ability to adequately digest lactose sugar is dose dependent:
an overload of sugar or a deficiency in the lactase enzyme necessary to
digest the sugar can lead to colicky symptoms. Research has shown that
some infants have a transient lactase enzyme deficiency. This deficiency
corrects itself by three or four months of age, but the intervening months
can be very uncomfortable, to say the least.
Parents can administer lactase digestive enzyme drops with each feeding
to help baby digest the lactose (see the colic section of AskDrSears.com for
suggested products). If TLD is the culprit, symptoms should improve within
a few days. This innovative over-the-counter treatment allows moms to
continue breastfeeding instead of weaning. Baby can wean off the drops
around four months as tolerated. Currently there is no practical infant test
available to measure a baby’s lactase enzyme level. Diagnosing this
transient lactase deficiency is done by a simple trial with lactase drops.
Furthermore, the smaller, more frequent feeds that we advise for GERD
in the preceding section give baby less lactose with each meal.

 Formula Allergies and Colic

Infants fed a cow’s milk–based formula may become colicky if sensitive to
cow’s milk as an allergen. The American Academy of Pediatrics Committee
on Nutrition recommends that soy formula not be used routinely in colicky
infants because of the likelihood that infants who are allergic to cow’s milk
proteins are also likely to be allergic to soy. A hypoallergenic formula
recommended by your baby’s doctor (Alimentum, Nutramigen or Neocate)
can be tried. Use the elimination-and-challenge approach described here to
uncover formula allergies.

Dr. Bob Notes: Lactase drops (see above) can also be added to milk-based
formula. Instead of immediately switching a colicky baby to a more
expensive, worse-tasting, and less-nutritious hypoallergenic formula
(necessary for babies with milk protein intolerance), a trial of lactase drops
with regular formula may be warranted to determine if lactose is the
primary problem.

No Smoking, Please

 Colic occurs more often in babies whose mothers or fathers smoke or if a
breastfeeding mother smokes. Researchers believe that not only does the
nicotine transferred into mother’s milk upset baby but the passive smoke in
the home acts as an irritant. Babies of smoking parents fuss more, and
mothers who smoke may be less able to cope with a colicky baby. Recent
studies show that mothers who smoke have lower levels of prolactin, the
hormone that increases a mother’s sensitivity and allows her to persevere
during those trying times.

OceanofPDF.com

 Step Four: Consider Other Causes of Colic

After years of hurting with colicky babies and their parents and reviewing
the research, we have concluded that colic has many causes: physical,
medical, dietary, and emotional.

Is Colic Due to Upset Biorhythms?

To ensure well-being, everyone has biorhythms—internal master clocks that
automatically secrete regulating hormones and govern our daily changes of
body temperature and sleep-wake cycles. When our biorhythms are
organized, we feel right and act right. When our biorhythms are upset—for
example from jet lag—we become “fussy.”

FUSS FOODS
Your baby’s colic could be due to something in your diet that is passing
through your breast milk. Oftentimes, baby’s food intolerance is dose
related. Perhaps you can drink a small amount, such as one glass of milk a
day, without it bothering baby, yet two or three glasses are more than baby
can comfortably tolerate. You can eliminate all potential offending foods at
once or just a few at a time, depending on how severe the colic is. Be
patient, it sometimes takes a week or two for the offending food to get out
of your system. Dairy products are the most common offender. Here’s a list
of foods that may be the culprit.

 beef
caffeine: coffee, tea, soda
chicken
chocolate (sorry!)
citrus fruits
corn
dairy products
egg whites
gassy vegetables:
broccoli
cauliflower
cabbage
onions
green peppers
nuts
peanuts and peanut butter
shellfish
soy products
tomatoes
wheat
Some babies enter the world with disorganized biorhythms. We say they
are unsettled. Other babies enter the world organized and expect the
caregiving environment to keep them organized. Failure to become
organized or stay organized results in a behavioral change we call colic.
Perhaps there is a group of organizing hormones that cause babies to settle.
If these organizers are missing, babies become internally unsettled. Instead
of fussing all the time, they let loose with periodic outbursts of colicky
behavior or store up a day’s worth of tension and release it in one long
evening blast.

 Could colic be a deficiency of calming hormones or an excess of
upsetting hormones? There is some experimental support for the
disturbance-in-biorhythm theory of colic. Newborn experimental animals
separated from their mothers have disturbed secretions of adrenal
hormones, the body’s regulating hormones.
Progesterone is a hormone known to have calming and sleep-inducing
influences. Baby receives progesterone from the placenta at birth. Could the
calming effect of maternal progesterone wear off around two weeks (when
colic typically begins) and cause colic if the infant does not begin producing
enough of his own progesterone? Some studies have shown low
progesterone in colicky babies and improvement in the colicky behavior
when these babies were given a progesteronelike drug. Other studies have
shown mixed results. Breastfed babies in one study had higher levels of
progesterone.
Prostaglandins, hormones that cause strong contractions of intestinal
muscles, are newcomers to the disturbed-biorhythms theory. Coincidentally,
when researchers injected prostaglandins into two babies to treat their heart
disease, the two infants became colicky. Observations that babies who were
the product of stressful births were more likely to become fussy lend
support to these hormonal theories.
A final bit of icing on the biorhythm cake: Colic magically subsides
around three to four months of age, at the time when baby’s sleep patterns
become organized into more predictable biorhythms. Any relationship? Our
personal belief is that fussiness and colic in some, but not all, babies are the
behavioral and physical manifestations of the internal regulating systems

 gone haywire. Much research is needed to identify the relationship between
internal regulating hormones and baby’s behavior and the effect of
parenting styles on these substances. Until this research is available, we
simply have to rely on common sense—that holding and nurturing calm a
baby.

OceanofPDF.com

 COMFORTING COLIC
Traditionally, colic has been “treated” by laying a reassuring hand on the
tummy of the baby and the shoulders of the parents and temporizing, “Oh,
he’ll grow out of it!” Most approaches to colic are aimed more at helping
parents cope than at relieving baby’s hurt. By maintaining the mind-set “the
hurting baby” rather than “the colicky baby,” you and your doctor form a
partnership to persevere in finding the cause and the remedy for your baby’s
pain.
Even though no one completely understands colic, let’s make two
assumptions: The whole baby is upset, and baby has pain in the gut (the
term “colic” comes from the Greek kōlikos, meaning “suffering in the
colon”). Treatment, therefore, is aimed at relaxing the whole baby and
particularly baby’s abdomen. Review the soothing suggestions we describe
for calming the fussy baby, beginning here. Here are additional tips to relax
tense tummies.

OceanofPDF.com

 The Colic Dance

Want to make a best-selling dance video? Put ten veteran parents with their
colicky babies on a dance floor and watch the different steps. While each
dance movement is as unique as a fingerprint, the choreography that works
the best contains movement in all three planes: up and down, side to side,
forward and backward—as in the womb. Here’s your first dance lesson.
The right hold. Place baby in the neck nestle position or football hold
(described below). Hold baby firmly, but relax. Convey an “I’m in charge”
impression. Snuggle closely with a lot of skin-to-skin contact or use a baby
sling.
The right dance step. Move in three planes (up and down, side to side,
back and forth), and alternate these three motions. The up-and-down
motion, the most colic-soothing dance step (the “elevator step”), is best
performed by springing up and down as you walk—heel-toe-heel-toe.
The right rhythm. Moving in a rhythm of sixty to seventy beats per minute
soothes babies best. (Count one–one thousand, two–one thousand….)
Interestingly, this rhythm corresponds to the uterine bloodflow pulse rate
that baby was used to. Continue dancing until either the dancer or the fusser
wears out.

 Change partners. Some babies prefer mother’s dance routine, probably
because they are used to her style after nine months. But a change of
partners is sometimes needed. Babies appreciate a new set of calm arms
when mothers are tense from a whole day of baby holding. Dads have their
own unique dance steps, too. When dad wears out, call in an experienced
grandmother. She has time, patience, and experience.

OceanofPDF.com

 Colic Carries (Mostly for Fathers)

Like dance routines, try all variations of baby holding until you find one
that works. Here are some time-tested favorite colic carries that fathers of
high-need babies refer to as “fussbusters.”
The football hold. (See the illustration on the next page.) Drape baby
stomach down along your forearm. Place baby’s head near the crook of
your elbow and his legs straddling your hand. Grasp the diaper area firmly
and press your forearm into baby’s tense abdomen. You will know you have
found the right hold when you feel baby’s tense abdomen relax and his
previously tight limbs loosen and limply dangle. Or try reversing baby so
that his cheek lies in the palm of your hand, his abdomen along your
forearm, and his crotch area snuggled in the crook of your elbow.

 The football hold, a time-tested colic carry.

The neck nestle. Snuggle baby’s head into the groove between your chin
and chest, in the neck nestle position. Croon a low, slow, repetitive tune. As
baby quiets and falls asleep while dancing or being carried in the neck
nestle position, ease baby into the warm fuzzy position (see here).
Bouncing baby. Hold baby close enough to engage in an eye-to-eye gaze,
with one hand firmly under his bottom and the other on his upper back and
neck. (Be sure to support the wobbly head of a newborn.) Bounce baby by
moving your hands up and down rhythmically at sixty to seventy beats per
minute. For an added touch, pat baby’s bottom.
Bounce while you dance. One father in our practice scheduled his daily
exercise routine during his baby’s predictable evening fussy times. He
bounced on a small trampoline while holding baby. It worked to take the
tension out of baby and pounds off daddy.

OceanofPDF.com

 Baby Bends

Besides creative rocking, baby bends are great for untensing baby,
especially for a baby with pain in the gut. Here are some time-tested
favorites, most of which are not effective when baby is at the peak of an
attack. Do what you can to calm baby somewhat first, then he’ll be more
able to receive the physical benefits of bending.
The gas pump. Grasp both lower calves and pump baby’s legs, knees to
tummy. Occasionally alternate the pumping actions with bicycling motions.

The limp-limb sign is a sure indication that baby is deeply asleep.

 A comfortable neck nestle.

The colic curl. This is a favorite of tense babies who stiffen and arch their
backs and have difficulty relaxing and molding into any holding position.
Cradle baby with him sitting in your arms facing forward, resting his back
and head against your chest. Bending baby relaxes the abdominal and back
muscles, which often relaxes the whole baby. If your arms give out, try the
kangaroo carry in the baby sling (see here). (Or if you and baby like eye
contact and like to play facial-gesture games, reverse the bend. Hold baby’s
back away from you and bend his legs up against your chest.)

 Roll out the pain. Drape baby tummy down over a large beach ball and roll
him back and forth in a circular motion. Lay a securing hand on baby’s back
while rolling.

A variation of the colic curl.

Press out the pain. Drape the awake baby stomach down on a cushion,
with his legs dangling over the edge, to apply some soothing pressure to his
belly.

OceanofPDF.com

 Soft Touches

The big hand. Dads, place the palm of your hand over baby’s navel and
your fingers and thumbs circling baby’s abdomen. Let baby lean his tense
abdomen against your warm hand.
The “I Love U” touch. Picture an upsidedown U over the surface of your
baby’s abdomen. Underneath are your baby’s tense intestines, which need
relaxing, and the colon, out of which you try to massage the gas. Rub some
warm oil onto your hands and knead baby’s tense abdomen with your
flattened fingers in a circular motion. Start with a downward stroke for the I
on baby’s left side (your right, see illustration). This stroke moves gas down
and out of your baby’s descending colon. Then massage along the upsidedown L, moving the gas along the transverse portion of the colon and down
the descending colon again. Then massage along the upside-down U,
stroking upward along the ascending colon, across the transverse, and down
the descending colon. Abdominal massage works best with baby on your
lap, feet facing you, or in a warm bath, or both.

 The “I Love U” touch helps move gas along baby’s intestinal tract.

OceanofPDF.com

 A Mother’s Story

“I tried warm baths with my baby. This helped, but only as long as he was
immersed in the warm water, and realistically, you can’t spend your life in a
bath! I also massaged his tummy while he was in the water. With his feet
toward me, I would place my left hand across his middle and knead rather
deeply with my fingers, concentrating on his left side close to the rib cage.
This helped, but he only liked it when he was in the water. After his bath I
would rub him with lotion, starting with his precious little feet and working
up each leg. I found when I reached his thigh his wails immediately turned
into cackles of laughter. I began to concentrate on massaging his thighs
when colicky periods began, and even without the bath, the reaction was
always the same.
“The thigh massage I found most helpful went like this. I would lay Eric
in my lap on his back with his head on my knees and his feet at my stomach.
I would place a hand on each thigh, thumb in the groin area and fingers on
the outside of the leg. Then I would use a rather firm, deep kneading motion
with equal pressure on both the inside and the outside of the leg, squeezing,
rolling, then releasing. It worked every time, turning those pitiful wails into
laughter—at least for a while!”

 RX FOR FUSSING
Why Babies Fuss (or Hurt)

Missing the womb
Separation from mother
High-need baby
Formula allergy
Allergy to foods in breastfeeding mother’s diet
Gastroesophageal reflux
Ear infection
Urinary tract infection
Constipation
Diaper rash
Broken bone from recent fall
Drug withdrawal (newborn)
They’re just being babies
What to Do

Babywearing
Frequent feedings
Prompt responses to cries
Colic carries and dances
Soothing lullabies and music
Baby swings
Moving attractions: fish tank, grandfather clock, videos, exercise
machines

 Car rides: freeway fathering
Feeding while carried in a sling
Infant massage, especially abdominal
Warm fuzzies: dad’s chest
Warm baths
Looking at self in mirror
Elimination diet if breastfeeding
Hypoallergenic formulas
Smaller, more frequent feedings to avoid overfeeding
Upright position, especially after feeding
Tense-tummy exercises
Medicinal gas relievers
A visit to the doctor

OceanofPDF.com

 Gas Relievers

Antiflatulent (simethicone) drops, a nonprescription digestive aid given
before feedings, lessens the formation of gas in the intestines. At this
writing these drops are considered safe and are sometimes effective in
relieving excess gas formation. Bloated babies are often relieved by the
doctor inserting a lubricated pinkie into baby’s tight rectum. Sometimes
stool will shoot out and the “colic” stops.
If

your

infant

is

constipated,

nonprescription

glycerin

rectal

suppositories for babies may help expel some stool and relieve the backedup gas. Insert the suppository about an inch into the rectum and hold baby’s
buttocks together a few minutes to allow the suppository to dissolve. (See
treatment of constipation, here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 A Home Remedy

Parents have reported that some herbal teas are successful in relieving the
pain in their colicky babies. Try chamomile and fennel teas. Put ½ teaspoon
of the herb in 1 cup of boiling water. Cover and steep for five to ten
minutes, then strain. Cool and give baby a few teaspoons of the tepid tea.

A WORD OF CAUTION ABOUT COLIC REMEDIES: From time to
time new research shows that colic remedies thought to be harmless to a
baby may not be safe. Always be sure to check with your doctor before
giving your baby any prescription or nonprescription remedies. Also see
our website, AskDrSears.com, for updated information.

OceanofPDF.com

 Should Baby Cry It Out?

We put the cry-it-out approach to sleep in the chapter on nighttime
parenting. We want to keep it asleep as a “treatment” for the colicky baby.
This severe method of dealing with colic is a no-win situation for baby and
for parents. In a study comparing two groups of colicky babies, one group
was given an immediate nurturant response to crying, while the other group
was left to cry it out. The group whose cries were properly attended to cried
70 percent less. The babies in the cry-it-out group, however, showed no
decrease in colicky crying. Besides not helping the baby, the cry-it-out
approach desensitizes parents, who may already be struggling with
ambivalent feelings toward their baby. The last thing they need is any
advice that creates even more distance between parents and their baby.

DON’T SHAKE THE BABY
Colicky cries not only pierce tender hearts; they may also push anger
buttons. If baby’s escalating cries are getting to you, hand baby over to
another person or put baby safely down and walk out of the room until your
scary feelings subside. Angrily shaking a baby may damage his fragile brain
structures, sometimes fatally.
Parents, as we’ve said before, it is not your fault your baby cries, nor
must you always stop baby from crying. There may be times when baby
needs a good relief cry. But baby doesn’t need to cry alone. Your role is
neither to ignore nor frantically hush baby’s cry, but to do all you can to

 help if there is pain. Then if baby still cries, stay relaxed yourself and allow
him to release and express what can only come out through crying. We all
know how therapeutic a good cry can be, and even more so in someone’s
supporting arms. Babies have feelings just as intense as ours, and it helps
them to be able to get it out so they can get back to feeling balanced and
happier, and maybe even sleep better.
Parents need to know how stress causes them to react to their baby’s
crying. Many remember only too well the feelings of despair because of
fatigue and lack of sleep—visions of throwing baby out the window do not
mean parents would actually do it! Stress can push new parents to the
extreme edge, and they can picture themselves losing control, shaking the
baby, screaming at the baby to shut up. Stress management becomes an
important tool in dealing with a crying baby. If you have thoughts like
these, seek help immediately from a professional counselor or a
sympathetic friend.

OceanofPDF.com

 IS COLIC PREVENTABLE?
Mike and Lori were parents of a previously colicky baby who was now a
happy and calm two-year-old. Expecting their second baby, they came in for
prenatal counseling and began, “Is there anything we can do to increase our
chances of having a calmer baby? We don’t want to go through that again.”

OceanofPDF.com

 A Colic-Prevention Experiment

I counseled these parents that, while there is no magic preventive medicine
for colic, there are ways to lower your chances. Over a three-year period we
tried a colic-prevention experiment in our office. This is what we advised
and what we observed.
Strive for a peaceful pregnancy. While a stress-free pregnancy is as rare
as a never-fuss baby, studies have suggested that mothers who go through
pregnancy with a lot of unresolved stress have a greater risk of having
colicky babies.
Try a drug-free pregnancy and birth. Studies have shown that mothers
who had a drug-free birth were less likely to have colicky babies. Also,
mothers who took addicting drugs or drank alcohol heavily during
pregnancy were more likely to have fussy babies.
Practice the seven Baby B’s of attachment parenting. Of all these
concepts we found babywearing to be the most useful fuss preventer. Every
couple in our experiment left the hospital with a baby sling, and a brief
course in babywearing by our office staff followed. Both mom and dad
were instructed to wear their baby most of the day.

 Identify the “colic candidate” early and intervene. Some babies give a
clue in the first day or two of life. They show a few sparks that warn the
real explosion is soon to follow.
When I was working as director of a university hospital newborn
nursery, I was astonished at how disturbing are the cries of some newborns.
I would open the door of the nursery and hear one of those ear-piercing
cries and want to shut the door and run. Babies’ cries are something I
definitely have a low tolerance for. So in addition to studying the sound
qualities of the cry, I wondered if we could identify babies with particularly
disturbing cries in the newborn nursery and mellow out these cries during
the first few weeks. Most babies have the good manners to start out with
attachment-promoting cries, which if promptly attended to don’t escalate
into detachment-promoting cries. A few click immediately into the earpiercing, shrill detachment cry, which makes all within earshot want to run
from the baby. These cries sometimes invoke anger rather than sympathy
toward the baby. Nursery nurses identify these babies early on, often saying,
“This one’s going to be a handful.” In most of these “crybabies” I have
studied, babywearing early in the newborn period not only lessens the
frequency of crying but mellows the nature of the cry into more tolerable
and attachment-promoting cries. The following is an example that actually
occurred during the writing of this book.
Jeffrey, the secondborn of a very attached and committed mother, was
the product of a stressful labor and birth. Jeffrey’s cry was shattering. Even
in the delivery room his cry almost cleared the room of all personnel.
Susan, Jeffrey’s mother, even admitted that his cry was disturbing their

 bonding relationship. As an experiment, I advised the parents to wear
Jeffrey in a sling for at least four hours every day, more if possible. Also,
they were instructed to tape-record his cries over a period of two weeks.
Within a week, Jeffrey’s cry mellowed considerably, enabling the mother to
“finally enjoy being with him; he cries much nicer now.” Susan and her
husband created a caregiving environment in which Jeffrey had no need to
be angry and certainly no need to cry angrily.

OceanofPDF.com

 Attachment Parenting Can Help

It is customary for medical professionals to advise parents to wear their
babies and use other comforting techniques after fussy or colicky behavior
has already begun. Indeed, I used to do this. I then realized the importance
of preventive medicine for colic. I started advising new parents to begin
wearing their babies right after birth, especially those babies who had
already been labeled “fussy” in the hospital. As I expected, the incidence of
colic and fussy behavior dramatically decreased in my practice.
I have noticed, and research has confirmed, that parents who employ the
attachment style of parenting have fewer fussy babies. I have observed,
however, that even parents who practice all the concepts of attachment
parenting may be blessed with a colicky baby. Even babies whom I call
right-from-the-start babies get colic. (But in these babies suspect a medical
cause.) There’s something fundamentally distressing about not being able to
comfort a crying baby. But attachment parents who have colicky babies are
better able to cope with the colic, are more likely to seek out the cause, and
are generally more sensitive to baby’s crying. In these families, even if they
cannot cure the colic, it does not promote a distance between the parents
and baby, but they use this passing trial as just another factor that cements
the already strong parent-infant bond.

 I find it very interesting that colic usually does not begin until after the
second week of life. Could it be that the infant is giving us a two-week
grace period to help her get organized and adjust to life outside the womb?
If her expected parenting style is not fulfilled, her system goes from neutral
equilibrium to disequilibrium, from unorganized to disorganized, resulting
in the total behavioral decompensation we call colic.
Even with babies whose colic is due to a medical rather than a
behavioral cause, parents who wear their babies are better able to cope with
the colicky behavior. The closeness they achieve creates a sensitivity in
these parents, causing them to be especially responsive to their infant’s
needs. Babywearing parents also learn to anticipate the triggers of colicky
behavior and avoid these triggers before they occur.
Babywearing is especially valuable in preventing evening colic. It could
be that baby has spent most of his day trying to compensate and fit into his
environment using his own semisuccessful self-soothing techniques. By the
end of the day he is so exhausted from trying to fit that he bitterly
decompensates into colicky behavior. Babywearing during the day, in
effect, compensates and helps baby organize the day and thereby relieves
evening colic. The tenseness that would have built up during the day and
would need to be released at night in colic is not there because babywearing
has done its part to help the baby fit. (See “Babywearing Reduces Crying
and Colic,” here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 ENTERING THE PROMISED TIME
When will it stop? Colic begins around two weeks of age and reaches peak
severity around six to eight weeks. Seldom do the violent outbursts continue
longer than four months of age (unless it’s due to an undetected medical
cause), but fussy behavior may last throughout the first year and mellow
between one to two years of age. In one study of fifty colicky babies, the
evening colic disappeared by four months in all of the babies studied.
What’s magic about three to four months? Around that time babies develop
more

internal

organization

of

their

sleeping

patterns.

Exciting

developmental changes occur that lead babies to the promised land of fussfree living. They can see clearly across the room. Babies are so delighted by
the visual attractions that they forget to fuss. Next, they can play with their
hands and engage in self-soothing finger sucking. Babies can enjoy more
freedom to wave their limbs freestyle and blow off steam. Also, during the
second half of the first year baby’s intestine is more mature, and perhaps
milk allergies subside. Or by this time the cause has been found or
comforting techniques perfected. Like pregnancy and labor, colic too will
pass.

OceanofPDF.com

 17

OceanofPDF.com

 Working and Parenting

One morning Martha and I, Dr. Bill, were guests on a TV show. I was
asked to comment on “the working mother,” which tops my dreadedquestion list. While I was trying to be pediatrician turned politician and
muster up an unoffending answer, Martha piped up, “If I hadn’t worked
while you were an intern, we wouldn’t be sitting here right now.”

OceanofPDF.com

 THE REAL ISSUE: ATTACHMENT
The issue is not the working mother, the issue is attachment with your baby.
The solution is to combine earning and parenting. Separating mothers into
two camps does nothing but provide judgmental material for magazines and
devalues one side or the other. The approach we take is to present the facts
and then offer, instead of guilt-laden judgment, support for attachment and
thoroughly researched advice for incorporating working and attachment. To
write that full-time attachment mothering makes no difference would be
dishonest, ignoring what both research and experience have shown and
trading truth for popularity. Likewise, to pontificate that a baby will be
absolutely disadvantaged if mother works is equally shortsighted. We have
worked out a practical approach based upon our own career juggling, and
our experience in counseling hundreds of working and caring parents.

OceanofPDF.com

 For Mothers Who Are Undecided

Your baby is due in a few weeks, and you have begun your maternity leave.
As you clean out your desk, you wonder, “Will I ever return? Should I
return? Do I have to? Do I want to?” For the many women in this quandary
who have the luxury of choice, here are answers to some questions often
asked by mothers about to face the decision whether to work, stay home, or
both.
Does the amount of time I’m with my baby really make any difference to
my child’s outcome?
What you are really asking is “How important am I?” Reread Chapter 1,
“Getting Attached,” and read the first few pages of Chapter 19, “Growing
Together,” on the meaning of mother-infant attachment, how it affects your
child, and what’s in it for you. Especially consider the concepts of mutual
giving, mutual shaping, and mutual sensitivity. Notice that your presence
influences not only what you give to baby, but what baby gives to you, how
interacting with your baby shapes your mothering skills. What baby does
for mother is an important but underappreciated fact. Your presence is
important to your baby’s development, and your baby’s presence is
important to your development.

 Are there studies showing that full-time mothering makes a difference?
Yes, but not the studies that make headlines in magazines. Again, the issue
is not full- or part-time mothering, but attachment. Even the artificial
divisions “full-time” and “part-time” are misleading. You can be full-time
at-home but only part-time interacting with your baby, or part-time at work
and full-time interacting with your baby when at home. In a nutshell, the
studies conclude: The most important contributor to a baby’s physical,
emotional, and intellectual development is the responsiveness of the mother
to the cues of her infant.
It’s the attachment with your baby that counts, not just the time you
spend. A baby has an intense need to be with her mother that is as basic as
her need for food. But the need for food is not continuous, nor is the
requirement for mother. The baby needs to be held, carried, talked to
(attached), but not necessarily always by mother. Mother’s availability, like
feeding, is on an as-needed basis to be delivered as much as possible by
mother herself. “Responsiveness” is the current buzzword among infant
development specialists. Another is “reciprocity.” These infant-stimulation
terms boil down to a more understandable concept—harmony. Your baby
has a need and gives you a cue. Because you are present and tuned in to
baby, you pick up on the cue and respond. Because baby trusts that she will
receive a consistent and predictable response, she is motivated to keep
cueing. The more you and baby practice this cue-response interplay, the
better baby learns to cue and the better you learn to respond. The mother-

 baby relationship is in harmony. Baby and mother bring out the best in each
other.
And don’t forget the mothering hormones (see here); studies have shown
it’s the frequency of mother-baby interaction that is the most potent
stimulator of these mothering boosters.
What about quality time?
The concept of quality time was marketed by the child-care industry to
lessen guilt during the you-can-have-it-all style of the eighties. Initially
meant for working fathers, quality time made its way into the guilt-easing
package for working mothers.
There is a certain value to the quality time concept. In certain situations,
quality time may be the only option. One sincere, caring mother told us, “I
have to work all day, so quality time is all I can afford. I give up a lot of
time I would ordinarily spend on entertainment to be with my child, so that
when I am not working I am fully devoted to my infant. Besides quality
time, I probably give him more quantity time than some nonworking
mothers who spend a lot of time each day pursuing their own forms of
entertainment.” This mother is truly doing the best she can do. While
quality time is important, so is the quantity of time. Here are some
advantages of simply being there.
Baby’s spontaneity. Babies are spontaneous. Their play is mood
dependent. One of the fallacies of baby care is that we must always be

 stimulating our babies. Most babies, however, have a prime time of
receptivity each day, a period during which they learn best from their social
interactions. Most babies have their best time in the morning. Evening times
are often a baby’s worst. The “happy hour” from 6:00 to 8:00 P.M. is often a
cranky, fussy time of the day that is enough to drive mothers back to work.
To rush home from a full day’s work and feel you then have to stimulate
your baby is not in the parent-infant contract. A more realistic approach is
simply being available and approachable when baby needs to play or be
comforted.
Missed milestones. Precious things happen when a parent is not around,
shooting another arrow at the quality time target. Everyone loses when the
first crawl, the first step, the first word, occur and baby’s favorite guests are
not at the party.
Teachable moments. Another fact of baby care that dilutes the quality time
concept is the well-researched observation that baby-initiated play has more
educational value than parent-initiated interactions. Baby looks up into the
sky and sees his first bird. That’s an opener. Is there someone there to share
his discovery and expand on it by talking to baby about birds flying in the
sky?
What are the effects of mother-baby separation?
Basically, they are a lessening of the benefits of mother-infant attachment.
In recent years there has been a flurry of research validating, almost down

 to the cellular level, the importance of mother’s presence. Fascinating
findings (for example, infant animals separated from their mothers have
higher levels of stress hormones and lower levels of growth hormones) are
beginning to open a lot of eyes toward realizing the value of attachment.
How long and how often baby can tolerate separation from mother depends
much upon the strength of the mother-baby attachment, the quality of
substitute attachment caregiving, and the temperament of the baby.
Of course, no matter how much weighing of advantages and disadvantages
you do in advance, baby will ultimately have a voice in the decision too. If
you are blessed with a high-need baby (see the preceding chapter for a
profile of this little person), full-time mothering for a longer time may be
your only real option.

A mother notes: I left a promising career to stay home when my baby was
born, feeling my career as a mother was even more promising.

OceanofPDF.com

 “I Have to Work—We Need the Income”

If your preference is to be at home with your baby, but for financial reasons
you have to work, consider these alternatives.
What does it cost to work? By the time you deduct from your paycheck
the costs of convenience food, transportation, clothing, child care, increased
taxes, and medical bills (infants in day-care centers get sick more often),
you may be surprised by how little you have left.
Evaluate your priorities. Are you working to pay the utility bills and to
feed your family? Or are there desired luxuries that can be temporarily put
off? No material possessions are more valuable to your infant than you are.
Consider whether you can afford not to give your child your full-time self,
at least for two or three years.
Economize. Take a long, hard look at your family’s spending habits. Some
people are better at penny-pinching than others, and to some it is a
consideration that makes them angry. (Why should they have to discipline
themselves?) We know it isn’t easy for everyone in the family, yet if they
can truly understand the worth of having mother with her small children
full-time, the effort and delay of gratification will be worth it. With serious

 economizing, it is possible for some to raise a family on one income and
even make a few dreams come true along the way.
Consider borrowing the extra income. The high-touch stage of infant care
does not last forever. Have you considered borrowing the extra income
while your child is an infant and returning to work later to repay it?
Grandparents are often a willing lending source if they realize that this is
one of the most valuable investments they can make in their grandchild’s
future.
Plan ahead. During your early years of marriage and during pregnancy,
economize to save as much money as you can. Let the savings from your
second income help your family while you are a full-time mother. Many
couples become accustomed to a standard of living that depends upon two
incomes. Early in your marriage consider living on one income and saving
the other, lest you become trapped in the two-income standard of living
after baby arrives.
Start a home business. We feel for some couples this may be a realistic
answer to the second-income dilemma. Home businesses are most
successful when you do the type of work you want to do. Any work that you
dislike will wear thin after a while. Examples of successful home businesses
that we have seen work are network marketing, bookkeeping, typing and
word processing, selling, Web-based businesses, working with arts and
crafts, giving piano lessons, working as a sales distributor, or starting your

 own home day care. We have professional women in our practice who bring
their businesses into their homes and turn a spare room into an office.
Telecommuting is a technological boon that has enabled many mothers to
stay connected to their office while staying home with their baby. For
example, one mother is an editor who works at her own portable home
computer that is tied into the main office. She goes to her office without
leaving her nest. The exciting part of home businesses is that many of them
become so successful that it not only helps mother and baby stay attached, it
helps husband and wife stay attached, and as the child gets older he or she
can become involved in the family business. We know two mothers who
wanted to stay home with their new babies but needed the second income.
They started a garage business making car seat covers. This company
subsequently mushroomed into a multimillion-dollar corporation.
Consider different working-time options. Besides the usual full-time or
part-time employment, consider two other novel options:

Flextime work. Work with flexible hours allows a
parent to adjust the hours to be at home when the
child is sick or has a special need, and it best
allows spouses to share the child care.
A shared job. In this type of arrangement two
parents share the work of one full-time job. This
situation allows parents to cover for each other
when the children have special needs or are sick.

 It benefits employers because they get two minds
for the price of one. For any arrangement less
than full-time, you may have to bargain with
employers for benefit packages.
MOTHERS WITH DUAL CAREERS CAN
THRIVE
Our primary message in this chapter is to give you the tools that will help
both you and your baby bond and thrive together. The bonding and
attachment challenges faced by moms who must be away during the day are
real and shouldn’t be ignored. This isn’t just our opinion; it is solid science
based on numerous research studies. Our spouses in the Sears family have
also worked during challenging financial seasons (e.g., paying for medical
school). Let’s explore what your options are, then examine what you can do
as a mom to ensure that your attachment to your baby (and baby’s bond to
you) really thrives.

OceanofPDF.com

 KEYS TO WORKING AND ATTACHING
We begin this section with two real stories.

OceanofPDF.com

 What Not to Do

Jan is a career woman about to deliver her first baby. Her professional voice
tells her that she has studied long years to get her degree, that she feels
fulfilled by her job and wants to return to it. Her maternal voice tells her,
because she has researched this baby well, that a strong mother attachment
is important. She fears that she may not be able to return to work easily if
she gets hooked on motherhood. Subconsciously she keeps herself from
getting too attached to her baby and is preoccupied with the day she has to
return to work. She spends a lot of time interviewing substitute caregivers,
buying things for baby, and planning her dual-career juggling act. Before
she realizes it, her month at home is over, and the office scene now
consumes her day. She dismisses frequent baby pangs as a side effect of
mothering that soon will pass—and it does. Baby seems to be thriving in the
hands of a nurturant caregiver, and Jan has entered the ranks of master
jugglers.
In time a distance develops between mother and baby—and between
father and baby, too. The signs are subtle at first, then obvious. Come the
toddler years, she and her child are locking horns. Discipline becomes a list
of methods desperately snatched from the nearest book. She finds herself
seeking more and more help from counselors about how to handle her
unruly daughter. The attachment was not developed at a time when both

 mother and baby needed it, and they are now playing the difficult game of
catch-up.

OceanofPDF.com

 A Story About Healthy Working and Attaching

Mary and Tom are about to become first-time parents. The couple, both
with interesting careers, realistically evaluates the family situation and
concludes that Mary needs to work (even wants to), at least part-time.
During “their” pregnancy Mary and Tom read a lot about the importance of
mother-infant attachment and father-infant attachment. They vow not to let
working and parenting be an either/or decision. They both will work outside
the home, but they will also work at building a strong attachment to baby,
and this is how they do it.
First, Mary puts out of her mind the day she plans to return to work lest
she be preoccupied with “what happens when.” She doesn’t let economic
pressures rob her of the joy of becoming attached. She chooses her birthing
scene wisely, keeps baby with her after birth, breastfeeds on cue, and wears
baby James most of the day—the entire attachment-parenting package. Tom
shares every aspect of parenting except the breastfeeding. The attachment
strengthens.
After a month of being an attached mother, Mary feels connected with
her baby and at peace with herself. Feeling connected to their baby elevates
Tom and Mary’s whole decision-making process to a higher level. Mary
still realizes she must work, but she is even more committed to mothering
because she realizes how important it is to maintain the attachment. She

 realizes she can’t rewind the parenting tape of the early, formative months,
but she can always catch up on income. She decides to ease into working,
first very part-time, then maybe more—using baby as a barometer of
separation.
In some ways her strong mother-infant attachment makes it tougher to
leave James; in other ways it is easier because she knows in her heart
(confirmed by research) that strong early attachment makes later separation
healthier. A secure mother-infant attachment allows baby to better tolerate
substitute care and helps mother to feel less guilty about leaving.
The attached couple thoughtfully selects a substitute caregiver, one who
is naturally nurturing and sensitively responsive. Mary spends time showing
her how she wants her baby mothered.
While at work, Mary periodically clicks her mind onto images of her
baby. After all, working people let their minds wander a bit; she might as
well let it wander to her baby. Every few hours her breasts tingle and leak as
a reminder that though professionally she is at the office, biologically she is
a breastfeeding mother. She pumps and stores milk, glad for this connection
with James. The connection continues—because Mary orchestrates it.
Sometimes the couple is able to juggle work schedules so that dad
parents while mom works. After all, if mom shares earning, dad can share
baby care.
At night James sleeps next to mom and dad, for some catch-up closeness
from missed time during the day. The attachment continues at night. As
Mary and Tom take inventory of their “home baby-raising business” they
make adjustments, considering the needs of all three persons.

 They realize the need to put a part of their previously busy lifestyle on
hold for a while, because James will be a baby for a relatively short time,
and their current financial situation is likely to improve. They even include
James in their social life, gravitating toward like-minded friends and
learning from veteran career jugglers.
What is the secret of their success? Because they were convinced
attachment parenting makes a difference, they found a way. And they see
the payoff. Years later, after Mary’s office closes, Tom’s company relocates,
and their professional lives change, James will display the dividends of a
long-term attachment investment.

OceanofPDF.com

 Connecting and Staying Connected

Central to our approach to the working-parent issue is not whether or how
much a mother works, but how close the attachment is between baby and
mother. Even though the focus is on employed mothers, a broader issue is
how both mother and father can be employed and parent. Here are tips for
keeping connected to baby.
Make the most of maternity leave. Don’t dwell upon the day you will
return to work, lest the preoccupation rob you of those precious weeks of
connecting with your baby. During the weeks or months at home with baby,
practice as many of the attachment concepts as you can. Get hooked on
your baby. Let your baby develop your nurturing skills. Enjoy the time
spent with your baby as you let mutual giving bring out the best in both of
you.
Realize your importance. Ponder the whole concept of attachment as
discussed in the questions and answers earlier in this chapter. Be aware of
the importance of parent-infant attachment. Especially consider the
concepts of mutual giving, shaping, and sensitivity. Once the magnitude of
what it means to nurture another life hits you, you will be more motivated
to make attachment a priority.

 Reconnect with baby. Let quality time be nurturing time, a time to
reconnect with your baby after work. Continue breastfeeding after returning
to work if you enjoyed this feeding style while you were a full-time
mommy (see here for tips on breastfeeding and working). Wear baby as
much as possible while working around the house, shopping, and running
errands. Incorporate baby into your away-from-the-workplace life.
Indulging baby in things to make up for relationships is not part of the
attachment style of parenting. Catch-up nurturing is.
While at work keep the attachment going. New technologies can be
helpful. You and your baby may be able to look at each other through a Web
camera set up on a computer. Baby’s pictures, pumping milk, and telephone
calls to caregivers make long-distance connecting easier. Sometimes you
may find all these baby reminders upsetting. Take these feelings as a sign of
your continued sensitivity to your dual career. Completely shutting off baby
thoughts eight hours a day is a desensitization process that leads to more—
distance between mother and child.

 Attachment parenting helps the working mother reconnect with her baby
after work.

BREASTFEEDING: AN ONGOING
COMMITMENT
Continuing the breastfeeding relationship will enhance your attachment,
provide baby with the best of nutrition, and help fend off flu germs to which
baby will be exposed (See here, “Getting It Together: Working and
Breastfeeding,” for more information on pumping, storing, and feeding
baby your expressed breast milk.)
Blend jobs. If possible, choose employment that allows you the maximum
time to mother. Here are some suggestions:

Telecommunicate as much as possible.
Start a home business.
Find nearby employment that enables you to
come home for reconnecting times or enables the
caregiver to bring baby to your workplace.
Work a flextime schedule, in which you have a
certain amount of work to do but can choose your
hours to accommodate baby-care times.
Use on-site child care that allows you to stay in
close and frequent touch with baby while at work.

 Work and wear. Bringing your baby to your job
depends on the baby and the job. A fussy baby
and a librarian mommy couldn’t peacefully
coexist in the same workplace. But there are
plenty of jobs that enable you to wear your baby
in a baby sling while working. Some examples
are clerking in a baby shop—a natural shopperstopper—selling real estate, even office work in a
setting where baby sounds are socially acceptable.
The cradle or playpen in the office corner can be
an option. A patient of ours is a substitute teacher
who wears her baby to class. Can you imagine the
attachment
message
she
gives
these
impressionable future parents? (See the
discussion of working and wearing baby, here, for
more baby-at-the-workplace tips.)
Know yourself—know your baby. No career, even mothering, works if
you push yourself beyond job satisfaction. A mother in our practice summed
up her realistic appraisal of herself and her baby: “Full-time mothering was
too much for me; full-time working was too much for my baby.” She
reached a compromise. Besides working part-time, she got involved with a
mothering support group at our suggestion so she could learn to broaden her
enjoyment of her mothering profession.

 Martha notes: When asked that inevitable question “And what do you
do?,” I respond, “I’m a specialist in early childhood education.” And with
no trouble at all, I could sit down and write out a detailed job description to
go with that lofty title.

Share baby care. If you are bringing home part of the bacon, honor your
husband with his share of the household duties, especially taking over for
the sitter whenever possible. One of the better by-products of employed
mothers is more-involved fathers.

OceanofPDF.com

 Shortening the Distance

Over the years we have noticed that expectant mothers planning to return to
their jobs a few weeks after birth subconsciously may not let themselves
become closely attached to their baby “because it will be so hard to go back
to work.” Many of these babies and mothers who get a short start become
victims of the dual-career juggler’s disease—distancing.
We tried an experiment in our practice. Prenatally or around the time of
birth, when mothers told me they would be returning to work, I asked them
to put “W-day” completely out of their mind. “Enjoy full-time mothering
while you can. Get hooked on your baby. In a couple of weeks before your
return to work, we’ll discuss preparations.” Amazing changes occurred in
these mothers.

They procrastinated and asked for a medical
release to extend maternity leave. I was happy to
oblige and prescribed Dr. Bill’s standard motherneeds-to-stay-home-with-baby-awhile-longer
remedy: “Because Mrs. Smith’s baby is allergic to
any milk other than her breast milk, it is
medically necessary to extend her maternity leave
so that she can safely meet her baby’s nutritional

 needs.” (This statement is technically correct. At
least in the early months, infant intestines show
allergic reactions, albeit sometimes microscopic,
to any food other than human milk. Therefore,
mother’s milk can be considered a preventivemedicine prescription.)
The concept of leaving baby at one place and
working in another became foreign to them—as if
having to leave parts of themselves in two places.
The baby had become part of mother’s life.
These mothers had various outcomes. Some made
drastic changes in their life-styles and took a year
or two off to be full-time moms. The rest went
back to work, but all had come to the same
conclusion. They would work but still meet the
needs of their babies.
The mothers who returned to work sought jobs
that gave them the maximum flexibility. These
mothers settled only for substitute caregiving that
offered a high level of sensitive nurturing. Some
mothers even negotiated improved child-care
policies at their workplace, such as sick-child
leave and flextime.

 What had happened to these mothers? A month or two of attachment
parenting began a relationship that was too valuable to dilute, and whatever
it took to maintain this connection they did. These babies did for their
mothers more than all of the advice in the world could have done—they
showed mother her importance.

OceanofPDF.com

 CHOOSING SUBSTITUTE CAREGIVERS
After many mothers come to grips with the agonizing reality of dual-career
juggling, next comes the search for their substitutes.

OceanofPDF.com

 Options for Care

The first step for most mothers in this position is to consider the care
options that are feasible in their circumstances.
In-home care. Having your baby cared for in your own home is preferable.
The advantages of home care are familiar surroundings, familiar toys, the
germs that baby has already learned to live with, no transportation hassles,
and your familiarity with the home. Shared care by your spouse is usually
best; next comes grandparents or close relatives. Though more costly, a
trained nanny, an au pair, and live-in help are other options. But once you
go beyond the inner circle of family, relatives, or intimate friends, a
seemingly endless search begins.
Shared home care. An option for part-timers is sharing child care with a
friend—“I’ll mother yours and you mother mine two and a half days a
week,” or whatever schedule you work out. This deal brings you the
advantage of having a like-minded caregiver, and, as in a profit-sharing
partnership, each is motivated to give the other person’s child the level of
care they expect for their own. Friends with the same due date and back-towork schedule as yours, and mates in your childbirth class, are ready
sources for this arrangement.

 Home day care (family day care). In this arrangement baby is cared for in
another mother’s home. Mothers often do home day care to supplement
their family’s income and to be home with their own children. The same
nurturing priorities that prompted this mother to set up this arrangement
may carry over into her care of your baby. You can only be sure of this if
you know this person well or have carefully checked out her references. But
this is not so ideal if the care provider piles in kids to the maximum
allowable limit, has weak sick-child policies, and is not an attentive person.
An ideal rule of thumb is that one caregiver can usually care for one oneyear-old, two two-year-olds, three three-year-olds, and so on, which is
modified by the number and ages of her own children. These houses should
be licensed, and you should be able to see the license. Remember, licensing
deals with safety and medical issues; it does not guarantee a nurturing
environment. That is your job to determine.
Parent co-ops. Four or five mothers of similar values get together and
agree to care for one another’s babies in their own homes in rotation. Since
one caregiver cannot manage more than two babies under a year, the co-op
hires a full-time caregiver as a parent’s assistant. Or several like-minded
parents chip in and hire one or two highly qualified and highly paid
caregivers to come to one of the houses to look after the babies.
On-site day care. Corporations that value keeping their employed mothers
satisfied offer day care at the workplace. Check it out. If your corporation
doesn’t have this setup, lobby for it.

 Commercial day care. In general, day-care centers are the most
challenging for infants under one year because of too many kids, too few
staff members, and the increased chances of contagious illness at a child’s
most infection-vulnerable time.

OceanofPDF.com

 Finding the Right Caregiver

Before you start the search for a specific caregiver, formulate the qualities
you want—keeping in mind the realistic fact that your clone doesn’t exist.
As a starter, consider that you want one substitute parent. Consistency of
care is the least you can offer your baby. The same caregiver with the same
mind-set as you is idealistic, yes; but it’s a place to begin. Next, try the
following sources for possible leads.
Friends. Spread the word around your like-minded friends. They may know
of available caregivers, and the fact that they know your mothering style
gives you a bit of a preselection.
Baby’s doctor. Pediatricians often have bulletin boards of child-care
positions; be sure your doctor knows and recommends the caregiver
(although this does not replace your thoroughly checking this person out
yourself). The doctor is likely to know mothers who run a mini-day-care
center in their own homes, rather than those who will come to yours.
Consider putting up your own help-wanted notice on the doctor’s bulletin
board.
Resource and referral agencies. Training in how to find quality care is
provided by these agencies. They also maintain a referral list of licensed

 day-care houses and facilities in your community. If no agency is available
in your area, contact your local social service agency.
Also consider these sources:

your church or synagogue
senior-citizen organizations
hospital auxiliaries
your local La Leche League group
newspaper ads—best to write your own
nanny, au pair, and baby-sitting agencies

OceanofPDF.com

 Interviewing Candidates

For those of you who have to sift through resumes and conduct interviews
trying to decide to whom you will entrust your precious baby, here’s how to
make the decision process less overwhelming and the selected caregiver
less of a stranger.
Make a list. Before starting the selection process, make a list of questions
you need to ask (see list below). Put the most important questions at the top
so if the answers aren’t satisfactory you don’t waste time covering your
whole list.
Screen first. To save time and fruitless interviewing, ask applicants to send
you resumes and references. Select from these whom to telephone
interview. Begin at the top of your question list and, as you get a phone feel
for the person, either complete the list or gracefully terminate the
conversation. If uncertain, by all means get a personal interview. Don’t let a
good person get away. Phone interviews, while timesaving and helpful, can
be misleading. Beware the person reluctant to provide references. The right
caregiver expects to be asked for references.
Your first impressions. First by phone, then face-to-face, impress upon the
prospective caregiver how you value substitute care and the importance of

 her nurturing your baby the way you want your baby mothered. But don’t
get too specific, since you want to find out her own nurturing values before
you reveal yours, lest she simply parrot what you want to hear. Besides the
usual name, age, address, phone number, and so on, try these probing
questions:

What will you do when my baby cries? How will
you comfort him? In your experience what
comforting techniques work best for you? What
do you feel about spoiling? (In these openers, try
to get the person to talk about baby care—while
you listen and see if you match mind-sets. Is she
basically a nurturing, sensitive, and responsive
person?)
What would you like to know about my baby?
(Get a feel for her flexibility. If you have a highneed baby, can she match her giving with baby’s
needs? You may need to offer more pay for this
kind of baby care.)
How do you feel about holding a baby a lot?
What do you feel a baby this age needs most? (As
you are getting a feel for her nurturing abilities
and her flexibility, you’re also getting a sense of
whether you can work with this person and trust
your baby with this person. Also, watch how she

 interacts with your baby during the interview. Is it
forced or natural? And how does your baby
interact with her?)
Now it’s time to get down to the specifics:

Why do you want to look after babies?
Tell me about your last job. Why did you leave it?
How will you play with my baby during the day?
How will you handle feeding my baby? (If you
are breastfeeding, does she understand the
importance of offering your pumped breast milk?)
How will you put my baby to sleep?
If my baby throws a tantrum, how will you handle
it? How will you discipline him if he seems
defiant?
What are the most common accidents that you
feel he is likely to have? What precautions will
you take? Have you taken a CPR course? (If yes,
ask to see the certificate. If no, would she be
willing to take a course on her own time?)
What would you do if my baby was choking on a
toy? (Ask this to test her knowledge; see here for
answer.)

 What factors may interfere with your being on
time? Do you travel a long distance? By car or by
public transportation? (Was she on time for your
appointment?—a question to ask her references
also.)
Do you drive? (Ask this only if driving is a
requirement for your caregiver.)
Tell me about your previous child-care
experience.
Do you have children of your own? What are
their ages? (Determine if the care of her own
children may compromise her availability for the
care of yours. If she has school-age children, what
alternate care does she have if her children are
sick? If she has a baby or preschool child and
wants to bring her child along, discuss this option.
Meet mother and child together to see how they
interrelate and get a feel for the temperament of
her child. Do you want your child also to spend
the day with this child? Realize that there will
always be a “her child—my child” compromise,
and if her child is going through a high-need stage
at the same time as yours, guess who will get the
attention.)

 How long do you plan to do child care?
(Consistency is important for your child to build
up an attachment.)
Are you willing to do some housework? (Ideally
have the caregiver do some household chores
while baby is sleeping, which gives you more
time with baby after work. But a person who will
keep both your baby nurtured and your house
immaculate is a rare find.)
How is your health? What is your physician’s
name, and could I check on the date of your last
examination? Are you a smoker? (Smoking and
babies don’t mix.) Do you drink? How much and
how often? Do you use other drugs? (While you
are unlikely to hear a yes answer, get a sense of
her level of comfort or agitation at answering the
question.)
Ask yourself if she is a physical match for your baby. While frail
grandmothers, so soft and patient, may wonderfully rock a three-month-old
all day, they may not have the stamina to keep up with a busy toddler.
During your interview get a feel for this person’s mannerisms, and consider
your feeling for the overall person. Is she kind, patient, flexible, nurturing,
with an overall presence and mannerisms that are contagious in a healthy

 way? Basically, is she a person you want your baby to form an attachment
to?
If with the first interview you don’t succeed, keep trying, remembering
the importance of making the right match. Be prepared, however, to make
some compromises. You will quickly realize the person you want may not
exist, and the demand for quality caregivers far exceeds the supply. Keep
this in mind when you begin negotiating fees.

OceanofPDF.com

 Giving Your Substitute a Trial

After you’ve made your choice, agree beforehand on a trial period of a few
weeks to see if she, baby, and you fit. Here’s how to tell.
Use baby as a barometer. Expect an initial change in baby’s behavior for
two reasons. Not only is he getting used to different care, but you are, too.
Sometimes it’s more the difference in mother (tired, preoccupied, stressed
from work) that accounts for baby’s behavior changes. But after a week or
two baby should settle down into his previous behavior. If he becomes
clingy, aggressive, angry, wakeful, or mopey and that spark has diminished,
something is amiss. Either it’s a baby-caregiver mismatch or you need to
reassess the timing of your return to work.
Use the caregiver as a barometer. Is she enjoying your baby? Or do you
come home to a frazzled, irritable, tense person who can’t wait to relieve
herself of this burden? That’s a red flag. (Accept some days’ wear and tear
as normal baby-tending effects.) If, on the other hand, she and baby show
signs of a match, you can sleep better.
Look for good-care signs. Besides baby’s emotional state, is there
evidence of good maintenance? For example, are diapers changed often

 enough? Does baby’s bottom have a rash and odor not present presitter? In
all fairness it could be coincidental to teething, change of diet, or diarrhea.
Make spot checks. Periodically arrive unannounced early or on a lunch
break. If you have a high-need baby who needs a lot of holding, how much
has he been left to cry it out? Short of a hidden video camera or audio
recording, spot checks tell you a lot. Without your having to be either
paranoid or lax, in time a caregiver will earn your trust, making such
regular surveillance less necessary. But some continued monitoring
reinforces the fact that you expect her to take her job conscientiously.
Ask for neighbors’ and friends’ observations. Tell your friends and
neighbors about your situation and ask them to kindly report any concerns.
If your sub takes baby to the park for group play, ask the other mothers to
comment.

OceanofPDF.com

 Introducing Your Sub

It’s not fair to caregiver or baby to throw the two together without a proper
introduction. Before the day of departure, have the caregiver spend some
time with you and your baby. This gradual acquaintance serves several
purposes: It helps baby get acquainted with her, it helps her get acquainted
with baby, and it allows you to model for your sub how you want your baby
cared for. Especially if baby is in the stranger-anxiety stage, a gradual
warm-up is best (see here for tips on introducing baby to strangers).
Remember to put on your friendly face when greeting this new friend. If
she’s okay to you, she’s okay to baby. This is also a good time to see your
sub in action. You can always change your decision. If the initial
impressions are good, ease the caregiver into baby care as you ease into
your work.
It’s best not to start right off with eight-hour days and forty-hour weeks.
Begin leaving baby for short intervals, ideally between feedings, and
gradually lengthen the time away. Begin back to work on a Wednesday or
Thursday to ease the separation.

OceanofPDF.com

 THE COMMERCIAL DAY-CARE OPTION
Although group day care is not recommended for infants, there are times
when this really is the only reasonable alternative for working parents. Here
are some ways to make the best of this situation.

OceanofPDF.com

 Selecting a Day-Care Center

Child-care providers deserve the respect and compensation given to
teachers. They are more than pigtail-and-bubble-gum babysitters. These
persons are substitute parents. Learn what quality day care should be and
seek it out, rather than settling for mediocrity. Your child will benefit. Here
are some tips to help you in making the selection.

Check out the center, or preferably several of
them, spending some time watching the
caregivers and children relate. Find out which
person will be primarily looking after your baby.
Watch how she relates to the children in her
charge. How does she discipline them? When
they cry, how does she comfort them? Is she
sensitive? Does she give the children eye-to-eye
contact? Does she touch and hold them? Does she
engage in lively conversation? Does she appear to
enjoy handling babies? Is she able to adapt to the
ever-changing moods of some toddlers? Does she
have a sense of humor? Also, above all, watch
how the children relate to the caregivers. By

 observing staff and children interacting, you will
get a feel if there is a genuine connection there.
Ask about the ratio of caregivers to children. The
rule of thumb we mentioned earlier for home day
care (one one-year-old child, two two-year-olds,
and so on) would be unaffordable in commercial
day care. The maximum should be no more than
four children for one caregiver.
Examine the licensing to be sure that it is current.
Inquire about the credentials of the staff.
Ask what the philosophy of the center is. Use
leading questions, like “What will you do when
my baby is crying? What do you feel about
spoiling?”
Browse around the facilities. Are they clean? Is
the equipment safe? Are the toys age appropriate?
Are the children generally happy? Does the staff
appear caring, connected, and attentive, or more
distant and detached from the kids?
Ask about their sick-child policy, whom they
admit, whom they don’t. Watch their sanitation
procedures. Do they wash hands after changing
diapers, maintain separate diapering and foodserving areas, sanitize the toys when necessary,

 and discourage sharing of bottles, pacifiers, and
other personal items?
Is all the staff trained in CPR? Ask to see their
certificates. Do they have a policy for handling
disasters and emergencies such as fires?
Visit the center at a time when other parents are
dropping off or picking up their children. Ask for
references.
Finally, is this a place you enjoy being?
Don’t feel you are imposing on the day-care center by asking probing
questions. The industry to which we are entrusting the future of our country
should have high standards and be willing to demonstrate them. If the only
available day-care center fails the test questions, seriously consider getting
welfare assistance so you can stay with your baby until appropriate care can
be located.

OceanofPDF.com

 Too Sick to Attend Day Care? How to Tell

It’s seven o’clock in the morning and family rush hour begins. The teakettle
is whistling, the toaster’s popping, and the traffic report is the usual bad
news. Enter a whine that will turn your already overbooked day upside
down. By reflex you lay hands on your baby’s head. “Oh, no, a fever!” To
day care or not to day care, that is the question.
How sick is sick enough to miss day care? This decision affects three
parties: Does your baby feel too sick to attend day care? Is she contagious
to the other children? How convenient is it for you to take a day off from
work? Here are some practical guidelines on what germs are the most
catchy.

Diarrhea Illnesses

Here is one set of germs that all doctors agree are very contagious.
Frequent, watery, mucousy, and sometimes bloody diarrhea is a sure
indication to stay home, both for your baby’s sake and to prevent an
outbreak in the center. Add vomiting—parents call this a double ender—and
your baby is certainly too weak and too upset to leave home. As soon as the
vomiting is over, the stools are no longer explosive and watery, and your

 baby feels better, she may return to day care. Be prepared for the bowel
movements to remain slightly loose and more frequent for weeks, as the
intestines are notoriously slow to recover. During this convalescent stage of
mild diarrhea, your baby is not contagious.

A DAY-CARE TIP
Establish routines for day-care drop off and pickup to make transition times
easier for small children. A special “hug and kiss refuel” on departure and
on reunion eases the separation anxiety. Remember, too, that it is hard for a
child who is engrossed in play to drop everything the minute the parent
walks in. Briefly join in your child’s activity, show interest in what he is
doing, and gradually close out the activity. (See here for departure tips in
closing out play.)

Colds and Fevers

While diarrhea illnesses merit quarantine, respiratory and febrile illnesses
are a different bag of germs. Most cold germs do not threaten an outbreak in
the day-care center as much as diarrhea germs do. In fact, studies in schoolage children have shown that excluding children from school does not
diminish the spread of colds; admitting kids with colds to school does not
increase their spread (the contagious period is variable, and babies are most
contagious a day or two before they act sick). When you do send your twoyear-old to day care with a cold, this is one time to teach her not to share.
Show her how to cover her nose and mouth with a tissue or her forearm
when she sneezes or coughs and to turn her head away from others. Two-

 year-olds may be able to learn this sanitation gesture but are likely to forget.
If your baby has a fever (persistent temperature of at least 101°F/38.03°C) it
is prudent to keep her out of day care until the fever has resolved for
twenty-four hours.

Sore Throats

Sore throats, especially those associated with fever and throat sores (for
example, hand, foot, and mouth disease, see here), are very contagious and
are a red light for day-care attendance until the fever and the throat sores are
gone—usually around five days.

WHEN TO STAY HOME WITH A COLD
If your baby’s nasal secretions are clear and watery, and your baby is happy
and playful, pain free, and has only a low-grade fever (100°F/37.8°C) there
is no need to keep your baby home from day care. If the nasal secretions
become more thick, yellow, and green, especially if accompanied by a
fever, an earache, frequent night waking, or a peaked look—in mother
jargon, a sick-looking face—this is a stay-home-and-call-the-doctor cold.
Your baby may have an ear or sinus infection. In reality, a cold can be
contagious for two or more weeks, yet it is unrealistic to expect to miss
work for that long. When to send only a mildly sick baby to day care
depends a lot on the ability of the day care to separate potentially
contagious children.
Before you jump to change your whole day, here’s a nasal secretions tip:
The goop from the nose is always thicker upon awakening in the morning,
since it has had a chance to stagnate during the night. To help assess the
situation, give your baby a morning steam. Allow the shower to heat up—
once it’s steamy, bring baby into the bathroom and squirt a few saline nose

 drops into each stuffy nostril and encourage a gentle nose blow, or remove
the secretions with a nasal aspirator (see here). If the remaining secretions
are clear and your baby breathes better, you can breathe easier, and it’s off
to day care.

Eye Drainage

The nose is not the only thing that runs when baby gets a cold. Eye drainage
is often associated with an underlying cold, especially a sinus infection. If
the whites of the eyes are not red, then this type of eye drainage is not
contagious, and usually neither is the rest of the baby. This type of goopy
eye drainage does, however, merit a doctor visit.
Some runny eyes are due to conjunctivitis (often called pinkeye), a
contagious infection that will send day-care providers rushing to make a
come-get-your-baby call. If the eyes are bloodshot in addition to draining,
this is contagious pinkeye, which is quickly treated and made
noncontagious by an antibiotic eye ointment or drops. The baby may attend
day care as long as treatment has begun. If the eyes are not bloodshot, this
is seldom contagious conjunctivitis, and your child may still attend day
care.

Colds Versus Allergies

 Day-care centers often reject a coughing, sneezing child because of a cold
when it’s really an allergy that is not contagious to playmates and is no
more than a nuisance to the child. How to tell a cold from an allergy? Back
to the telltale nasal secretions. Allergic noses run and drip, are clear and
watery, and are accompanied by other allergic signs: watery eyes, sneezing,
wheezing, a past history of allergies, and the fact that it’s hay fever season.
The nasal drainage from a cold is too thick to run. It dangles. Also, with a
cold there are other signs of infection, such as fever. In general, allergic
children are noisy (sneezy and wheezy), but don’t act sick. They may attend
day care and are not contagious. Children with colds act sluggish, mopey, or
cranky and may be contagious.

Coughs

Most colds end but the coughs of some linger, keeping babies out of day
care and parents out of work. But all coughs are not automatically stayhome illnesses. A dry, hacking cough that neither awakens the baby nor is
associated with fever, pain, difficult breathing, or other cold signs is not a
reason for quarantine. These nuisance-type coughs linger on for weeks, are
rarely contagious, and seldom bother the child or her mates, who
themselves may also be coughing. Then there’s the baby who coughs a lot
at night but seems well during the day except for annoying throat-clearing
sounds and may have several similar episodes during allergy season. This

 child suffers from postnasal drip, she is noncontagious, and this seldom is a
reason to stay home from day care.
Of course, any cough accompanied by fever, chills, and the coughing up
of green or yellow mucus warrants medical attention and absence from day
care. Your baby can return to day care when the fever subsides and she feels
better (usually in a few days), though the cough itself may linger for a week
or two.

Rashes

The problem with rashes is that the day-care provider sees them and sends
your baby home. But not all rashes are contagious or uncomfortable enough
for a baby to miss day care.
Impetigo. A bacterial infection in the skin, impetigo begins as tiny red spots
resembling picked-at pimples that enlarge to coin-sized blisters which
rupture and produce an oozy, sticky, honey-colored crust. These circular
spots may be as small as a pimple or as large as a quarter. They tend to
occur in patches where babies scratch, such as beneath the nose and on the
diaper area, but may occur anywhere on the skin. Scratching spreads these
eruptions. You can cover the infected areas with the prescribed antibiotic
ointment and a square bandage and send your baby back to day care. More
severe cases may require oral antibiotics and a longer stay-at-home break.

 Ringworm. A circular rash with red, raised borders, ringworm is caused by
a fungus and is even less contagious than impetigo. Cover the area with an
over-the-counter antifungal cream (or a prescription cream if necessary) and
pack your baby off to day care.
Chicken pox. Unlike the rashes just mentioned, chicken pox is one of the
most contagious of all childhood infections and a sure prescription to stay
home. It begins as a flulike illness (low-grade fever and tiredness), and the
spots usually appear a day later. Initially, they resemble tiny insect bites
over the back, chest, abdomen, and face. Our patients used to frequently
wait at our office door at 9:00 A.M. wondering if “these spots” could be
early chicken pox.
It is difficult to diagnose chicken pox during the first day of spots, as
they might simply be prickly heat, pimples, or insect bites. If in doubt, keep
your baby home for the day. If it’s chicken pox, in a day they’ll change
from pimples to blisters, and new crops will appear. After several days, the
early spots will crust. Baby can return to day care once all the spots are
scabbed over, about a week after they first appear. (See also here.) If the
spots don’t progress in this manner after twenty-four hours, then it’s likely
not chicken pox and your baby can return to day care.

Head Lice

 Where there are lots of children in a crowded place, expect little parasites to
tag along. A typical scene: You get a call at your office or your baby is sent
home from day care with a note informing you that she has head lice. Your
first reaction is embarrassment (“But my house is so clean!”) followed by
incredulity (“She has to miss day care and I have to miss work because of a
lousy louse?”).
What’s wrong with this picture? First, head lice are no reflection on your
housekeeping. They live in warm, crowded environments like classrooms
and day care, where they can easily pass from head to head as babies
snuggle together. Lice don’t carry disease and are more of a nuisance than a
medical problem. They reside deep in the hair, most commonly around the
nape of the neck and around the ears. In return for a warm, fuzzy place to
live, they often don’t bother the host, except for an irritating itch and
unnecessary quarantine by the day-care provider.
Lice themselves are difficult to see (they’re tiny, light brown, and may
sometimes be seen with a magnifying glass), but you may find the whitish
nits (egg sacs) attached to the base of individual hairs. You can distinguish
nits from dandruff because nits are round and adhere to the hair shaft,
unlike the flat flakes of dandruff that slide off easily.
If you see nits, you don’t have to immediately share your discovery with
your doctor. An over-the-counter lice shampoo (follow directions on
package) and a specially designed nit-removal comb will suffice for an
evening at-home treatment. Your baby may return to day care the next
morning, but be prepared for the day-care provider to scan every hair

 looking for nits—hence the term “nit picker”—and to call for pickup if even
one egg is found.

OceanofPDF.com

 Who Plays Nurse When Baby Is Sick?

For dual-income families, who stays home when baby can’t go to day care,
mom or dad? Who can most afford to stay home? Who is most needed at
work? Do you and your spouse split the shift or bring in the reserves? (Sick
babies should have their mothers if at all possible—mother preference
intensifies when baby is sick.)
While there is no better nurse than a caring parent in a child’s own
home, this ideal may not be possible, especially for financially strapped and
single parents. Consider these alternatives.
Try shift work. Mom is nurse in the morning, dad in the afternoon. Your
child gets special TLC from both parents and both sharpen their sick-childcare skills.
Take your baby to work. If your baby is not sick enough to stay home but
is not permitted in day care, prepare a “sickroom” at work if circumstances
permit. If you have your own office, set up camp in the corner, including
her favorite books, toys, and blankets. This scene is also a prime chance for
your child to learn about your work. If the older patient is willing and able,
give her some time-occupying task to “help” you at work. Your child will
feel important and get her mind off being sick.

 Have grandmother on call. If blessed with nearby extended family, ask
grandma to pinch-hit. Grandmothers have time, unlimited patience, and the
price is right.
Use a sick-child-care center. Explore what facilities for sick children are
available in your community. Some day-care centers have get-well rooms,
staffed with sensitive caregivers trained to care for sick children. However,
they are expensive.
Plan ahead. Before your baby gets sick—and she will—devise a family
game plan rather than scrambling for on-the-spot decisions with the first
fever. Decide with your spouse who will stay home. Have backup
caregivers on call. Find out your day-care center’s sick-child admission
policies. Are there home-care agencies available, and what is their cost?
Find out what’s available, affordable, and above all what’s best for your
child.

OceanofPDF.com

 Sick-Leave Benefits

Taking a baby out of day care may mean paycheck deductions for working
parents, but a day at home with your sick child can have its compensations.
Being at home with your sick baby is a chance to rebond. Especially if you
have recently locked horns with your child or she is going through an
independence streak, a day at home may do wonders for your relationship.
Babies go from independent to dependent when sick, as if clicking into a
memory of what “mother” and “father” really mean. Making chicken soup
and Popsicles, giving back rubs and reading stories—a day at home with
your baby is a chance for your nursing, and parenting, skills to shine.

OceanofPDF.com

 18

OceanofPDF.com

 Special Situations

Over the years of counseling families, we have come to recognize the
phenomenon we call the need-level concept: Given the right advice and
support, parents can adjust their level of caring to meet the need level of
their baby. Special family circumstances and special-needs babies have a
way of bringing out special qualities in parents. In the following challenges,
we will show you how this happens.

OceanofPDF.com

 PARENTING THE ADOPTED BABY
The long-awaited phone call comes. You’re going to be parents, without the
customary nine months of biological preparation. While there are a wide
variety of circumstances, here are some general ways to ease into adoptive
parenting.
Consider open adoption. During the writing of the first edition of this
book, our eighth child, Lauren, came into our family by adoption. It was
then that we realized that in most circumstances it’s healthy to lift the veil
of secrecy surrounding adoption. Open adoption means keeping lines of
communication open between birth mother (or birth parents) and adopting
parents. This permits prearranging a plan that is best for all parties. Many
adopting parents and birth mothers are choosing open adoption because this
arrangement benefits everyone, especially the child.
Open adoption benefits adopting parents by removing the surprises.
They learn more about the genetic background of their child, and they don’t
have to live in fear that the birth mother will suddenly invade their lives.
The birth mother, for her part, is continually reassured that the child is loved
and well cared for. Removing the mystery about what happened to her child
helps the birth mother reaffirm that she made the right choice. As a birth

 mother who chose open adoption once said, “Instead of having an abortion,
I made four people happy—including myself.”
Later on, letters of contact answer questions the child may have that can
only be answered by the birth mother, avoiding imaginings that threaten
self-worth. Statements such as “I gave you to your parents because I could
not at that time give you the life I wanted you to have” are not from a
person who didn’t care, and it’s important for the adoptee to feel that.
Yet another value of open adoption came to us when we realized a
biological mother could not sweep her birth memories under a rug and
uncaringly get on with her life. This mature type of adoption exposes the
myth that birth memories disappear. They won’t! Open adoption encourages
coming to grips with the fact that the baby has and always will have two
sets of parents. In essence, open adoption allows all parties to tell the truth
—and truth is therapeutic.
Get all the facts. Be certain to learn as much as you can about the
biological parents: family history of inherited disease, prenatal care of the
mother, possible drug use during pregnancy, and any other necessary
medical or social information.
Be involved in the pregnancy. If you have the ideal adoptive situation—
knowing the birth mother during her pregnancy—do what you can to ensure
good prenatal care. Be sure she understands the importance of a drug-free,
smoking-free pregnancy. Help her choose the right childbirth class and birth

 attendants, especially a labor support person. And be sure to assist her in
receiving professional counseling before (and after) the birth.
Be involved in the birth plan. If possible (and if the birth mother is
comfortable with the idea) be present at the birth. After the birth attendants
ensure that baby is healthy, have baby “delivered” into your arms. Bond
with your baby. Some adopting parents in our practice have even checked
into a hospital room. They have fed and cared for their baby from birth to
discharge from the hospital, taking part in the baby-care classes that the
hospital offers.
Part of your birth plan that you both have previously worked out is what
contact the birth mother will have with the baby immediately after delivery.
In the movies, a baby is snatched from visual or skin contact with the
mother and rushed out of the delivery room. The theory of this inhumane
practice is out of sight, out of mind. Supposedly, this helps the mother
forget the birth and get on with her life. Nonsense! The birth mother needs
to be able to say good-bye.
While long-distance adoptions may delay an early bonding, try to
assume the care of your baby as soon as possible after birth. Baby needs to
know to whom he or she belongs. Granted, the legal formalities are
important, but you are not simply transferring ownership of a package. You
are assuming care of a person. Adopting parents often worry, If we miss the
early bonding period, will baby and we be eternally deprived? No! Bonding
is a lifelong process. Early bonding just gives you a head start. (See
discussion of delayed bonding, here.)

 Try attachment parenting. Adopting mothers often wonder if they will be
adequate mothers. What are they missing by not having the biological boost
of the hormones of pregnancy and birth? In our experience adopting
mothers are so thrilled to finally have a baby that they are able to make up
for these biological helps. For some parents it’s love at first sight; for others
it’s a gradual process. The style of parenting you practice will affect the
way your relationship progresses. The attachment style we advocate is
particularly helpful for adopting parents. Try to practice as many of the
attachment concepts as you can.
Adopting parents, both mothers and fathers, can also experience
postpartum depression. This is most likely due to a combination of being
fatigued and overwhelmed by so many changes so fast. Seek the support of
other adopting parents and learn from their experience. For example, a
special custom in some adopting families is to celebrate two birthdays:
baby’s biological birthday and the day baby legally became theirs.
Think about when to tell, how to tell. Here is how we told Lauren she
came into our family by adoption. First, we have never referred to her as
our “adopted daughter.” She is our daughter. This presentation conveys to
inquirers that to us how she entered our home is of secondary importance to
the fact that she’s ours. Also, we have not kept the A-word a secret from
Lauren. During the first couple of years Lauren heard the word “adoption”
frequently, and when she was around the age of two, with the aid of
storybooks about adoption, we eased Lauren into associating herself with
the word. In order not to devalue her, we minimized the difference of

 adoption, since children equate being different with being less. Yet we do
celebrate two birthdays, her biological one and the day her adoption was
finalized. Likewise, we thought it unwise to make a big deal of her
“specialness” or that she was “chosen” since, as adoption counselors have
discovered, this status may burden the child with the feeling that she has to
measure up. By letting Lauren become familiar with the word “adoption,”
we helped her become comfortable with the term long before she
understood its full meaning. Finally, as Lauren got older, we filled in the
blanks according to her interest and understanding. (For more information
see “Adoption Resources,” here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 INTERNATIONAL ADOPTION
More and more parents are adopting infants and children from overseas. Yet
there are numerous extra challenges involved in the process. You will learn
most of what you need to know from the organization that is assisting you
in the adoption process, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
offers additional information (CDC.gov), but here are some important
things to think about.
Traveling to meet your child. In most cases, one or both parents will travel
to meet the child and spend days or weeks bonding in the child’s
environment so that he or she can better adapt to the new family. Older
siblings may come along as well.
Review of health history and medical examination. The United States
requires all international adoptees to undergo a physical exam and health
screening in their country of origin. The main purpose of this is to ensure
the child does not have any infectious diseases such as tuberculosis. This
screening may miss some physical or developmental health problems, and
parents are encouraged to thoroughly study any available medical records in
order to be well prepared for unexpected medical challenges.

 Medical evaluation in the United States. Adopted children should visit
their primary care physician within two weeks of coming home. The doctor
will perform a thorough physical exam, assess growth and nutrition, review
the medical records, and evaluate the child’s development. The CDC also
recommends blood and stool testing for various infectious diseases that may
require treatment. Immunization status will also be confirmed.
Get ready to pour on the love. The attachment style of parenting is
especially important for internationally adopted infants and children, as they
may not have been able to establish a close bond with a primary caregiver
in their home country.

OceanofPDF.com

 PARENTING TWINS
With twins, parenting means double the fatigue, double the fun. While most
parents find the first year of life with twins a bit of a blur, here’s how to
make caring for multiples easier.
Doubly prepared. With ultrasound now routine during prenatal care, twins
seldom come as a surprise. And remember, multiples usually come two or
three weeks early. Waiting until the last minute may find you with an
unfeathered nest. Read Chapter 3, “Preparing for Baby,” and do most of
your baby buying and nursery designing before your final months of
pregnancy. In the last trimester, join the Mothers of Twins Club in your
community. Attend their meetings before the birth of your babies and
continue throughout at least the first year or two. There is no better resource
than experienced parents sharing time- and energy-saving tips.
Double team. With singletons father involvement is a choice. With
multiples it’s a must. In caring for twins the mother-father roles are not
clear-cut. Except for breastfeeding (and even here dad has duties), all the
high-maintenance tasks of infant care can be shared by father. Yes,
attachment parenting multiples takes more time and effort, but you get
double the rewards. You may not be able to do the whole attachment

 parenting package all of the time. Do the best you can with the resources
you have.
Dinner for two. Try to get both babies on a simultaneous feeding schedule.
If dad is home, and you are bottlefeeding, each parent can feed a baby at the
same time. If you are breastfeeding use the holding positions illustrated in
the discussion of breastfeeding twins, here.
Double duties. As with simultaneous feedings, try to get babies on a similar
sleep schedule. Having two set times during the day when all three of you
lie down together helps establish a consistent nap routine. In the early
months, double bathing will be impossible without four hands. If you find
two in the tub too cumbersome, bathe one while the other one plays.
Realize that babies don’t need daily baths. Bathe one baby one day, the
second the next, and yourself the third. Daily sponging of the face and
diaper area during the out-of-tub days should suffice.
Doubly organized. With the birth of your twins comes an honorary degree
in time management. Do what you have to do and delegate the rest. Give
dad, grandma, or a trusted friend your shopping list. Let wait what can wait.
Ask your equally tired friends at Mothers of Twins for shortcuts, for
example, with preparing food. Diaper service is a real asset if you’re using
cloth diapers.
Double up in bed. Instead of putting babies in separate bassinets in the
hospital, most twins calm more quickly and settle better if placed side-by-

 side or face-to-face in the same bassinet. After all, they have been
wombmates for nine months. As they get older, juggle sleep areas
depending on whether they sleep better snuggled next to each other or
separately. (See co-sleeper arrangement, here.)
Get help. Hire household help, at least in the early months. For parents of
twins this is not a luxury; it’s a necessity. If your friends ask what you need
or what they can give you, ask for housekeeping help and solicit brought-in
meals.
Carrying double. Carried babies cry less. Veteran parents have learned that
this style of parenting calms babies. Double this for twins. One crying baby
can set off the other, and the cumulative effects of double wailing can be
nerve-racking. Get two baby slings, one for mom and one for dad, and
frequently wear your babies out for a walk. The great outdoors can be a
mind saver when you are feeling housebound.
Seeing double. If you have trouble telling your identical babies apart, try
these labels: a bracelet on one, painting toenails different colors, cutting
one’s hair differently, and identifying clothing. Even for identicals, if you
give each a total body scan you usually notice an identifying birthmark,
dimple, or other feature that belongs only to one. Trying to match four lookalike shoes is the worst case of mistaken identity. Either buy differentlooking pairs or use different shoelaces. As twins get older, even the most
identical-looking ones develop unique features.

 Name that twin. Keep in mind you are parenting individuals, not twins.
Call them by their names, rather than “the twins.”
Alike but different. As these little mates grow older, be prepared for them
to play both ends. They like the specialness of being twins but also want to
be individuals. One day they may want to dress alike; the next they may
want to dress differently. Ride with the flow, treating them alike when they
want to be twins and differently when they want to be individuals.
There’s an extra dimension to watching twin development—babies relating
to each other. Doubling the humor balances doubling the work load. The
arrival of the sitting and crawling age is a major relief milestone for parents,
as the duo can entertain each other, giving you much-needed baby breaks.
Then comes the surveillance stage, as your eyes wander Ping-Pong-like,
keeping both babies under your watchful gaze. The high-maintenance stage
of twin raising soon lessens but never passes. Such are the joys of parenting
a baby—and another baby. (For more information about parenting multiples
see “Twins and Multiples,” in “Resources,” here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 SINGLE PARENTING
Our hearts go out to parents who by choice or by circumstance begin their
parenting careers without a mate. While there are a variety of singleparenting circumstances for mothers and fathers, our discussion is limited to
single mothers. Here are a few tips on being a nurturing mom to your baby
while leaving some time to nurture yourself.
Choose the parenting style best for you. In our experience the style of
parenting that works for most single parents most of the time is attachment
parenting. You may not be able to do all of the elements of attachment
parenting all of the time, but try to do as many as you can as often as you
can. This way of parenting is more difficult when solo, but it’s also more
important. Without the help of another parent to bounce decisions off of,
you will need extra sensitivity toward your baby’s behavior and extra
knowledge of your baby’s needs. Attachment parenting gives you the selfconfidence to make decisions and the wisdom to carry them through.
Consider the advantages of attachment parenting as discussed in Chapter 1
and you will see how this way of caring for your baby will improve the
behavior of your child and make parenting life easier for you.

 Don’t do it alone. You may be a single parent, but you’re not a superparent
—nor should you have to be. Even two-parent households need help.
Connect with support groups, other single parents, relatives, anyone who
can lend an experienced and nurturing set of arms.
Reserve time for adult company. Realize you are set up for burn-out. To
make up for baby not having an involved father, you may be tempted to
immerse yourself in motherhood and slip into the trap of “My baby needs
me so much I don’t have time for anything or anyone else.” Your baby
needs a happy mother.
Solve custody squabbles sensitively. While the child is still an infant,
divorcing parents would be wise to adopt the motto of juvenile courts: Do
what is in the best interest of the child. A common situation is the baby who
is not yet weaned but father demands overnight visitations. If you face this
situation, La Leche League has some useful articles on their website,
lalecheleague.org; look for “Breastfeeding and the Law” in their Resources
section.
Single moms often feel guilty, wondering if they are doing enough for their
child, and cheated, wondering if they are getting enough out of life for
themselves. Remember, parenting is a guilt-laden profession and even in the
best of home circumstances, you will never feel that you are always the best
mom you can be. Martha and I were both children of single parents, having
lost our dads in early childhood. I remember as a child resenting the fact

 that my mother had to work long hours to support us, when that wasn’t the
case with the other kids on the block. Yet as a child, and to this day, not
only did I feel loved but I sincerely believed that my mother was doing the
best she could in less-than-ideal circumstances. If you can leave your child
with these messages, you can feel you have done your best as a single
parent.

OceanofPDF.com

 THE DOWN SYNDROME BABY—A SPECIAL
KIND OF PARENTING
As Martha gave her final push and I eased the precious head out of the birth
canal, out popped a pudgy little hand with a curved little finger. In a flash I
realized that we were parents of a baby with Down syndrome. The baby we
expected was not the baby we got.
As we parent Stephen, we continue to realize that a child with special
needs exacts from us a special kind of parenting. For special-needs children
the principle of mutual giving really shines. As Stephen develops special
skills, we develop special skills. He continues to stretch us while also
bringing out the best in us. Here are the most common concerns parents
have about the most common chromosomal abnormality.

OceanofPDF.com

 How Frequent

Down syndrome (formerly called mongolism), named after Dr. Langdon
Down, who described these children in 1866, occurs in one out of seven
hundred births. The chance of having a Down syndrome baby increases
with the age of the mother:

women under age 25—1 in 2,000 births
women at age 30—1 in 1,300 births
women at age 35—1 in 400 births
women at age 40—1 in 90 births
women at age 45—1 in 32 births
women at age 50—1 in 8 births
Depending on how they are presented, these figures can be scary. If a
doctor says to a mother, “At age thirty-five you have five times the chance
of having a Down syndrome baby that you did at age twenty,” that would
scare many senior mothers from conceiving. Here’s how I present the risk
factors to my patients who ask. At age twenty you had a 99.95 percent
chance of not delivering a baby with Down syndrome; at age thirty-five
your chances are 99.75 percent. Doesn’t that figure sound more reassuring?
This is why in my opinion the “thirty-five-year-old scare” is too young;

 forty-five perhaps? Even at age forty-five you have a 97 percent chance of
delivering a baby without Down syndrome. So for mothers of later
childbearing age, these figures are looking up.
Because of these risk factors, we believe that it is unwarranted to scare a
thirty-five-year-old

mother

into

prenatal

diagnostic

tests

(either

amniocentesis or chorionic villi sampling). Weigh these facts: At age thirtyfive your statistical chance of delivering a Down syndrome baby is 0.25
percent. However, the risk of damage to a normal preborn baby during the
tests may be around 1 percent. Whether or not you have prenatal diagnostic
testing is an individual judgment call between you and your doctor.

OceanofPDF.com

 Why Down Syndrome Occurs

Normally a sperm and an egg each contain twenty-three chromosomes. At
fertilization they combine to form a cell with forty-six chromosomes.
Sperm and egg cells undergo normal divisions, called meiosis, producing
exact copies of the original cell. Sometimes, by chance, during meiosis the
division is unequal. One cell gets one less chromosome and dies. The other
cell gets one extra chromosome and lives. If this cell joins with a sperm (or
egg), the resulting fertilized egg contains forty-seven chromosomes. In the
case of Down syndrome the extra chromosome is number 21, so the genetic
name for this syndrome is trisomy 21, that is, the cells have three number21 chromosomes. There are other trisomies, which usually end in
miscarriage or early infant death. Why an extra chromosome causes the
features of Down syndrome is unknown. This unequal division of cells is
called nondisjunction. It occurs by chance and accounts for 95 percent of
the chromosome abnormalities in Down syndrome.
A rare genetic form of this syndrome (occurring in around 2–3 percent
of these babies) happens by the mechanism of translocation. In this
situation one of the number-21 chromosomes parts company with its mate
and attaches to another chromosome, giving the appearance of the cell’s
having only forty-five chromosomes. However, the person is normal
because he or she has all the genetic material of forty-six chromosomes. But

 when a sperm or an egg from this normal person containing the translocated
number-21 chromosome joins with another sperm or egg, the resulting
fertilized egg appears to have forty-six chromosomes but actually has three
number-21 chromosomes. To confirm which type of chromosome
abnormality your baby has, a geneticist analyzes your baby’s chromosomes
in a blood sample. The type of chromosomal abnormality, either
nondisjunction or translocation, can be ascertained by looking at the
chromosome alignment in your baby’s blood cells. While most translocation
abnormalities occur by chance, occasionally one parent is a carrier of cells
that may contain a translocated number-21 chromosome and therefore has
an increased risk of having more Down syndrome babies. If analysis of
baby’s blood reveals a translocation type of abnormality, analysis of the
parents’ blood will reveal whether this happened by chance or whether a
parent is a carrier and therefore has a risk of future babies inheriting this
abnormality.
Another type of Down syndrome is called mosaicism, meaning some of
the baby’s cells contain the normal number of chromosomes, and others
have an extra number 21. This is why many cells of your baby’s blood are
analyzed. Sometimes, but not always, a baby with mosaic Down syndrome
is less affected.

OceanofPDF.com

 Why Us?

Chromosomal abnormalities happen by chance. You did not cause this by
anything you did or did not do during pregnancy. A woman is born with a
certain number of eggs and does not produce new ones during her life. The
longer an egg lives, like any tissue, the more likely something is to go
wrong. Why this happens in sperm is more of a mystery. New sperm cells
are continuously being made. There is no such little creature as an old
sperm. For some unknown reason the risk of nondisjunction occurring in
sperm increases in men over fifty.

OceanofPDF.com

 Possible Medical Problems

Down syndrome babies are prone to a number of potential medical
difficulties. Among them are these.

Heart defects: Around 40 percent of Down
syndrome babies are born with an abnormally
developed heart. Most of these conditions are
now surgically correctable.
Intestinal defects: Around 4 percent of these
babies are born with a blockage in the upper
intestine, called duodenal atresia. This must be
surgically corrected to allow food to pass.
Hypothyroidism: This occurs in around 10
percent of children with Down syndrome.
Because the chance of this condition increases
with age and may not be apparent on
examination, it is wise to check your baby’s
thyroid function at least every two years.
Vision problems: Many children with Down
syndrome develop a variety of eye problems, such

 as crossed eyes, nearsightedness, farsightedness,
and cataracts.
Hearing problems: Around 50 percent of these
children have varying degrees of hearing
problems. Their increased susceptibility to middle
ear infections contributes to this.
Instability of the vertebrae: In approximately 10
percent of these babies the first two vertebrae,
where the spinal column joins the neck, are
unstable (called atlanto-occipital instability).
Babies with this condition are prone to spinal
cord injuries from a jolt during contact sports. All
Down syndrome children should have X rays of
the upper spine before being allowed to
participate in contact sports.
More colds: Down syndrome babies have
reduced immunity, which together with small
nasal passages makes them more prone to sinus
and ear infections.
Obesity: Children with Down syndrome tend to
have poor appetite control. That’s why parents
and other caregivers need to take the nutritional
head-start tips we give throughout this book and
double them for infants with Down syndrome. To
help your baby get off to a lean start, breastfeed

 as often and as long as possible, and serve just
“real” foods. These two nutritional lean starts are
likely to shape your infant’s tastes toward lifelong
healthy eating habits. But be prepared to monitor
your child’s eating habits for many years to come.
OceanofPDF.com

 How Smart Are These Babies?

Children with Down syndrome have less-than average intellectual
functioning; some are more impaired than others. With early intervention
and special education many of these children join mainstream classes in
school. Language lags are the most noticeable of the impairments. Because
they do not go through motor milestones so quickly, it’s like watching the
remarkable unfolding of development in slow motion. Because parents
cannot take milestones for granted, infant development takes on an added
element of anticipation and excitement.
What they may lack academically, these babies make up for socially.
Like all children, babies with Down syndrome have good and bad days.
But, in general, these babies are affectionate and just plain happy. Many
share constant hugs and kisses and radiate a generally carefree attitude.
Their giving and caring attitudes are so contagious that those around these
babies wonder who is really normal. There is indeed an up side to babies
with Down syndrome.

OceanofPDF.com

 Parenting These Special Babies

With these babies the attachment style of parenting really shines. It gives
you the ability to read the special needs of your baby, almost like having a
sixth sense. You will need a deeper sense of intuition and observation
because your baby’s cues may initially not be so easy to read. (See
breastfeeding the baby with Down syndrome, here, for practical attachment
suggestions.)
Weighing how your baby looks and acts in relation to other babies will
tear you apart. As I was coming to terms with parenting a special-needs
baby, every time I examined a baby in my office I would think, “Our baby
doesn’t look like that or feel like that.” In reality, I was filling my mind with
the gut-wrenching feelings that our baby was less valuable than other
babies. The real breakthrough came when I was able to focus on the special
qualities of our baby rather than on what he is missing compared with other
babies.
Find out what resources, such as early intervention programs, are
available within your community. Consider joining a Down syndrome
support group if there is one in your area. You will be amazed at the
practical suggestions and insights from parents who have gone through
situations similar to yours and have coped and thrived and are able to share
their experiences. One mother wrote to us: “Stephen will bring flashes of

 color to your life that you never knew existed.” Some parents plunge right
into as many support groups and community resources as they can and feel
comfortable immersing themselves in learning as much as possible about
parenting their child with special needs. Other parents feel more
comfortable choosing only a few support resources, deciding it is better for
their own family situation if they do not focus their entire lives on Down
syndrome but, rather, incorporate their special-needs baby into the
mainstream of family life. They feel this approach emphasizes more of the
individuality of their special baby. For example, when baby Stephen rubbed
his palm across my cheek, the caress of his soft touchy hand was unlike any
touch I have ever felt. Special-needs babies can bring special gifts to the
family. In my experience parents who practice attachment parenting get in
harmony with their special-needs baby and develop an incredible sensitivity
toward him. This sensitivity carries over into their social, marital, and
professional lives. This sensitivity is also contagious to siblings. Parenting
special babies is a family affair. I have noticed that when siblings pitch in
and care for their special-needs brother or sister, it mellows out their usual
egocentric and selfish natures, enabling them to become giving, nurturing,
and sensitive children. In general, a special-needs baby can elevate the
sensitivity level of the whole family.
On the other hand, parenting a special-needs baby can cause marital
stress. It is necessary to keep some balance in your baby care. Some
mothers focus totally on the special needs of the baby and withdraw from
the needs of other members of the family. It is natural for a mother of a
special-needs baby to feel, “My baby needs me so much; my husband is a

 big boy and can take care of himself.” Each spouse needs to care for the
other so that they can better care for their baby.
A word of advice for friends and relatives: The worst thing you can do is
shower sympathy on the parents of a baby with Down syndrome. Statements
like “I’m sorry for you…” devalue the baby—and the parents. After all,
mother delivered a baby, perhaps not “normal” by our standards, but a
unique person who will make his or her own contribution to that family and
to society. After the birth of our baby, when the parade of friends began, the
most uplifting statement I remember is from an experienced grandmother
who offered, “My wish is for you to become excited about your special
baby.” (For more information about babies with Down syndrome, see
“Down Syndrome” in “Resources,” here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 MIXING BABIES AND PETS
If you have raised a dog through puppyhood, bringing up a baby should be
a breeze—but not without some planning.

OceanofPDF.com

 Have Pet—Add Baby

Introducing a new baby to a pampered pet may bring out problems as
intense as sibling rivalry. Here’s how pet and baby can safely and
peacefully get along.

Before Baby Arrives

If your pet has been the baby in a childless house, get it used to being
around babies before yours arrives. Invite over friends with babies. Let your
pet sniff (under supervision, of course) and get used to the scent of babies.
Remember, the attention you lavished on Fido will now go to baby, so a bit
of prepartum weaning is wise. When your pet demands attention, sit in a
rocking chair and “mother” a baby doll, meanwhile letting your pet learn an
ability that few humans have—delaying gratification. Like life with a new
sibling, after an initial decrease of attention, sharing the house with the baby
will eventually mean more attention for the pet.
Veterinarians recommend bringing home from the hospital an unwashed
blanket or sleeper of baby’s so that your pet can get used to baby’s scent
before the real person arrives.

 And, of course, if dog or cat has been a member of the family bed, get it
used to sleeping outside your bedroom before your new bedroommate
arrives.
If your pet is proven not to be baby friendly, tough and heartless as it
may be, find a new home for it before baby arrives. It’s not worth the risk.

When Baby and Pet First Meet

When mom, dad, and baby bundle return to the pet’s home, be prepared for
frisky jumps into your arms. Pet misses you. Sit down on the floor or couch
at pet level for a get-acquainted sniff. After pet and baby have met, let dog
or cat snuggle next to you during baby feeding and holding time—like you
would a sibling.

Postpartum with Pet

The first two weeks at home with baby and pet are a get-acquainted period.
Never leave them together alone. Snappy dogs are unpredictable, and cats
like to jump into bassinets and snuggle next to babies.

OceanofPDF.com

 Have Baby—Add Pet

Do you really want a pet? Before choosing another family member consider
the time, energy, and expense involved in caring for another set of legs—
four at that. If a friend offers you a pet, remember there’s no such thing as a
free pet. While visions of your toddler romping through the yard with a dog
seem appealing, during the high-maintenance stage of babyhood do you
have time and energy to take care of two babies?
Beware of this parent trap: Stray dogs or cats wander into your yard, and
your older children pounce to adopt the stray. Clutching their homeless
furry friend, your child pleads, “Please, mommy, can we keep her?” The
combination of a begging child and hungry pet is hard to snub. As charter
members of the can’t-say-no club, our home has provided shelter—and
more than overnight—to many a stray. And sometimes at a cost we weren’t
prepared for. Here’s a pet-bargaining tip: When your older child wants a
pet, be sure he or she agrees to care for the animal—and get it in writing.

Choosing a Pet

Certain pets and babies don’t mix. Kittens and cats are usually kind to
babies. Certain breeds of dogs are more baby friendly than others. Avoid

 unpredictable breeds, such as Doberman pinschers. Shun breeds that have
high-strung personalities, such as little “yappers” who often compensate for
their size with unpredictable and unpleasant behaviors. Try a gentle breed,
such as a Labrador retriever. Purebred is less risky, but a healthy pound dog
with a gentle nature may be brought home on trial. Before purchasing or
bringing home a pet, be sure the previous pet owner agrees on a two-week
trial. If the pet’s temperament and the baby don’t mix, keep baby and return
pet.

Keeping a Healthy Pet

While it’s true pets bring more joy than germs to children, keeping your pet
well is part of the total family health package. Before selecting a pet (gift or
purchase) have your vet check the animal. Periodically, have the vet
deworm and deflea your pet. A flea-bitten baby and a flea-ridden pet make
an uncomfortable combination. Keep your pet’s immunizations current.
Free or lowcost immunization clinics are available in most communities.

If Dog Bites Baby

Seek proof from the owner that the dog has been fully immunized and the
shots are current. Dog-bite cuts become easily infected. Clean the wound

 with antiseptic soap, and cover with an antibiotic ointment until the wound
is healed. If the bite inflicts a severe wound, your doctor may prescribe an
antibiotic. If the dog is a stray and immunizations are unknown, call the dog
shelter or local dogcatching agency to quarantine the dog for signs of
rabies. Check the outcome with these agencies and notify your doctor if
rabies is suspected. Make note of the circumstances surrounding the bite.
Was it provoked or unprovoked? Was the dog acting strange?

Safety Around Pets

By two years of age your child can understand how to behave safely around
pets. Remember, babies treat animals like toys. They pull ears and tails,
jump on dogs, and throw cats. Let sleeping and feeding pets lie. Teach your
child not to grab the dog’s bone or dish while the pet is eating. Put feeding
dishes out of reach of the curious toddler. The most common cause for
biting is a dog defending his food.
Teach your child how to approach a strange dog, and be especially
vigilant when visiting the home of someone with a pet. Let the animal
approach the child. Have your child stand still as the pet circles and sniffs.
Teach your child not to stare at the animal, provoke the pet with jerky
movements, or run from the dog. Speak to the dog in a high-pitched,
soothing voice like you would talk to a baby. Children tend to provoke
dogs, and some dogs are more easily provoked than others.
Pets and babies do mix, but only with care.

 OceanofPDF.com

 IV

OceanofPDF.com

 Infant Development and Behavior
What changes can we expect from month to month? What can we do to help
our baby be bright and happy? How will each stage affect our lives? Can
we really make a difference in how our child turns out? These are common
questions new parents ask concerning the growth and development of their
babies. The most exciting new discovery is the profound effect that the style
of parenting has. How a baby grows used to be viewed as a sort of
developmental elevator. From month to month baby went up a floor, the
door opened, and baby got off to encounter new skills. Given a reasonable
amount of nurturing, nutrition, and health care, baby would graduate from
one developmental stage to another at a pace determined primarily by
genes and temperament.
This simplistic view is partially true, but there’s more. Each baby enters
the world with his or her own potentials, like a capabilities cup. Some
babies have larger cups than others. How close baby comes to fulfilling his
or her potential depends to a large extent on the nurturing and
responsiveness of the caregivers. You can influence how full your baby’s
capability cup becomes. In the following pages, we’ll show you.

OceanofPDF.com

 19

OceanofPDF.com

 Growing Together: Enjoying Your
Baby’s Developmental Stages

Let’s look again at that developmental elevator. A baby reaches each
developmental floor equipped with certain competencies. How these
competencies flower into skills depends upon interaction with the
caregiving environment baby finds on that floor. If the interaction is
responsive and enriching, baby gets back on the elevator with more skills,
and the ride up to the next floor is much smoother. Because baby reaches
the next floor with more skills, the interaction on the next level of
development is even more rewarding.

OceanofPDF.com

 GROWING TOGETHER
Our approach in the following chapters is to focus not only on the growth of
the baby but also on that of the parents—the growth of a relationship. Infant
development and the modern cliché infant stimulation mean not only what
the infant does and what parents do for the infant, but what baby and
parents do for one another. They grow together as a family. Here’s how it
happens.
Mutual sensitivity. As you travel through the first two years of
development together, something good happens to both of you. You become
more sensitive to each other.
Mutual shaping. As you and your baby become mutually sensitive to each
other, you begin to shape each other’s behavior. Mutual shaping of behavior
is well illustrated by the ways parents and baby shape one another’s
language. On the surface parents appear to undergo a regression to the level
of the baby. They act, talk, and think down at the baby’s level. The parents
first become like the baby in order that the baby can more easily become
like the parents—all developing communication skills that none had before.
This concept of mutual shaping is one of the most important ways parents
and baby learn how to fit together.

 Mutual competence. As you and your baby become more sensitive to one
another and shape one another’s behavior, you develop competence. Your
baby gives a cue. You watch, listen, learn, and respond. Because of your
keen perception and quick response, baby is more motivated to continue
giving cues.
Take, for example, the way baby develops social competence. In the first
days, even hours, of life baby cries to get fed or comforted. Parents respond.
In time baby refines these “Pick me up” cues to facial or body language
gestures. Parents perceive this new language and respond. Because of this
responsive social setting, baby learns better social language, and parents
develop better cue-reading abilities.
Baby is not, as previously thought, a passive player in the parenting
game. She takes an active part in shaping behavior and building the
competence of parents, providing they develop a parenting style that lets it
happen.

OceanofPDF.com

 ATTACHMENT PARENTING: HOW IT BUILDS
BETTER BABIES—AND PARENTS
Over our many years in pediatric practice we have noticed a remarkable
correlation between certain parenting styles, and their lack, and the
development of babies. The style of parenting that works for most families
most of the time is attachment parenting. In Chapter 1 we listed the seven
tools of attachment parenting (see here), and in subsequent chapters we
have discussed how this style of nurturing benefits a baby’s growth and
development. Let’s briefly review the most important points.

OceanofPDF.com

 Attachment Parenting Helps Babies (and Parents) Thrive

All babies grow, but not all babies thrive. Thriving takes growth a step
further, to baby’s fullest potential. Helping babies thrive is what attachment
parenting is all about. Research has proven what parents have long known
—that something good happens to parents and babies when they’re
attached. For example:

Infants of parents who practice attachment
parenting show more advanced developmental
skills compared with infants given more
restrained and distant styles of parenting.
Infants who are breastfed on cue and have a
timely weaning, are worn in slings during the day,
sleep beside their mother at night, and are given
an immediate nurturant response to crying
eventually become more independent. These
styles do not, as previously believed, create
overly dependent children.
Infants whose cues are sensitively attended to
later develop more competent social skills.

 Attachment parenting enriches brain growth. In
studies, sensitively nurtured infants scored higher
on mental development and IQ tests.
Infant animals who stay closer to their mothers
have a higher level of growth hormones and
enzymes essential for brain growth. Separating
from or not interacting with their mothers causes
the levels of these growth-promoting substances
to fall.
These attachment studies have fascinating results. Here is what we
believe happens when parents and baby connect.

Attachment Parenting Organizes Babies

By organizing behavior, attachment parenting helps babies conserve energy.
Because their behavior is better organized, attachment-parented babies cry
less than other babies. If they cry less, what do they do with their free time?
They spend more time in quiet alertness and divert the energy conserved
from not crying into growing. During quiet alertness babies interact and
learn the most from their environment, and their physiologic systems work
better.

WRITING YOUR BABY’S STORY

 Want to make a memory that lasts a lifetime? Create your baby’s own book.
Beginning with your birth story, journalize your baby’s development.
Recording tips. Your recording system can range from a minimum-effort
simple scratch pad, and a stick-on-sticker baby calendar, to authoring your
baby’s full story on a computer. We found it easiest to keep a pocket-sized
tape recorder handy on the most accessible kitchen counter. Dictate those
memorable events when they occur, sometimes as they are occurring, such
as baby’s first steps. Periodically type these notes or hire a friend to type
them for you. (The “Martha notes” excerpts throughout this book are drawn
from her journals of Matthew and Stephen.)
What to record. Too much verbiage obscures the main event. Start each
topic with an opener, a highlighted minititle similar to the format we use in
this book. This makes it easier to scan and retrieve information later. Record
high points of your baby’s development: first sit, first step, and first words.
Also highlight humorous events and cute scenes—we call them the catch of
the day: “Today I caught Johnny unrolling the toilet paper across the room!”
And don’t forget special occasions, like birthdays. Note special clips of
your development. Oftentimes you will respond to a baby’s cues in a way
that amazes you: “I did that?” or “It worked!” Don’t let your wisdom go
unrecorded.
In the early months or years you will probably make daily or weekly
entries because baby does so many new things so fast. As baby grows or the
reporter tires, you may record only the headlines of special events or make
once-a-month entries. It’s fun later to pick up your baby’s story and reflect
on the person he was and the person he is now. It also helps you reconnect
with your growing child during phases in your life when the fleeting
features of childhood have faded from your memory. You might even want
to give a copy of your diary (easier to duplicate if it is typed) to your “baby”
as a wedding gift, or when he or she becomes a parent. By referring to the
fussy moments and sleepless nights recorded in mother’s journal, your
grown child will gain insight into how he or she was parented.

 Attachment Parenting Is Good Brain Food

The brain grows more during infancy than at any other time, doubling its
volume and reaching approximately 60 percent of its adult size by one year.
As the brain grows, nerve cells called neurons, which resemble miles of
tangled electrical wires, rapidly proliferate. The infant is born with much of
this wiring unconnected. During the first year, these neurons learn to work
better and connect up with each other to make circuits that enable baby to
think and do more things. The more baby interacts with the caregiving
environment, the more nerve connections she makes, and the better the
brain develops. Attachment parenting helps the developing brain make the
right connections.

OceanofPDF.com

 The Shutdown Syndrome

One day, first-time parents Norm and Linda came to me, Dr. Bill, for
consultation, along with their four-month-old high-need baby, Heather. The
family had been practicing the attachment style of parenting and, though
often exhausting, it had worked for them. Heather had been a happy,
thriving baby. Then well-meaning friends (aka baby trainers) persuaded
Norm and Linda that they were spoiling Heather, that she was running their
lives and manipulating them, and she would be forever dependent.
Somehow they lost confidence in their intuitive style of parenting and
yielded to these pressures of a more restrained and distant style of
parenting. Heather was scheduled, left to cry herself to sleep, and was not
carried as much. Over the next two months Heather’s weight leveled off.
She went from happy and interactive to withdrawn. Her sparkle left, and she
was no longer thriving—neither were the parents. Heather was about to
undergo an extensive medical evaluation for failure to thrive. After listening
to the parents’ story and examining Heather, I diagnosed the shutdown
syndrome and explained: Heather had a high need to connect with her
parents. Because of their responsive style of parenting she was an organized
baby and trusted that her needs would be met. And it was working. When
the attachment plug was pulled, her connection was lost, as was her trust. A
sort of baby depression resulted, and her physiologic systems slowed down.

 I advised the parents to return to their previous parenting style, carrying her
a lot, breastfeeding on cue, responding sensitively to her cries by day and
night and, above all, adopting a style of parenting that worked for them, not
someone else’s parenting advice. They did, and Heather thrived once more.

OceanofPDF.com

 HOW BABIES GROW
Before we begin our journey through infant development from birth to two
years, here are some basic principles that will help you understand and
enjoy the individual variations of your baby.

OceanofPDF.com

 Getting-Bigger Charts

At each well-baby checkup your doctor will plot your baby’s height,
weight, and head circumference on a growth chart. In the most commonly
used charts, each line represents a percentile, which means that’s where
your baby is, compared with a hundred other babies. For example, the
fiftieth percentile, or average, means that one half of babies plot above the
line, the other half below. If your baby plots in the seventy-fifth percentile,
he is larger than average. Twenty-five babies plot above your baby, and
seventy-five below. Note that these charts are not infallible. They represent
averages of thousands of babies. Average growth is not necessarily normal
growth. Your baby has his or her individual normal growth. These charts are
simply handy references to alert the doctor to any unhealthy trends. (See the
growth charts in the appendix.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Getting-Smarter Charts

Your baby gets bigger not only in size but also in competence.
Developmental charts show the average age at which infants perform the
most easily identifiable skills, such as sitting or walking, called
developmental milestones. The developmental chart used most by
pediatricians, the Denver Developmental Screening Test (DDST), shows
that 50 percent of children walk at one year of age, but the normal range for
beginning to walk is ten to fifteen months of age. Expect your baby to show
uneven development in many of the developmental milestones. He may plot
“ahead” in one milestone and “behind” in another.

OceanofPDF.com

 Progression Is More Important Than Timing

When a child does what is not as important as moving through a progressive
sequence of developmental milestones. Your baby will progress from sitting
to pulling up to standing to walking. He may accomplish these motor
milestones at different ages than the baby next door. But they both will
follow a similar progression. Compare your baby only with himself as he
was a month ago.
Infants spend different amounts of time at each stage before moving on
to the next higher stage. Some infants seem to make a quick stop at one
level and then quickly progress to the next. Some may skip a level entirely.
Avoid the neighborhood race to see whose baby walks first. Motor
milestones, such as crawling and walking, are neither an indication of
baby’s smartness nor a badge of good parenting.

OceanofPDF.com

 Why Infants Grow Differently

Not only do babies look and act differently from one another, they grow
differently. That’s what makes them unique. It helps parents to understand
the wide variation in normal growth patterns and the way that many of life’s
little setbacks may affect growth and development.
Baby’s body type. Your baby is endowed with tall and slim genes, short
and wide genes, or in-between genes. Ectomorphs (tall and slim “bananas”)
often put more calories into their height than weight, so that they normally
plot above average in height and below in weight, or they may start out
hovering around the average line and eventually begin a stretching-out
phase, soaring up the chart in height but leveling off in weight.
Mesomorphs (“apples”) show a stocky squared-off appearance. They
usually center around the same percentile in both height and weight.
Endomorphs (“pears”) plot in the reverse of ectomorphs, often charting in a
higher percentile for weight than height. All of these variations are normal
and indicate the importance of looking at your baby (and his family tree)
while looking at the chart, and putting the two together.
Growth spurts. While the chart implies a smooth, steady progression,
many babies don’t grow that way. Some babies grow in bursts and pauses,

 and when you plot them on the growth chart, you notice periodic growth
spurts followed by periods of leveling off. Other babies show a consistent,
steady increase in height and weight over the first year.
Health and nutrition. Sick babies temporarily divert their energy into
healing rather than growing. During prolonged colds your baby’s growth
may level off. With diarrheal illnesses your baby may even lose weight.
Expect catch-up spurts after the illness is over. Breastfed and bottlefed
babies may show different growth patterns, and the growth charts currently
in use do not differentiate. Some breastfed babies, especially high-need
babies and frequent feeders, may plot high on the weight chart and be
unfairly dubbed “overweight.” Nearly all of these “overweight” breastfed
babies begin a natural slimming process around six months to a year, when
breast milk fat naturally lowers. Both breastfed and bottlefed infants who
plot on the overweight side in the first six months normally begin a
slimming process that we call “leaning out” between six months and a year
as their increasing motor milestones help them burn off the chubby rolls.
(See here for weight differences of breastfed and formula-fed infants.)

OceanofPDF.com

 THE

FIVE

FEATURES

OF

INFANT

DEVELOPMENT
As we travel through infant development from birth to two years, we will
group baby’s developmental skills into five general areas: gross motor
skills, fine motor skills, language skills, social and play skills, and cognitive
skills.
Gross motor skills. How your infant uses the larger muscles of his body—
trunk, limb, and neck muscles—is determined by his gross motor skills.
They include such milestones as head control, sitting, crawling, and
walking. The progression of gross motor skills from birth to two years
means getting more and more of his body off the ground, moving from head
to toe.
Fine motor skills. Finger and hand skills that baby uses to manipulate toys
rely on fine motor skills. Like gross motor skills, fine motor skills develop
in an orderly progression, from imprecise punchlike reaching to pinpoint
pickup with the thumb and index finger.
Language skills. Here is where your skills as a baby communicator really
shine. Parent input can affect language development more than any other of

 your baby’s skills. You may think that babies don’t talk much until one and
a half to two years. Baby “talk” begins at birth. The cry of a newborn that
causes nurses to come running, that causes mother to drip milk and embrace
her baby, and causes a parent to bump into furniture during a nighttime
sprint toward the 3:00 A.M. summons—that’s language! To a tiny baby,
language is any sound or gesture that makes a caregiver respond. During the
first year, called the prelinguistic stage of language development, baby
learns to communicate before she is able to say words. Early in the newborn
period a baby learns that her language, the cry, is a tool for social
interchange that she can use to get attention and satisfy needs. By
sensitively responding to your baby’s early cries, you help her refine these
somewhat demanding signals into more polite body language requests that
are easier on the nerves.
Mothers are naturals at talking with their babies. Language researchers
who have studied mothers all over the world notice a sort of universal
mother language, called motherese. Mothers are intuitively able to speak
down to the baby’s level, yet they’re able to shift to a higher level of
communication when their infants are ready.
Social and play skills. The ways a baby interacts with caregivers and plays
with toys make up her social skills. Like language development, interaction
with caregivers can profoundly affect social development. In the fun-thingsto-do-with-your-baby suggestions for each stage of development, we give
time-tested play tips to help you and your baby have more fun.

 Cognitive skills. We have frequently watched our babies’ facial expressions
and said, “I wonder what he’s thinking.” While you will never be certain
what goes on in your baby’s developing mind, it is fun to deduce what your
infant is thinking by his expressions and the way he is acting. Cognitive
skills include the ability to think, to reason, to make adjustments to different
play situations, and to solve problems such as how to crawl over obstacles.
We will point out what signs to watch for to give you a clue to what your
baby is thinking.

OceanofPDF.com

 Make Your Own Chart

A valuable exercise during the first two years is to make your own growth
and development chart like the one shown in this chapter. Using a large
poster board, list the areas of development down the left-hand side and
monthly stages of development across the top. Divide the sheet into blocks
and plot your baby’s skills. Concerning cognitive development, fill in what
you think is going on in baby’s mind. For simplicity, you may wish to
combine social and language milestones, as we have done on our chart and
throughout these chapters. Charting your baby’s development not only
improves your skills as a baby watcher, it adds to your overall enjoyment of
growing together. (See the growth charts in the appendix.)

OceanofPDF.com

 SEVEN WAYS TO BUILD A BRIGHTER BABY
You can make a difference in your baby’s brain development. New insights
into how a baby’s brain grows show that parents can have a profound effect
on how smart their child later becomes. The brain grows more during
infancy than at any other time, tripling its weight and reaching
approximately 60 percent of its adult size by one year. As the brain grows,
nerve cells called neurons proliferate, resembling miles of tangled electrical
wires. The infant is born with much of this wiring unconnected. During the
first year, these neurons grow larger, learn to work better, and connect up
with one another to make circuits that enable baby to think and do more
things.
Here’s how these circuits work. The tips of each neuron resemble
fingerlike feelers attempting to make connections with other nerves. During
development two important improvements are made on this beginning
nervous system. First, the number of connections between neurons
increases, and second, each neuron acquires a coating called myelin, which
helps messages move faster and insulates the nerve, preventing short
circuits. The new and exciting field of neurobiology tells us that the more
connections the nerve cells make, the smarter the child’s brain. Smart-start
parenting means helping your baby’s brain make the right connections.

 OceanofPDF.com

 OceanofPDF.com

 OceanofPDF.com

 1. A Smart Womb Start

At the moment sperm meets egg, your baby’s brain growth takes off. In
fact, a baby’s brain develops faster during the nine months in mother’s
womb than at any other time in the child’s life. The development of the fetal
nervous system is affected—for better or worse—by what’s in mother’s
blood during the nine months of pregnancy. Inhaling or ingesting
substances called neurotoxins, such as cigarette smoke, excessive alcohol,
and many kinds of drugs, has been shown to harm the baby’s brain
development and increase the risk of having learning and behavior
problems later on.
Besides the “don’ts” of drugs, alcohol, and nicotine during pregnancy,
there are some “do’s” that affect the developing fetal brain in a healthy way.
A maternal diet rich in brain-building omega-3 fats (see here) is smart
nutrition. While it takes very poor maternal nutrition to harm a baby’s
developing brain, in general, the better you nourish your body, the better
you nourish your baby’s growing brain.

OceanofPDF.com

 2. A Smart Milk Start

As discussed here, research has shown that breastfed babies enjoy an
intellectual advantage over bottlefed babies. Even more exciting,
breastfeeding research suggests a dose-response relationship: The more
frequently and longer a mother breastfeeds, the smarter her kids are likely
to be. Here are two reasons that breastfed babies enjoy a brighter beginning:

Smarter fats. Mother’s milk is rich in brainbuilding fats such as DHA (docosahexaenoic
acid), ARA (arachidonic acid), and cholesterol.
Dubbed “smart fats,” these nutrients contribute to
the growth of the baby’s brain tissue, especially
myelin, the fatty coating that insulates each nerve
fiber, enabling messages to travel faster and more
efficiently between brain circuits. Most infant
formulas now have these fats added, but they are
not as nutritious as the real fats in mom’s milk.
Smarter communication. As discussed here, the
responsiveness of caregivers to the cues of the
infant is a powerful builder of brighter babies.
Breastfeeding is an exercise in baby-reading. A

 breastfeeding mother learns to read her baby’s
cues of hunger and satisfaction since, unlike the
bottle-feeding mom, she can’t count the number
of ounces of milk she is giving. The perk of extra
intuition hormones that a breastfeeding mother
enjoys helps her be more sensitive, tuned in, and
more appropriately responsive to the cues of her
infant. Since breast milk is digested faster than
formula, breastfed babies feed more often and
therefore enjoy more interaction and touch time,
which are also powerful influencers of an infant’s
emotional and intellectual development.
OceanofPDF.com

 3. Smart Moves

Why does babywearing build brighter babies? Answer: Their brains grow
better. Babies learn a lot in the arms of busy caregivers. Carried babies cry
less. What do they do with this extra time and energy? They learn. Carried
babies show an increase in awake-contentment time, also called “quiet
alertness” or “attentive stillness”—the behavioral state in which an infant
learns most by being able to best connect and interact with his environment.
And the more babies interact with their environment, the more meaningful
are their neurological connections. Babies divert the energy they would
have spent on fussing into thinking. During babywearing, mom gives her
baby a 180-degree view of his environment and allows him to more easily
scan his world. Babies who are carried learn to choose—picking out what
they wish to look at and shutting out what they don’t. This ability to make
choices enhances learning.
To appreciate how babywearing helps infants learn, let’s use a principle
from Parenting 101: Get behind the eyes of your baby and imagine the
world from her viewpoint. First get into a stationary infant seat or crib and
imagine the world you see. You lie unattended, flailing your arms, arching
your back, and wasting a lot of energy in purposeless motion. You don’t
learn much lying motionless gazing passively at a meaningless sky or
ceiling.

 Now imagine being worn in a sling. You are now what we call a
“slingbaby.” With mom you travel down the aisles of the supermarket. You
see the same variety of shopping attractions that mom sees. You’re being
carried through the park, where you watch kids play. You’re with mom
when she’s poking around the house or talking on the phone. You go where
your mom goes, see whatever she sees, and hear whatever she hears.
Because we believe that babywearing is valuable for a baby’s
intellectual development, every new parent who comes into our practice
gets a demonstration on how to wear their baby in a sling. Later these
parents often tell us, “When I pick up the sling and put it on, my baby lights
up and raises her arms. She knows that soon she’ll be in my arms and in my
world.” Whenever I mentioned the cue word “go” to nine-month-old
Matthew, he would crawl toward the wall where we hung the baby sling.
Matthew’s connection between the word “go” and the tool for going, the
baby sling, is known in infant development jargon as a pattern of
association. Like thousands of short-run movies filed in the infant’s
growing neurological library, patterns of association are rerun whenever
baby is exposed to a situation that reminds him of the original “movie.”
Slingbabies fuss less, learn more, and are just plain easier and more fun
to be with. (For more about the benefits of babywearing, see Chapter 14.)

OceanofPDF.com

 4. Smart Play

Babies learn about their world through play, and parents can learn about
their babies’ preferences and capabilities at each stage of development by
watching them play. By observing and sharing in baby’s play, parents can
begin to get a faint idea of all the decision-making and problem-solving
processes going on in baby’s developing mind. In the following chapters, as
you read and grow with your baby, you will learn age- and stageappropriate brainy baby games, toy tips, and the concept of “toys for
two”—toys that help you interact more meaningfully with your baby.

NO TV OR VIDEO GAMES FOR BABIES
Most parents understand the importance of limiting screen time for babies.
Yet as baby grows into a toddler, it’s easy to fall into the trap of letting your
active, exploring troublemaker zone out with a video or TV show, or play
with an app on your mobile device (yes, they make apps for toddlers!), so
you can have a much-needed break. Try to resist this temptation. Most
developmental specialists believe—and a growing body of research
supports—that video input isn’t healthy for a baby’s developing brain. One
research study even showed that infants who regularly watched a
supposedly educational video series had lower IQs compared to their “no
TV” peers. We continually notice how some older toddlers and preschoolers
in our office seem addicted to fun apps on mom’s phone or laptop; such
early introduction to video games can contribute to becoming obsessed with
these games throughout childhood, especially for boys. Instead, keep books,
puzzles, and other manipulative toys and games handy at home and
whenever you go out so you don’t have to “plug your baby in” to keep him

 occupied. We agree with the recommendation of the American Academy of
Pediatrics: no TV for tots under two.
5. Smart Talk
How you talk to your baby has a profound effect on your baby’s brain
development, and here’s where parents, especially mothers, can really
shine. As you ride the developmental elevator with your baby through the
following chapters, you will learn many brain-building tips for talking with
your baby. (See “Tips for Talking to Your Baby,” here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 6. Smart Listening

It’s not only how you talk to your infant but also how you listen that helps
build a brainy baby. As we discussed here, the responsiveness of caregivers
to the cues of their infant is a powerful enhancer of brain development.
When it comes to learning to be a good listener, here is where attachment
parenting really shines.
Once upon a time, the “fear of spoiling and being manipulated” mind-set
gave rise to a philosophy of infant care we call “baby training” (see here).
This lower-touch, cookbook style of parenting promises to help babies fit
more conveniently into their parents’ lifestyles. New insights into infant
development have shown how detrimental this approach can be. The current
buzzword among infant development specialists is responsiveness, which
means tuning in to the cues of the infant and responding sensitively.
As you take a course in infant development in the following chapters,
you will learn listening tips, the most important of which is responding
appropriately, knowing when to say yes and when to say no, and how to tell
the difference between a need and a want. Infants whose language is
listened to and whose needs are responded to appropriately learn to trust
their environment, and trust is one of the earliest and most valuable brainbuilding blocks. (See “The Shutdown Syndrome,” here, for a story about
how lack of trust slowed an infant’s development.)

 OceanofPDF.com

 7. Smart Foods

New research is confirming what parents have long observed: What
children eat affects—for better or worse—how they act, think, and learn.
Since a baby’s rapidly growing brain uses 60 percent of the total nutritional
energy consumed by the infant, it stands to reason that the healthier the
food, the healthier the brain. The food baby eats affects not only how well
the brain grows, but also how well the nerves send messages to one another
via biological bridges called neurotransmitters. Best foods for growing
brains are:

Smart fats. The best fats come from breast milk,
with its omega-3 fatty acids, including the smart
fat DHA. Low-fat diets are not smart for babies.
Nature is smart. Around 50 percent of the calories
in mother’s milk comes from healthy fat. Since a
baby’s brain is 60 percent fat, and since fats are
the major structural components of the brain cell
membrane and the insulating sheath around each
nerve, getting enough fat and the right kinds of fat
can help build a better brain. (See “Smart Fats for

 Baby, Healthy Fats for Mom,” here, and “Feed
Your Baby Smart Fats,” here.)
Smart carbs. Also known as “mood foods,”
carbohydrates (sugars) help growing brains in two
ways: Carbs are the primary energy source for the
nervous
system;
and
carbs
regulate
neurohormones and neurotransmitter function. A
steady supply of “smart carbs” (such as complex
carbohydrates, fiber-filled carbs, and carbs
combined with protein) improves alertness and
concentration. (See “Feed Your Baby the Best
Carbs,” here, and “Grazing,” here.)
Other smart nutrients. An adequate supply of
vitamins, namely vitamin C, folic acid, and the
other B-vitamins are important for optimal brain
growth. Minerals, namely calcium and iron, are
also important nutritional brain-building blocks.
(See “Value Your Vitamins,” here, “Mind Your
Minerals,” here, and “Pump Up Baby’s Iron,”
here.)
Go organic. An infant’s developing brain is more
susceptible to the harmful effects of chemicals,
heavy metals, pesticides, and food additives and
preservatives compared to our fully developed
adult brains. That’s why it’s important to feed a

 baby as organically as possible throughout the
early years. See here for more information on
organic baby food.
The parenting style you practice, the way you play with your baby, and
the food you feed your infant, all stack up to be important blocks for
building your baby’s brain.

OceanofPDF.com

 AUTISM

SCREENING

AND

EARLY

DETECTION
With the continuing rise in autism spectrum disorders (ASD diagnoses),
parents should be vigilant in tracking their infant’s development and
watching for early signs of autism. Early detection and treatment do make a
significant difference in a child’s developmental outcome. Yet such
vigilance shouldn’t be rooted in fear and worry; this can detract from
parents’ enjoyment of watching their infant develop and thrive. We
encourage parents to be educated about autism detection, but remember to
enjoy to the fullest baby’s progression through his developmental
milestones. For a complete discussion on all the signs of and criteria for
autism, as well as options for treatment and prevention, read The Autism
Book (Little, Brown). Here are some of the most common signs to watch
for:
Lack of eye contact. After one or two months, infants should eagerly make
eye contact with everyone who approaches them and maintain that eye
contact on and off throughout each engagement. Infants should also
spontaneously make eye contact; parents shouldn’t have to work hard to get
a baby’s attention. A baby who generally looks away from others, who

 makes eye contact only when someone actively engages him, or who tends
to study objects by looking sideways at them instead of straight on is a
possible cause for concern.
Obsession with spinning objects. Of course, most infants love to watch
spinning wheels and games. But if an infant or toddler seems to frequently
stare at and obsess over spinning objects, that is a red flag.
Lack of babbling by twelve months. An infant’s “baby talk” should
progress from “coos” and “goos” at four to six months to babbling sounds
with consonants by six to nine months. Infants who aren’t babbling with
multiple consonant sounds by twelve months should be evaluated for
language delay.
No words by eighteen months. It is not uncommon for toddlers to be
slightly delayed in their language development. But our cutoff for worry is
an eighteen-month-old who hasn’t yet spoken that first word (usually
“mama” or “dada”).
Solo play. Toddlers should seek out other people to play with, such as mom,
dad, or other toddlers. They should want to show others what they have and
be curious about what the other person is playing with. If a toddler is
content to play alone for hours without seeking to engage others, this may
be a warning sign.

 Lack of engagement with new people. A toddler should promptly notice
any new person who enters his space. He may display stranger anxiety and
want to hide in mom’s arms, or be happy, social, and engaging. Either way,
there should be a reaction. A toddler who doesn’t seem to notice others,
continues about his own business, and attends to the new person only if that
person actively tries to engage him may have delayed social awareness.
Lack of joint attention. When a toddler sees something new, interesting, or
even frightening, she should turn and look at her caregiver to gauge the
reaction. For example, if a dog walks by, the child should look at the dog,
look at mom, smile and light up, look back at the dog, point, and perhaps
walk toward the dog, pulling mom along to share this new discovery. Or she
may shy behind mom if uncertain, looking at mom as if she’s wondering
what her parent thinks about the dog. Showing interest in anything new but
not turning to others to share the experience may indicate an issue.
Repetitive movements. Another red flag is when toddlers have unusual and
repetitive movements, such as hand-flapping, toe-walking, flipping light
switches on and off over and over again, opening and closing doors
repeatedly, or unusual hand or facial mannerisms.
Autism is a very complex neurodevelopmental disorder that comes in many
shapes and sizes. Some infants show signs in the early months. But most
seem to develop in a normal manner until after the first birthday, then begin
to lose developmental capabilities (called regression) or stop progressing

 into more skills. Pediatricians and family doctors are now trained to
perform autism screening evaluations during the toddler and preschool
checkups. Make sure your doctor is giving your toddler a thorough
developmental evaluation and be sure to raise any concerns you have.

OceanofPDF.com

 SENSORY PROCESSING DISORDER
Sensory processing disorder (SPD), otherwise known as sensory integration
disorder, is a recently labeled condition in which a baby or child doesn’t
react in a usual manner to sensations such as touch, sound, and balance.
When a child detects a sensation, the brain doesn’t process that input
correctly and in turn doesn’t know how to create a natural response to it.
The brain becomes overloaded with irritating sensory input.
Symptoms during early infancy (0 to 6 months) may include:

colic (see here)
abnormally frequent night waking (see here)
aversion to snuggling or rocking
demand to be held only in certain positions
need for constant motion
Symptoms during later infancy (6 to 12 months) include:

uncomfortable with messiness (sticky hands,
face) or wet clothes
irritated by clothing tags

 refusal to try foods by 9 months (oral aversions)
Symptoms in toddlers include:

refusal to wear certain clothes (that just don’t feel
right)
refusal to wear socks or shoes unless put on just
right (little bumps in the socks or the inside of the
shoe are irritating)
won’t walk barefoot in grass or sand
bothered by chaos and loud noises
Symptoms in preschoolers include:

many of the above indicators
hyperactivity or constant motion, fidgeting
social awkwardness (the years of sensory
overload in the brain have spilled over into other
parts of the brain)
SPD is diagnosed and treated by an occupational therapist who specializes
in sensory integration therapy. This approach gradually exposes infants and
children to the offending sensations in order to allow their nervous systems
to acclimate. If done early on (in the first few years of life), other parts of

 the brain likely won’t be affected and the child will be less prone to develop
social or learning challenges. For more information on diagnosing and
treating SPD, including some alternative medical and nutritional treatment
approaches, read The Autism Book (although SPD is not autism, many of
the treatment approaches overlap).

Dr. Bob notes: Don’t be too quick to “label” your child with a disorder, and
don’t allow a therapist to be too quick to make a diagnosis. But don’t ignore
a potentially treatable developmental problem, Make balanced, informed
decisions with your pediatrician’s guidance.

OceanofPDF.com

 20

OceanofPDF.com

 The First Six Months: Big Changes

More changes occur in the first six months than during any other growth
period. Baby doubles his birth weight; posture progresses from barely a 1inch head lift to a full sit-up; hand skills progress from tight-fisted, aimless
swiping to precise reaches. Baby’s thought process matures, too; primarily
reflexive responses give way to the beginning of thought-out actions and
the initially uninterpretable cries develop into understandable cues. Parents
also grow at an amazing rate at this stage, progressing from “I have no idea
what he wants” to “I finally understand his signals.” Let’s now take a
journey through one of the most exciting stages of a child’s life: the first six
months.

OceanofPDF.com

 THE FIRST MONTH: BIG NEEDS
“What should we be doing with our new baby?” is a question that concerns
new parents. Hold him a lot and love him a lot is the answer. The first
month is a stage of adjustment for parents and organization for baby. Hold
the toys for later. Babies do not show great strides in motor development
during this stage, nor do they need a lot of things—except the arms of
loving parents.

OceanofPDF.com

 Opening Moves

Watch your tiny bundle curled up in the bassinet. So peaceful, so quiet. It’s
hard to imagine this is the same baby who turned roly-polies in your uterus.
When he awakens, gaze at him face to face. His arms and legs dart out as if
stretching after a deep sleep. Those were the punches and kicks you felt
during the final months inside. Now you can watch what you felt.
When playing with your newborn, notice the springlike feel to the
muscles. If you pull his arms or legs away from his body or try to open his
hands, they quickly spring back to their original flexed position. Enjoy this
tight, springlike appearance and feel while they last, as baby’s whole body
will loosen up over the next few months. When unflexing baby’s leg or arm,
you will often hear and feel crackling sounds around the knee and elbow
joints. These are normal joint noises coming from the rubberlike ligaments
and loose bones. These sounds, too, will disappear.

 A newborn in the fetal position.
The behavioral state your newborn is in often determines how he moves.
While most of the time baby’s wiggles seem random and jerky, recent
studies have shown that when newborns are relaxed and in the quiet alert
state their movements take on a more organized pattern of periodic bursts
and pauses. The more time baby spends in the quiet alert state, the more
these jerky muscle movements organize into more rhythmic patterns. This is
one reason we emphasize parenting styles that promote the state of quiet
alertness.
If your baby startles easily, his chin quivers a lot, and his arms and legs
seem trembly, wear your baby in a sling or wrap your newborn in a blanket,
which contains and helps to organize these jerky muscle movements. These
normal newborn shakes usually subside by the end of the first month.

OceanofPDF.com

 What Newborns Can See

Dim the lights; a newborn is coming. As though emerging from a dark to a
light room, a newly born baby squints. Add to this light-sensitive squinting
the puffy eyelids from the birth squeeze, and the world may not look so
clear for the first few hours. As a further light shield, newborn pupils are
often somewhat smaller than normal for the first week or two. Within
minutes to an hour after birth most newborns show a wide-open, interestedin-the-world look.

Newborns’ muscles have a springlike feel, and their limbs tend to return to
a flexed position.

 During the early days, except for fleeting eye-opening moments,
newborns keep their eyes closed. This can be frustrating to parents trying to
connect visually. Try this eye-opener: Hold your baby in front of you with
one hand supporting his head and the other under his bottom, between 8 and
10 inches (20 and 25 centimeters) from your eyes. Turning from the waist,
swing him gently to an arc of about 120 degrees and come to a slightly
abrupt stop. This rotating motion prompts baby to open his eyes reflexively.
Another method is to support your baby’s head and raise him gently from a
lying to a sitting position.
Newborns see; they just don’t see far. They see most clearly at a distance
of 8 to 10 inches, which, amazingly, is the usual eye-to-eye distance during
breastfeeding. Catch your baby in a bright-eyed state of quiet alertness.
Hold him in front of your face, making eye-to-eye connection around 8 to
10 inches away. As you move baby closer and farther from this intimate
space—the distance that best holds baby’s attention—notice that baby
breaks the visual connection and loses interest because your visual image
becomes more hazy.

What Newborns Like to See

Here’s a clue: It has round curves, contrasting light and dark patterns, and
sharp outlines. No, it is not a breast, but you’re close. Another clue. It
moves, blinks, and smiles. Newborns love to look at faces, especially a

 familiar one. Give him yours. There’s something uniquely appealing about
the order of features in the face. Researchers showed four different
diagrams to forty newborns at a mean age of nine minutes. The babies
turned their heads and eyes and displayed interest in the diagram that
showed the facial parts in the right configuration. They showed less interest
in diagrams in which the facial parts were scrambled. While a parent’s face
will always be baby’s best eye-catcher, next in order of preference are
black-and-white drawings or photos of a face, and black-and-white
contrasting patterns such as checkerboards, stripes, and bull’s-eyes.
Newborns are very discerning about what they choose to look at. If you
don’t wear glasses and suddenly put on a pair, or if your baby gets used to
seeing you with glasses on and you take them off, he may look puzzled and
turn away, as if thinking, “What’s wrong with this picture?” This visual
perception indicates that even a newborn can store familiar patterns in his
visual memory bank. The newborn is programmed to pay attention to the
human face even from birth.

TIPS FOR HOLDING BABY’S VISUAL
ATTENTION
Sit or hold baby upright.
Wait for baby to be in the quiet alert state.
Keep object or face around 10 inches (25 centimeters) from baby’s
face.
Use animated facial gestures (wide-open mouth and eyes) while
speaking in a slow, rhythmic, exaggerated tone.

 Fixating

“Sometimes he’s cross-eyed, sometimes he’s not,” parents often observe.
Periodic crossed eyes are normal. Eyes may not be constantly straight until
six months of age. Because newborns do not use both eyes together, images
do not fall at the same point on the retina in each eye. This results in poor
depth perception. As baby learns to hold her head and eyes still, images
become clearer, depth perception improves, and baby holds a longer fix on
your eyes. This binocular vision starts to develop around six weeks and is
well established by four months. Constant crossed eyes, at any age, need
medical attention.

How to Tell If Your Baby’s Eyes Are Crossed

Because some babies have wide nasal bridges, you may not see much of the
whites of the eyes. Consequently the eyes may appear crossed, but really
aren’t. Here’s how to tell. Shine a penlight into your baby’s eyes (or take a
flash photo). Notice the location of the light reflex, the white dot on baby’s
eyes. It should be in the same place in each eye. If the dot is in the center of
the pupil in one eye but off center in the other, one or both eyes have lazy
muscles. Report your findings to your doctor. During well-baby exams, this
is how your doctor checks baby’s eyes.

 Gazing

During the first few weeks your baby’s eyes scan your face but seldom are
still and fixed directly onto your eyes for more than a fleeting second or
two, despite your pleading, “Look at me.” Even though your baby starts
focusing better around two weeks, expect her eyes to continue to move
most of the time. Holding a fix on either a still or moving object does not
click in until around four months.
Sometimes if a newborn is in a relaxed, interested, and quiet alert state,
a face or an object may hold her attention for several minutes. Try this
gazing game: Hold your baby within her own clear-vision distance (which
you can determine by slowly telescoping your baby toward and away from
your face until you reach a distance that best holds her attention—this is
usually somewhere between 8 and 13 inches/20 and 33 centimeters).
Babies are more likely to become bored with visual games when lying
on their back but become more attentive when placed in the upright
position.

OceanofPDF.com

 What Newborns Can Hear

Newborns prefer mother’s high-pitched voice to father’s and prefer sounds
with a womblike beat. That’s the music they’re used to. They calm best to
soothing sounds with a slowly rising and falling rhythm, like classical
music.
Newborns appear to recognize the sounds they heard repeatedly while in the
womb, such as a favorite piano piece that mother played often during her
pregnancy. Babies and children are also more attentive to stories that
mother frequently read out loud during her pregnancy.
You don’t have to tiptoe and whisper around a sleeping newborn. Babies
have a remarkable ability to block out disturbing noises. This stimulus
barrier operates even when baby is awake. Sometimes you may call your
baby’s name, and he doesn’t even notice, and you wonder if he hears you.
Babies are selective about what they give their attention to. If baby is
interested in a dangling mobile and you call to him, his visual pursuits
override other senses, and he tunes you out. Try again when he is not so
focused on something else. (Expect the same behavior when your newborn
becomes a two-year-old.)
Newborns also protect themselves against sensory overload. During a
loud, disturbing commotion some babies become upset; others fade into a
deep sleep, as if saying, “Too much going on here. I’m tuning out.”

 Amazingly, newborns can associate the sound with the direction of its
source—which is called orienting. Call your baby from the right side, and
she may turn to the right. Now try the left side. Not all newborns orient to
all voices all the time, and don’t be alarmed if it takes another month or two
for your baby to turn toward your voice. Mother’s voice is special.
Newborns can pick out mother’s voice from the sounds of strangers.
When hearing the same sounds, newborns become habituated, which is
infant-stimulator jargon for becoming bored. If you’re not able to make
sound connections with your baby, try varying the tone of your voice. Also,
babies become confused if they cannot see who’s talking to them. They like
to look at who’s talking. To hold your baby’s attention to your voice, first
get an eye-to-eye visual fix and then begin talking. (For tips on checking
your baby’s hearing, see here.)

SOUND ADVICE: Exposure to loud noises such as train borns and rock
concerts may damage hearing. As a practical guide, music you can carry on
a conversation over is safe. If you have to shout over the noise, it’s too loud.

OceanofPDF.com

 A Mind of Their Own

Much of what a newborn does is by reflex. When hungry or upset he
automatically cries. He acts before he thinks.

Mental Pictures

Most of a newborn’s early learning is directed toward comfort and
satisfaction. He wants to be fed, held, and comforted, and he has the same
language for all these—the cry. Put yourself in the mind of your newborn.
“I cry, I get picked up. I keep crying, I get fed. I cry again when I’m
lonesome, and I get held more.” After repeating these cue-response scenes
hundreds of times, a newborn develops a mental picture of what to expect
following a cry. It is as if each time baby gives a cue, a flash card appears in
his mind, and he previews what’s going to happen. Infant development
specialists call these mental pictures a schema. The more mental pictures,
the better the mind develops. So the initial reflex, crying, matures into a
thinking or cognitive process as the baby calls up a flash card reflecting the
solution to his need and musters up the language to get it.

PICKING UP EACH OTHER’S SCENT

 The sense of smell is acutely developed in newborns, and in their mothers.
Not only can a newborn distinguish mother’s voice from a stranger’s, he
can also pick out her individual scent. An interesting study of six-day-old
newborns showed that when mother’s breast pad (with or without her milk)
was placed along side her newborn’s face, baby turned toward it, though he
ignored breast pads from other mothers. This special scent recognition also
holds true for mothers. Blindfolded mothers can identify their own babies
by smell.
Mothers go through the reverse of this mental process. Initially, as you
are learning to read your newborn’s cues, you think before you act. “Is he
hungry? But I just fed him. Is he wet? Is he manipulating me? Probably!”
As you overcome these worrisome mental gymnastics, you learn to respond
more intuitively, almost by reflex. You act before you think. As you and
baby practice this cue-response connection, you both settle into a state of
harmony. You and your baby are learning to fit—baby with a mind full of
beautiful attachment pictures, and you with a new comfort level of reading
your baby.

BABY’S BEHAVIORAL STATES
Crying. Loud, fretful complaints are accompanied by flailing,
uncoordinated limb movements. Baby is only minimally attentive. This
behavior is upsetting to baby and to his caregivers.
Active alertness. A state similar to quiet alertness, but here baby’s
limbs and head are moving, and baby is less visually attentive. Baby
seems distracted by his own motions.
Quiet alertness. Eyes are bright, open, attentive; limbs are relatively
quiet. Baby appears to be contemplating the environment. This state is
most conducive to interaction and learning.
Drowsy. Eyes are open and fluttering or starting to close; baby is
slightly attentive, with stirring body movements and sleep grins. Baby
is either waking up or falling asleep.

 Light sleep. Baby startles easily and shows facial and limb twitches,
irregular breathing, spurts of movement. Limbs are flexed toward the
body.
Deep sleep. Baby shows minimal movement, expressionless face,
regular breathing, and limp, dangling limbs.
A newborn who is used to this cue-response network learns to trust her
caregiving environment. She learns how to get her needs met through the
help of others. The nine-month-old, for example, raises her arms in
anticipation that daddy will pick her up and recalls the mental pick-up-andplay flash card that she expects.

OceanofPDF.com

 Enjoying Your Newborn’s Smile

With baby’s first smile, you swoon and forget the sleepless nights and
constant holding. You are thrilled, and you feel, “My baby really loves me.”
Enter the spoilers: “Oh, it’s just gas.” After years of watching newborns
smile, we wish to deflate the gas bubble. Newborns do smile, and not
because of gas (unless after passing it).
As veteran smile watchers we divide smiles into two types: inside smiles
and outside smiles. Inside smiles, occurring in the first few weeks, are a
beautiful reflection of an inner feeling of rightness. Some are sleep grins;
some are only a happy twitch in the corner of the mouth. Relief smiles
occur after being rescued from a colicky period, after a satisfying feeding,
or after being picked up and rocked. During face-to-face games is another
time to catch a smile. Baby’s early smiles convey an “I feel good inside”
message and leave you feeling good inside. Be prepared to wait until next
month for the true outside (or social) smiles, which you can initiate and
which will absolutely captivate all adoring smile watchers. Whatever their
cause, enjoy these fleeting grins as glimpses of the whole happy-face smiles
that are soon to come.

 Sleep grins are among baby’s first smiles.

OceanofPDF.com

 NEWBORN REFLEXES
Newborns and adults show two types of action: cognitive, meaning you
think before you act, and reflexive, meaning your reaction is automatic.
When you show your baby a rattle, his brain thinks, “I’ll use my hand to get
the rattle.” And the brain sends the message to the muscles, instructing them
to grab the rattle. If you tap your baby’s knee with the rattle at just the right
place, baby’s knee jerks automatically, or by reflex. Much of a newborn’s
early behavior is reflexive, but as his nervous system matures he puts more
thought into his actions. There are around seventy-five primitive reflexes in
the newborn period. Most are curiosities, some are protective, and a few
serve some additional purpose. Here are some interesting and useful
reflexes.
Mouthing reflexes. These reflexes help a baby find the source of food and
ingest it. Of these, the sucking and swallowing reflexes are the most
important for survival. Notice that your baby automatically sucks when you
stimulate (in order of decreasing sensitivity) the soft palate, the interior of
the mouth and lips, and the cheek and chin. A relative to the suck reflex is
the rooting (or search) reflex. Using your nipple, tickle your baby’s face and
watch him turn his head toward your nipple as if searching for food. The

 rooting reflex subsides around four months as reaching skills begin and the
infant’s search for food becomes more voluntary.
Startle reflex (Moro reflex). If baby is exposed to a sudden loud noise or
you withdraw support of baby’s head and back while holding him, he reacts
to the sensation of falling by quickly extending his arms out from his body
and cupping his hands as if trying to cling to and embrace someone.
Especially if there is no one to grab on to for comfort, the reflex may be
accompanied by anxious grimacing or crying. This protective reflex is a
clinging response in which baby is giving the message, “I need a person
between these embracing little arms.” The startle reflex is most noticeable
during the first month and gradually disappears by three or four months.
Anthropologists speculate that the startle and grasp reflexes are primitive
attachment behaviors that infants used to hold on to their mothers.

 The startle reflex (Moro reflex).

The grasp reflex.

Grasp reflex. Stroke the palm of your baby’s hand with your fingertip or
place your finger into the palm from the pinkie finger side and notice how
your baby’s fingers wrap tenaciously around yours. Sometimes baby’s grasp
is so strong that you can partially lift him off the surface he’s lying on
before he lets go. (Try this only on a soft surface, like a bed, as baby has no
control of when he will let go.) For another demonstration of the grasp
reflex, place a rattle in your baby’s hands; notice how difficult it is to pry

 the rattle away from little Hercules. The grasp reflex is strongest in the first
two months; it begins disappearing by the third month and is usually gone
by six.
Righting reflexes. Survival behaviors called righting reflexes help baby
learn to keep her trunk, head, arms, and legs in proper alignment for
breathing and development. Place your baby facedown and notice she lifts
her head just enough to clear the surface and turn her head to one side. If a
blanket or pillow falls over baby’s head, she may mouth it initially and then
twist her head vigorously from side to side and flail her arms to push away
the blanket to breathe and see.
Gag reflex. To protect baby from choking while learning to feed and
swallow, the gag reflex automatically expels an object from baby’s throat. If
a finger or an object stimulates the back of the throat, the jaw lowers and
the tongue thrusts forward and downward to push the object out. The gag
reflex persists throughout life, but the tongue-thrusting part of the reflex
disappears around six months. These reflexes explain why babies have
difficulty handling early solids.
Tonic neck reflex (fencer’s reflex). While your baby is lying on his back,
turn his head to one side and notice his arm and leg thrusting outward while
the opposite arm and leg flex, resembling the en garde position of a fencer.
This reflex both helps and hinders baby’s muscle development. It
encourages baby to look at the hand extended in front of him and keep his

 attention on a toy in that hand. But it inhibits baby from using his arms,
hands, and head in midline play in front of his body. Around three to four
months this reflex begins to subside, allowing your baby to hold toys in
front of him and engage in hand-to-eye and hand-to-mouth play.

The tonic neck reflex (fencer’s reflex).

 The stepping reflex.

Stepping reflex. Hold your baby over the table or floor so that the sole of
one foot presses on the surface. The weight-bearing foot will lift up, and the
other foot will lower, as if baby were taking a step. If you “stub her toe” on
the edge of the table, she will lift her foot as if stepping up on the table. This
reflex, which disappears around two months, is an amusing curiosity with
an unclear purpose.
Withdrawal reflex. Baby is protected against pain by the withdrawal
reflex. If baby’s heel is pricked to obtain blood, as during routine hospital
tests, the leg and foot flex and withdraw to avoid the pain. At the same time,
the other leg thrusts outward as if pushing the offender away.

 OceanofPDF.com

 THE SECOND MONTH: BIG SMILES
During the first month babies seldom make enough major changes to write
grand-mother about. It is a stage of becoming organized, discovering to
whom she belongs, and learning to fit into her new home. It is a time for
parents to recover from birth, survive on less sleep, and adjust to life with a
new baby. In the second month you are, in the words of surviving parents,
“over the hump.”
The second month is baby’s social debut—the coming out of herself.
She opens up her hands to greet people. She opens her vision to widen her
world and her mouth to smile and make more noise. The feeling of
rightness and trust developed during the first month opens the door for
baby’s real personality to step out.

OceanofPDF.com

 The Great Imitator

Baby’s intense interest in your facial gestures prompts her to mimic your
changing facial expressions. Like a dance—you lead, baby follows. Nothing
can entertain a baby like a face. Walt Disney capitalized on this observation
by creating cartoon characters with big and exaggeratedly round eyes, nose,
cheeks, and ears. The best of these, Mickey Mouse, has survived the
longest.

In the second month, baby will mimic your facial expressions.

 When your baby is in the quiet alert state, try this face-to-face game:
Hold your baby within best focusing distance (around 8 to 10 inches/20 to
25 centimeters) and slowly stick out your tongue as far as you can. Give
baby time to process your antics, then repeat two to three times a minute.
When baby begins to move her tongue, sometimes even protrude it, you
know you’ve registered a hit. Try the same game with opening your mouth
wide or changing the contour of your lips. Facial expressions are
contagious. You may catch your baby mimicking your yawn, or vice versa.
Mom, the mirror. In playing face-imitation games you mirror your
newborn’s expressions back to him. When a newborn frowns, opens his
eyes or mouth wide, or grimaces, mother instinctively mimics her
newborn’s expressions and exaggerates them. Baby sees his face in his
mother’s. Infant development specialists regard mirroring as a powerful
enforcer of baby’s self-awareness.

OceanofPDF.com

 Visual Development

The fleeting glances of the first month evolve into ten or more seconds of
engaging eye-to-eye contact that captivates caregivers and mesmerizes
babies. These penetrating stares and facial-welcoming gestures seem to say,
“Hi, mom and dad!” In the first month baby mostly scanned your face; now
she studies your face in more detail.

Martha notes:* When Matthew is looking at me, he scans my face very
methodically and systematically. He seems to be studying my face. He will
start out looking at my eyes and from there he will look up to my hairline
and follow the hairline all the way around, then come back to the eyes,
down to the mouth, up to the hairline and back to the eyes. He will study my
face like this for long periods of time.

Eyes and head move together. As you begin to walk away, notice baby’s
eyes can now follow you for a few moments. Unlike the asynchronous eye
and head movements of a newborn, baby’s eyes now move more smoothly,
and her head finally catches up with her eyes to move together. She’s more

 able to track your face or a toy moving from side to side, perhaps even a
full 180 degrees.
Sees farther. Last month baby showed little interest in the world beyond
her reach. She could not see it clearly. This month brings about an increase
in her intimate space, and more of her ever-widening world is now in focus.
As if given a better camera at two months, baby becomes interested in
many of the goings-on elsewhere in the room. She studies your face for a
while, shifts her gaze to focus on something in the background, scans the
room, pausing momentarily as if to snap the pictures she likes, and then
shifts back to peer at your face—still her favorite picture.
Eye-catchers. To spark the interest of a curious two-month-old, here are the
sights that most delight. During the early months babies like black and
white better than a rainbow of colors. They prefer patterns that contrast with
each other rather than soft colors that blend together. Even two-month-olds
have selective visual tastes. Rather than synthetic patterns and pastel
designer wallpaper, they prefer the colors of nature: bright flowers in the
garden, reds and yellows of changing autumn leaves, and bare tree branches
silhouetted against a winter sky. Babies often get bored indoors. Take her
outside where the rhythmical movements of trees, clouds, flowers, and even
automobiles open the eyes of everyone.
Sit me up to see my world. Want to see more of those bright sparkly eyes?
Get baby off her back. Babies seem to be less interested in using their visual

 or motor skills to relate to their environment when lying on their backs.
Perhaps the reclining position reminds them too much of sleep. Instead of
letting your baby lie in a crib staring at a mobile, sit her upright in an infant
seat or in your lap or carry her over your shoulder.

WHAT BABIES LIKE TO LOOK AT
your face—always the favorite
contrasts (mainly black and white)
black-and-white photos: glossy eight-by-tens of mom’s and dad’s faces
broad stripes, approximately 2 inches (5 centimeters) wide
black dots, 1 inch in diameter, on a white background (the younger the
baby, the wider the stripes and the larger the dots)
checkerboards and bull’s-eyes
silhouettes (for example, plants in front of a window)
mobiles, especially with black-and-white contrasting designs
ceiling fans and ceiling beams
fires in fireplaces
Become an eye watcher. Your baby’s eyes are the window to her feelings.
Wide-open sparkly eyes are invitations to play. Slowly drooping eyelids
signal that sleep is coming. An intense look reflects interest, while a blank
expression indicates boredom. Glazed may mean sick. If your baby turns
away from eye-to-eye contact, she is telling you that she is losing interest
and it’s time for a change. Raising and frowning eyebrows add another clue
to baby’s early eye language. Eyes do mirror moods.

OceanofPDF.com

 Baby’s First Smile Makes It All Worthwhile

Here it is, the sight you’ve been longing for—real smiles. A baby’s smile
develops through two stages. The smiles of last month were reflex smiles,
automatic reactions to an inner feeling of rightness. They were fleeting,
limited to the muscles of the mouth, and usually appeared only for a few
seconds as baby drifted off to sleep or after a feeding. Those were the “I
think they’re smiles but I’m not sure” grimaces. Now there is no doubt.
These are returned social smiles in response to your smiles and facial
gestures. The whole face lights up. Baby’s eyes are wide open and, if she is
really into it, crinkled up at the corners. Dimples appear in baby’s chubby
cheeks as she flashes her pearly gums and toothless grins. These facial
smiles often escalate into total body smiles as baby wiggles with pleasure
during a smiling game.

GUESSING YOUR BABY’S EYE COLOR
Place your bets on future eye color now, but all the pigment of the iris may
not cross the finish line until a year or two of age. During their baby’s twomonth checkup, parents invariably ask us, “What do you think her eye color
will be?” In the early years of the eye-color guessing game, we usually lost.
Now we know how to play the odds, and here they are.
Darker eyes, brown or dark green, usually stay dark, especially in
darker-skinned races: African American, Indian, and Asian. Lighter eyes
(blue, gray) are less predictable, often going through many color changes in
the first three months before settling on a color direction by three months

 and darkening to their final color by six to twelve months. When in doubt,
look at the parents. If both parents have brown eyes, guess brown (75
percent chance of being right); if one has brown eyes, still guess brown (50
percent right); if both blue, guess blue (but baby may still turn out browneyed). Though parents’ genes primarily determine eye color, even Greatgrandma Lily may leave her mark. Curious brown triangular or round
specks on the iris are often a distantly inherited trait. Add eye color to the
many fleeting changes of the early months. Photo capture it while you can.
Remember, smiling is a two-way communication between smiler and
smilee. Reinforce your baby’s smiles by smiling back. Jazz up your smile to
intensify baby’s smile. Sometimes this smiling game will escalate into a
chorus of mutual total body language: Parents exaggerate their facial
gestures and babble a barrage of baby talk while baby wiggles with delight
and spurts out her first coos and squeals, sounding like her first laugh. After
you have both come down from the high of your first laugh together, you
melt into a comforting cuddle. This first smile is such a powerful enforcer
of parenting behavior that you momentarily forget the sleep you are losing
and the rest of your social and professional life that is now on hold.

OceanofPDF.com

 Engaging Behaviors

Remember those helpless feelings when you didn’t know what baby
needed, and how frustrated you were when you couldn’t stop her cries? In
the previous month, except for a cry and a few decodable “Pick me up”
signals, you often didn’t know where you stood. Now the two-month-old is
easier to read. The smiles are an opener to relate and play. The cries take on
a more purposeful pattern. Around two months, babies show a set of
interesting cues we call engaging behaviors—social signals that show you
how they feel and what they need.

Martha notes: Matthew lets me know when he’s hungry, and he knows that I
usually hold him cradled in my arms for feeding. He knows that I fiddle
with my blouse and unhook my bra to get ready, so already during this
ritual he is letting me know that he anticipates a feeding. He starts to nibble
a bit, to rev up his breathing patterns, and to turn toward me in an
expectant sort of way. He has already told me that he is hungry, and now he
is telling me that he expects to be fed.

 Anticipation and protest behaviors. By two months of age your baby may
begin showing trust-in-parent signs; the earliest of these is anticipation.
After rehearsing the cue-response script of “I cry—I get picked up and
nursed” (meaning breast, bottle, or comfort) for two months, baby is now
ready to show the audience that she understands her lines. Likewise, if her
opening lines are misread, she shows protest behaviors.

Martha notes: If I miss Matthew’s early cues, he protests. He pounds my
chest with his tiny little fists in a desperate kind of way and bobs his head
back and forth. One day as I was preparing to feed him, I decided to hand
him over to dad so I could get one more thing done before I actually sat
down for a prolonged feeding. He immediately started to howl. This was the
opposite of what he was expecting and wanting. He was angry and very
upset and wouldn’t settle down until I satisfied his anticipation and fed him.
I have found it much more pleasant for both Matthew and me if I respect
his anticipatory behaviors. When he has given me a cue that he is hungry
and I respond immediately he is a wonderful sight. If I miss his hunger cues
or try to delay a feeding, he may cry for a period of time and his mouth will
be very tight and his lips pursed. During the feeding he will continue to be
upset. His sucking movements will be tense and his face will be quivering.
Disappointing his expectations produces feelings of mistrust which are
reflected in his sucking patterns and are not good for either of us. Because
of this, I find that my response time is consistently getting shorter.

 Catching your moods. Moods are contagious to attached babies and their
mothers, and around this stage a mutual mood sensitivity begins. When
mother is upset, baby is upset. We have noticed that babies who are most
sensitive to their parents’ feelings are the ones who have the most trust in
their parents. Naturally, a mutual sensitivity develops when two people
grow close to each other.

OceanofPDF.com

 Feeding Behaviors

Scratch the schedule. By two months of age, if not sooner, you will realize
that feeding schedules are an illusion of writers outside of the inner circle of
baby feeders, especially with breastfeeding babies. Some breastfed babies,
for example, like to cluster-feed, bunching several feedings into an hour or
two, then going three to four hours without feeding. Shun the rigid term
“schedule” and think in terms of feeding harmony: reading your baby’s
cues and not the clock’s and being more flexible in response to your baby’s
individual temperament and your life-style. We prefer the more flexible
term “cue feeding” to the “demand feeding” label attached to the hungry
little field general.
Now that baby can see clearly for a distance of 8 to 10 feet (2 to 3
meters), she looks beyond your face and body while nursing and is
distracted by other guests in her restaurant. Your baby may suck a little,
then stop and look at an interesting scene or passerby, then resume sucking.
Going on and off the breast, and even the bottle, is a time-consuming yet
passing nuisance. (See here for how to handle this nuisance.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Two-Month Talk

Your baby’s sounds give you a clue to what mood she is in. Cooing sounds
are baby’s earliest attempts to communicate delight. Remember, language is
made up of both sounds and gestures. Notice the amusing sounds that
accompany your baby’s smile. The initial part of the smile (the mouth
opening) is often accompanied by a brief “ah” or “uh,” followed by a long,
sighing, cooing sound as the smile widens and grows. During the second
month baby’s vocalizations range from brief one-syllable squeaks and
squeals to prolonged expressive sounds: “eh, ah, oh!” Toward the end of the
second month baby’s throaty, grunting sounds become higher pitched, more
vowel-like and musical, including coos, squeaks, and gurgles. Sounds
produced during sleep both amuse and worry parents. Baby’s breathing may
sound rattled as the air moves through puddles of saliva in the back of the
throat—the same sound that produces the normal chest rattle that you may
now feel.

How Mothers Talk to Babies

Many times during the early months you will wonder how much of what
you are saying really gets through to your baby. Research confirms what

 parents have long suspected—when mother talks, baby listens.
Let’s try a home video experiment. When your baby is in the quiet alert
state, capture an eye-to-eye fix and begin your natural mother talk while
your husband tapes the scene. When you play back the tape, you will see
baby’s and mother’s body language are in synchrony. If you play the
videotape in slow motion, you will notice that the listening baby’s head and
body movements seem to dance in time to the rhythm of mother’s voice.
You really are getting through to your baby, although imperceptibly.
Natural baby talk. You don’t have to learn how to talk to your baby.
You’re a natural. Mothers instinctively use motherese—upbeat tones and
facial gestures—to talk to their baby. They raise the pitch, s-l-o-w the rate,
and E-X-A-G-G-E-R-A-T-E the main syllables. Notice that you put your
whole face into the act by overwidening your mouth and eyes while talking.
The quality of mother’s speech is tailored to the baby’s listening abilities,
slowing down and speeding up according to baby’s attention. To make sure
baby gets the message, mothers instinctively draw out their vowels
—“Gooood baaaby.” How mother talks is more important to a baby than
what she says.
Taking turns. Mothers talk in slowly rising crescendos and decrescendos
with bursts and pauses, allowing baby some time to process each short
vocal package before the next message arrives. Though you may feel that
talking to your baby is a monologue, you naturally speak to your baby as if
you’re imagining a dialogue. Video analysis of the fine art of mother-baby

 communication shows that mother behaves as if she imagines baby talks
back. She naturally shortens her messages and elongates her pauses to the
exact length of time that coincides with the length of the imagined response
from the baby, especially when she is talking to the baby in the form of a
question. This is baby’s earliest speech lesson, in which mother is shaping
baby’s ability to listen. The infant stores these early abilities away and later
recalls them when beginning to speak.

Tips for Talking to Your Baby

The preceding research findings on speech analysis show that every mother
naturally receives an honorary degree as her baby’s speech teacher.
Following are some more tips to help your early communication get off to
an even better start.
Look at the listener. Capture baby’s eyes before beginning your
conversation, and you will be able to hold her attention longer and are more
likely to get an appreciative response.
Address baby by name. While baby may not associate the name with
herself for a few more months, hearing it frequently triggers a mental
association that this is a special sound she has heard before and signals that
more fun sounds will follow—much as an adult perks up to a familiar tune.

 Keep it simple. Use short two- or three-word sentences and one- or twosyllable words with lots of drawn-out, exaggerated vowels: “Preeetty
baaaby.” As when composing a telegram, avoid cluttering your dialogue
with “the” and “a.” Drop the pronouns “I” and “me.” They have no meaning
to baby. Refer to yourselves as “mommy” and “daddy.”
Keep it lively. Say “Wave bye-bye cat” as you direct your waving bye-bye
at the cat. Babies are more likely to recall words that are associated with
animated gestures. Give your speech some spark with inflections at the end
of the sentence. Exaggerate cue words. File away which sounds get the best
audience reaction. Babies become bored easily, especially with the same old
sound.
Ask questions. “Matthew want to nurse?” “Go bye-bye?” Talking in
questions will naturally amplify the sound at the end of the sentence as you
anticipate baby’s response.
Talk about what you are doing. As you go through your daily
maintenance tasks of dressing, bathing, and changing baby, narrate what
you are doing, much like a sportscaster describing a game: “Now daddy
takes off the diaper… now we put a new one on…” It’s normal to feel a bit
foolish initially, but you are not talking to a stone wall. There is a little
person with big ears processing every word she hears, storing it on an
endless memory record.

 Watch for go signs and stop signs. Wait for your baby to show
engagement cues (smiling, sustaining eye contact, and hands-out gesturing)
as if to say, “I like it, keep on talking.” Also, observe stop signs of
disengagement (vacant staring and turning eyes and head away from your
face) that say, “I’ve had enough of this chatter, let’s change gears.”
Give baby a turn. When asking a question, give baby time to answer. As
when you talk to another person, pause frequently to give baby a chance to
get in a little coo or squeak. Baby is likely to tune out a steady commentary.
Give baby feedback. If baby responds or when baby opens the
conversation with a smiling total body wiggle or a charming coo, imitate
her vocalization and replay it back. Mimicking her language adds value to it
and reinforces baby’s attempts to continue to get her point across.
Read to baby. Babies love nursery rhymes and poems with an up-anddown singsong cadence. Reading aloud can help you satisfy two persons
with the same story. Reading to a toddler while holding and sometimes
breastfeeding your new baby may hold both busy babies’ attention. There
will be days when your adult mind needs more than Mother Goose. Read
your favorite magazine or book aloud to baby, pepping up the story for a
baby’s ear.
Say it with music. Infant researchers believe that singing affects more of
the brain centers for language than do words without music. Even if you are
not an opera star you will at least have an admiring audience of one. Babies

 at all ages love familiar songs, either self-composed or borrowed. File away
baby’s top ten favorites and replay them frequently. A desire for parents to
repeat their entertainment is a forerunner of the incessant encores to come:
“Again… again, Mom [or Dad].”

OceanofPDF.com

 Two-Month Moves

Loosening hands and arms. The tight fist and body-clenched arms of the
first month loosen a bit during the second month, as if the reflexes that kept
baby’s muscles flexed tightly inward were overruled by the maturing brain’s
saying, “Loosen up and enjoy the world.” Baby’s tightly clenched fingers
unfold one by one to fan out into an open hand. When you place a rattle in
the palm of baby’s hand she will tightly grasp the toy and hold on to it
awhile. But don’t expect her to voluntarily reach for the rattle until next
month. Baby’s tightly clenched fist doesn’t eagerly release its treasured toy.
Stroking the back of a baby’s hand may persuade the tight fist to loosen its
grip.
First reaches. Baby’s first attempt to reach out and touch her world seems
totally aimless, but there is a bit of directionality in her punches. The short
little jabs in the general direction of a dangling toy score more misses than
hits. But practice makes perfect.

SAFETY TIP: Always stay with your baby while there is a mobile within
reach. Even though her waving hands seem aimless, baby’s finger, or worse,
her neck, can get caught in the dangling strings—which should be no
longer than 8 inches (20 centimeters).

 Baby begins to use her hands as tools in the second month.

The flexed-limb posture of the first month unfolds into a more relaxed
position in the second.

 The opening of eyes, voice, and hands during this second month is a
prelude to the social person to emerge during the next month.

OceanofPDF.com

 THE THIRD MONTH: BIG HANDS
“My three-month-old is so inviting,” exclaimed one mother. “Mine seems
so responsive,” said another. “I just love the way he waves his arms at me,”
added another mother. The third month is a fun period for both baby and
parents. Your baby is more alert, active, organized, and responsive.
Communication is better by the third month because both parents and baby
have become comfortable with each other’s cues. For these reasons, parents
often describe the third month as easier.

OceanofPDF.com

 Handy Hands

Those adorable little hands. How often you’ve played with them, prying
open tightly curled fingers and rubbing the soft palms over your face. Now
baby can play with his own hands. The beginning of hand play is the most
noteworthy feature of the third month. The previously clenched fists unfold,
and the hands remain half-open most of the time.
At this stage babies realize their hands are familiar and easily accessible
toys and, most important, part of themselves. Watch baby play with his
hands in front of his face. He may explore one hand with the other,
sometimes holding the whole fist, other times grabbing just one or two
fingers. Of course, these curious hands find their way to their familiar
target, the mouth, as baby delights in fist and finger sucking. These are
baby’s first tools, and now he begins to use them.
Reach out and grab someone. Watch out, hair and clothing, here come the
hands. Everything in grabbing distance is fair game. Babies love to pull
hair, grab glasses, grab daddy’s tie, and, a favorite, pull on mommy’s blouse
during nursing. These first grabs are powerful and not very polite. Once
baby gets hold of a fistful of hair, he doesn’t easily let go.

OPENING BABY’S HANDS

 The sooner babies open up their fingers, the sooner hand play begins. If
your baby is still tight fisted most of the time, here’s how to help. Gently
stroke the back of your baby’s hand to stimulate a reflex that helps babies
uncurl their fingers.

Toy of the month: A rubber or plastic ring or bracelet is the most
educational toy for the three-month-old. Watch as baby uses hand and
mouth to explore this simple toy.
The first reaches are not very defined either. When trying to reach and
grab a dangling toy, the arm movements are still short, boxerlike karate
chops, swiping and still often missing. Next month he’ll be more on target.
Holding power. Baby shows increasing power in holding on to toys. Now
instead of dropping a rattle immediately (as he did a few weeks ago), if you
place a rattle or ring into baby’s half-open hands, his fingers curl around it,

 and he holds on to and even studies it momentarily until he drops it because
he is tired or bored. Here are a few tips for choosing a rattle for your baby:
• The lighter the rattle and the easier it is to grip, the longer your baby will
hold it.
• Black and white or contrasting colors best hold baby’s attention.
• Babies prefer the feel of fabric to plastic rattles.
• A safe rattle that won’t cause choking has dimensions of no less than 1½
by 2 inches (4 by 5 centimeters) and no sharp or detachable parts.

A POSTURE TIP FOR STIMULATING HAND
PLAY
The position of baby’s body influences hand skills. The horizontal position
hinders hand play; the upright posture stimulates it. When lying flat on the
floor, baby will be more interested in freestyle cycling her hands and feet
and stretching them out from her body. Also, when baby is lying on her
back, the tonic neck reflex causes her head to turn to one side and her arm
to dart out on that side and her hands to stay closed. Instead of lying flat,
baby should be in a semiupright position in your arms or in an infant seat.
As you raise your baby to a semiupright position, notice that her head faces
forward and she looks toward a person or toy instead of to one side, and her
hands and arms stay open and inviting as if she is flirting with you or the
toy. Semiupright posture encourages the arms and hands to come together,
stimulating baby to play with her hands or with toys in front of her.

OceanofPDF.com

 Baby’s Visual Development Shines

Watch your baby’s eyes fix on an interesting floral pattern on the furniture
or wallpaper, or on the ever-favorite face. Notice how she now studies these
patterns longer, paying more attention to the detail instead of momentarily
scanning them, as in the previous month.
Tracking also matures. Observe your baby holding a visual fix, tracking
you, radarlike, as you walk by her and leave the room. She may cry as you
depart. Besides seeing better at this stage, babies see farther. When in the
quiet alert state, baby may gaze at ceiling fans, light and dark contrasting
ceiling beams, shadows on the wall, or plants on a ledge 15 to 20 feet (5 to
6 meters) away. Dark contrasting objects on light walls are the most
appealing.

Martha notes: I can keep Matthew’s attention by holding a black-and-white
six-faced cube about 2 feet in front of his eyes. He is riveted to the “moving
picture” for at least five minutes. He studies each side as it slowly rotates
and appears to discern the design difference on each side. Sometimes as
Matthew starts to fuss I pop out the cube and he stops fussing.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Three-Month Talk

Here’s when the real conversations begin. One reason you may find this
stage easier is that you are able to read your three-month-old. Watch your
baby’s facial and body language and try to guess what he is thinking by the
way he is acting. By reading baby’s mouth and facial language you can
often tell what emotion is soon to follow—is he going to cry or smile? By
quickly intervening with “Hi, baby [name]!” you can often divert a cry to a
smile. Seeing your happy face makes baby forget to fuss.
Communicative cries. Not only is baby’s body language easier to read but
his cries, too, are more revealing. Different cries reflect different needs—
and require different responses. The red-alert cries warrant an instant pickbaby-up. The fuss cries, however, may merit a longer-distance response
from another room. Notice the anticipatory pauses in your baby’s cries. He
is telling you he expects a response and is likely to protest if misread.
Vocalizing increases. Baby begins to “talk” more. Sounds become louder,
more vowel-like, and baby begins to draw out the vowel sounds longer:
“aaah,” “eeeh,” “eee,” “oooh.” Listen to those long strings of gurgles, goos,
growls, screeches, hollers, and sighs as baby experiments with the way
different tongue and mouth movements produce various sounds. Baby

 becomes amazed at how loudly he can screech—and the instant attention
his howls bring from his caregivers. Very early baby learns that his sounds
have shock value. But this loudspeaker may need some fine-tuning. Even at
this stage baby can adjust his tone to yours. If you greet baby’s ear-piercing
screeches with a whisper, he is likely to modulate his voice.

OceanofPDF.com

 Three-Month Moves

Since it is safest for babies to sleep on their backs, provide baby with some
daily tummy time and tummy talk to help strengthen his head-lifting
muscles. Place your baby tummy down on a padded surface on the floor.
Get down to his level. Lock in the eye-to-eye fix and begin talking. Baby
may raise his head 45 degrees or more and carry on a head-to-head visual
conversation. Instead of quickly plopping his head down as he did last
month, baby may hold his head up for a while and begin searching by
rotating his head from side to side.

Tummy talk. Your three-month-old will raise his head to make eye contact.

 Next game. Roll baby over on his back (most babies cannot yet roll over
themselves), hold both hands, and gradually pull baby to a sitting position.
Head and trunk lift together. Notice how much less now than last month
baby’s head lags behind his body. When held sitting, baby begins to hold his
previously wobbly head steady. The unsupported head may still tire and
quickly sag, but baby can now regain control of the droopy head and
resume holding it erect.
Stand and lean. Place your hands under baby’s arms and hold him standing
up. Last month he probably would have quickly crumpled down on his
wobbly legs. This month he may bear most of his weight for a few
moments, being supported only for balance. Now hold baby standing on
your hands and lean his chest against yours. Notice how much stronger
baby’s legs are this month.
Floor play. The up-down game begins. While most three-month-olds still
like to be held a lot, baby may like to be placed on his back on the floor to
enjoy freestyle play. The restrictive tonic neck reflex begins to diminish,
allowing baby’s stretched-out limbs to swing and cycle freely—called
“flapping his wings.” Naturally, his admiring audience cheers on his
performance from above. Better yet, get down with him so he’ll have
company.
Learning cause and effect. By three months baby discovers that he can
make things happen. A certain play action causes a certain reaction—called

 contingency play: “I swipe or kick the mobile—it moves.” “I shake the
rattle—it makes noise.”
As baby stores these cause-and-effect patterns of behavior in his
developing brain, he begins to make adjustments in these patterns to
improve their outcome. For example, by this time your baby has learned to
suck in such a way that he gets the milk most efficiently.

At three months, baby loses some of his wobbliness.

Martha notes: I notice that Matthew will latch on to my breast, give a few
sucks, and then wait for the milk-ejection reflex to start the milk flowing.
Only then does be start actively sucking and swallowing. He learned that
this was the easy way to get a feeding started.

 As baby becomes brighter and you become more observant, you both are
well on your way to growing together.

OceanofPDF.com

 A THREE-MONTH REVIEW
The first three months were the fitting-in period. You and your baby were
getting used to each other. Your regular sleep and feeding patterns were
organized into whatever routine worked for your family lifestyle and the
needs of your baby. By trial and error you developed a parenting style that
worked. And whatever career juggling needed to be done, you did.

SAFETY TIPS
By three months babies can scoot, wiggle, and roll. Never leave a baby
unattended on a changing table or in an infant seat on a countertop,
even for a second. Use the safety belt in the infant seat and place the
seat only on a carpeted floor.
Never leave baby unattended on a couch or any other piece of furniture
that she can roll off.
If baby spends time in your bed, put away the bed frame so the
mattress is directly on the floor. If baby rolls off, the short fall won’t
cause injury.

 Baby “flaps his wings.”
By the end of this first stage, baby has learned two fundamental lessons:
organization and trust. The fussy period of learning to fit into life outside
the womb has subsided (somewhat), and baby knows to whom he belongs.
Because his needs have been consistently responded to, he has developed
the most powerful infant development stimulator: trust. Based upon an
inner feeling of rightness, baby wastes less energy fussing and now diverts
this energy into developing skills—called baby competence. Because his
cues have been read, he values himself—the beginning of baby’s selfesteem.
You have graduated from novice to veteran at reading and responding to
your baby’s cues. You understand your baby’s language, primitive though it
may be. Perhaps life with a new baby has not been all rosy—it never is. But
at least by this stage you feel more comfortable in the two R’s of parenting:
reading your baby’s cues and responding in a way that works—at least most
of the time. It is normal for you to feel a bit shaky in these two skills. But if
you and your baby are still strangers, it’s time to take inventory of your

 parenting style. Reread Chapter 1. Is your nest too busy or cluttered with
nonbaby things? Consult parents who seem to be in harmony with their
babies. The earlier you and your baby begin growing together, the more
you’ll enjoy parenting during the next stage.

OceanofPDF.com

 THE FOURTH MONTH: BIG LOOKS
Now the real fun begins. The social, motor, and language skills that started
in the previous stage really blossom during the next three months, which we
call the interactive stage.

OceanofPDF.com

 The Master Skill—Binocular Vision

As you become a veteran baby watcher, you will notice that each stage has
one important skill that, once mastered, has a snowball effect in helping
baby better develop other skills. Binocular vision is the master skill of the
fourth month. Baby can now use both eyes together, giving him better depth
perception—the ability to judge accurately the distance between his eyes
and the things he sees. Imagine what baby had to put up with in the
previous month. After swiping at and missing targets for three months, baby
can finally get a consistent fix on a toy and grab it accurately.
When your baby develops binocular vision, here’s what he can do with
it. First, he tracks better. Watch him hold a visual fix on a toy or person
moving from side to side, a full 180 degrees. And, while tracking, his head
begins to catch up with his eyes so that both begin to move together.

“MY BABY’S NOT DOING THAT!”
There will be times when you feel, “My baby’s not doing that yet!” Don’t
worry. Nearly all babies go through the milestones we discuss, but they may
not always be “on time.” The month-to-month progression is more
important than the timing. Enjoy the sequence of development and don’t
focus on which month you are reading about.
Gazing begins. Gazing is more than seeing. It includes the sense of sight
plus the ability to move the head and eyes to keep a visual fix on a moving

 target. To see if your baby has mastered this skill, try the mutual gazing
game: When baby is in the quiet alert state capture his attention with a
visual fix. Then slowly tilt your head. Watch him tilt his. Rotate his body
and notice he turns his head to keep his favorite face in view. This is gazing
—a powerful visual skill that captures all who lock into baby’s eyes.

Martha notes: One of the most exciting things about our four-month-old’s
development is the way be reaches for me with his eyes. He expresses
thanks with his eyes. He turns his face and eyes toward me. They are so
expressive and adoring. He appears to be fully aware of me as his source of
love, nourishment, and well-being. He craves my presence and totally
enjoys our togetherness. It’s a love affair, full-blown. I recognize the love in
his eyes as one more emotion that he’s capable of expressing.

Favorite colors. Besides being able to see more clearly, babies widen their
color preference. While black and white were the favorites—and may
remain so for a while—your baby may begin to show an increasing interest
in colors. Babies prefer natural colors, like the reds and yellows of flowers,
and they still shun pastels. To encourage baby’s interest in color, continue to
contrast light and dark colors—alternating red and yellow stripes, for
example.

 Martha notes: When I’m reading books to the older children, Matthew is
very interested in looking at pages that are white or yellow and have large,
dark printed letters. He studies the letters intently and makes cooing noises.
It almost looks as though he’s trying to read what he’s looking at.

OceanofPDF.com

 Reach Out and Touch Someone—Accurately

The development of binocular vision is a prelude to an important hand-eye
skill—visually directed reaching, meaning the eyes lead the hands to grab
the desired object or person accurately. Watch your baby’s eyes follow his
hands as he reaches for a toy. It seems as if hands and eyes are finally
saying, “Let’s move together to improve our aim.”
Hand play. One of the most intriguing developments of this stage is
increased interest in hand play. Now that baby’s eyes have clear depth
perception, he may constantly play with his favorite and ever-present toys—
his hands. Sucking on fingers and fists now becomes a treasured pastime.
To relieve gum soreness, the beginning teether gnaws on his hands as
readily available teething objects.

Martha notes: Matthew’s favorite hand toy is a red rubber ring around 3 to
4 inches in diameter. We watch all the things he can do with this simple
inexpensive toy. He can grab it, squeeze it, bring it toward the midline in
front of his face, study it, grab it with the other hand, pull it with both
hands, release it with one hand while holding it with the other, transfer the
ring to the other hand again, and gum the ring as it inevitably finds its way

 to its final destination, his mouth. He seems amazed at his complete control
of this simple toy.

Gathering in. Most babies do not yet reach accurately with one hand.
Dangle an interesting toy in front of your baby’s face within reaching
distance. Rather than reach out with one hand with pinpoint accuracy, he
will most likely embrace the toy with both hands as if gathering it in toward
himself. Sometimes he’ll miss the toy entirely, and his embracing hands
will meet and continue on to the mouth. Now move the toy while he is
reaching for it, and he’ll probably miss it or turn away because you have
violated his rules of the reaching game. Hold the toy still. At this stage most
babies cannot yet make in-flight corrections to grab moving toys accurately.

SAFETY TIP: Beware of the reaching and grabbing tendencies of the
four-month-old. Keep baby beyond the reach of harmful objects, such as hot
beverages or sharp and fragile items. Never hold a hot beverage while
holding a baby, no matter how careful you plan to be. Babies have
lightning-fast reaches.

OceanofPDF.com

 Moves of the Month

Rolling over. When your baby rolls over depends more on baby’s
temperament than motor maturity. Very active babies, who enjoy stiffening
and back arching, are apt to roll over sooner. When lying on his tummy, the
active baby may practice push-ups and torque his head to one side,
surprising himself when he flips over. Mellow babies are content to lie and
gaze at visual delights. They flip around less and are likely not to roll over
until five to six months. Most babies at this stage roll from tummy to side or
from side to side, and they usually first roll from tummy to back before
rolling from back to tummy.

OceanofPDF.com

 Preteething Signs

Though you may not see those pearly whites for several more months, your
baby may now begin to feel them. Here are the usual signs that baby senses
teething discomfort:

Active babies are likely to roll over at an earlier age than mellow babies.
Keep a watchful eye on your little squirmer.

 • Drooling begins, accompanied by a pink raised rash around the lips and
chin (drool rash) and often looser bowel movements (drool stools) and a
similar rash around the anus. For the next few months expect a constant
case of wet mouth.
• Baby may massage his gums with his tongue and suck on his favorite
teethers—fingers and fist.
• Baby may chomp on your nipples or slide his sore gums over your nipple
to massage his gums. (See here for taming the nipple chomper and here
for teething tips.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Fun and Games with a Four-month-old

Grab-and-shake games. Offer baby rattles, 4-inch (10-centimeter) rings,
rag dolls, and small cuddly blankets.
Sit-and-hit games. Dangle an interesting toy or mobile within baby’s reach.
Watch him punch at it or try to gather it into his arms.
Kick toys. Pom-poms, a helium balloon on a short string, rattles, and
pleasant noisemakers can be attached to baby’s ankles for him to activate
with his kicking. He can also kick at mobiles or balls within range—all
under supervision, of course.
Finger games. Under supervision, give your baby piles of yarn to explore
with his fingers. Change the texture by using different kinds of yarn. Tying
6-inch strips of yarn loosely to baby’s fingers helps him realize that he can
move each of these interesting appendages separately. Later, lightweight
puppet figures can be attached to the dangling yarn.

FAVORITE FOUR-MONTH-BABY POSES

 Head up—chest up. Get out the cameras. The classic four-month-baby
pose is here: head up 90 degrees, upper body propped up resting on elbows
with chest completely off the floor, and eyes searching from side to side for
admiring photographers.

Sitting all propped up. Sit your baby on the floor, and he may
momentarily prop himself up with both arms before falling forward on his
nose or toppling sideways—be there to catch. At four months of age baby’s
lower back muscles are usually still too weak for baby to sit erect. To
determine if your baby is developing a sense of balance yet, hold him in the
sitting position by his hips and momentarily let go. Baby may thrust out his
hand to catch his fall as he leans sideways, indicating he is developing a
sense of balance.

 First stands. Hold baby in the standing position. By four months most
babies can bear all their weight for a few seconds before collapsing.
Continue holding his hands, and baby will often pull back up to a standing
position. Watch baby’s face showing delight in his newly found standing
skill; arms will also flap in delight. (Early standing does not cause bowed
legs, despite grandmother’s warnings. Babies only stand for a few seconds.
It’s lying in the curled-up fetal position all night that contributes to curled
legs.)

SAFETY TIP: Never leave a baby unattended with a piece of string or
yarn or a balloon. Keep string or yarn shorter than 8 inches (20
centimeters). Make a safe “yarn pile” by tying a dozen 6-inch strips
together at their centers.

Sofa sitting. Sit baby in the bend of a sofa pillow. He may spend five to ten
minutes looking around and enjoying this new posture and vantage point.

 Rolling games. Drape baby over a large beach ball and roll it slowly back
and forth. This helps him develop balance.
Peekaboo. This old favorite can be played by hiding behind a piece of cloth
or cardboard or popping up from behind a couch. Be sure to talk to your
baby and make exaggerated faces: “Where’s mommy? Here I am!”
Pull-up games. Hold a thin bar, such as a golf club or baton, in front of
baby’s chest. He will grab on, tighten his grip, and gradually pull himself
up.
Mirror play. Babies love to sit or be held in front of mirrors, enjoying their
own movements. (See “Magic Mirror,” here.)
Gitchee-gitchee-goo. Tickling games that use tactile and vocal gestures get
you both laughing.

OceanofPDF.com

 LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT, FOUR TO SIX
MONTHS
Baby’s language in the early months was hard to decode. Now baby
becomes a better communicator. During this stage baby learns that language
is fun, and she also learns how to use sound and body language to affect
caregivers.

OceanofPDF.com

 New Sounds

Watch baby’s wide-open mouth. Here comes the “ah,” then the mouth circle
closes a bit, and “ah” changes to an “oh.” Once baby realizes her soundchanging power is affected by simply altering the contour of her mouth, she
doesn’t want to quit. Baby stretches out these sounds into long strings of
“ah-oh-ah-oh” and long, drawn-out vowels, “eeeeeee,” especially during
exciting play or in anticipation of the pleasurable event of feeding. Notice
baby’s short catchup breaths between these long strings of sounds.
Cue sounds. Try to associate certain sounds with specific needs. If “ah-ahah” and “eeeeeee” means “I want to feed,” listen and respond. Baby will
soon learn the sound value of various vocalizations and be more motivated
to keep talking.
Loud sounds. Not only does baby realize she can make different sounds
and longer sounds, now she can make louder sounds by pushing more air
through her voice box. Watch baby take a deep breath, and out come the
hollers. Soon baby learns which sounds have shock value. Attention-getting
yells and protests seem to trigger a more rapid response from listeners.
Baby is not being deliberately annoying. She is just trying on new sounds to
see which one she likes best and is testing which ones shake up her

 audience. She will soon learn that pleasant sounds get a pleasant listening
response. You can help baby modulate her hollers by answering a yell with
a whisper. Baby will get the message.
Laughing sounds. When excited during play, baby pushes air through those
quivering little vocal cords so fast that laughter is full of squeals. Want baby
to laugh more? Playful tickles, gitchee-gitchee-goos, and silly sounds are
likely to invoke laughter. You are your baby’s favorite comedian. You’re
playing to an audience of one, and you can count on lots of laughs.
Remember, as silly as baby’s silly sounds sound to you, your silly sounds
sound just as silly to baby. Laugh together.
Raspberries. First on the top-ten baby sounds between four and six months
is a variety of bubble-blowing sputters affectionately known as raspberries.
These delightful baby sounds occur when baby blows air through the salivafilled mouth against pursed lips. As baby approaches teething time, expect
many of the sounds to take on a wet and sputtering quality.
First babbles. Sometime around six months babies start to make the
earliest of true language sounds—babbling, the sounds produced when baby
combines a vowel sound with a consonant and repeats it over and over (“baba-ba-ba”). Babbling will be most noticeable in the next stage of language
development, from six to nine months.

OceanofPDF.com

 Help Your Baby to Be a Good Communicator

Enjoying language not only helps baby learn to communicate better, it also
helps you to communicate better with your baby. Try these early language
lessons.
Familiar openers. Open the dialogue with familiar words, such as your
baby’s name, and repeat them frequently with a musical quality in your
voice. By four months, most babies respond consistently to their names. At
this age baby will also notice words that obviously refer only to him, such
as “cutie” or “sweetie.” Baby recognizes the unique tone of voice that you
reserve for him. If you want to know how important baby’s name is to him,
try this test: Talk to your baby from behind without using his name; then
speak the same sentence beginning with his name. Baby will turn toward
the speaker more consistently if addressed by name.

PRECIOUS RECORDINGS
Want to have some fun with precious baby sounds? Record baby’s sounds at
each stage of development. When listening to these recordings, even in the
early months you will be able to pick out certain repetitive patterns, such as
the comforting sounds of “ah” or the excitement of “eeeeee!” You will
usually get the best of baby’s vocalizations when he first wakes up. These
delightful wake-up sounds announce to the world that today’s play is about
to begin. Audio capture the sounds and video capture the body language
while you can, as these dialects and infant mannerisms pass all too quickly.

 Attention holders. Babies tune in to conversations and can tune them out
as well. Use opening words such as “hi” and “hello” to engage baby’s
attention and hold it through the conversation. When you notice that your
baby’s gaze begins to wander, repeat these opening cue words to reengage
baby.
Matching. Engage your baby in a face-to-face dialogue. Start with a very
open-mouthed, wide-eyed, expressive “ah.” Wait for your baby to open his
mouth and perhaps mimic the sound. Then slowly circle your lips down into
the “oh” sound and see if baby matches the sound. The ability to match your
sounds indicates that speech is an intelligent activity that your baby
recognizes and voluntarily attempts to reproduce.
Labeling. Give names to familiar toys, persons, or household pets. Start
with one-syllable words such as “mom,” “dad,” “ball,” “cat.” When your
baby’s gaze indicates that he is interested in the cat, teach him the name for
it. First use an opening phrase—“Hi, baby!”—to engage baby’s attention.
Once baby turns to you and locks in on your gaze, slowly turn your gaze
toward the cat, allowing baby to follow your eyes. When both of you are
looking at the cat, point and exclaim, “Cat!” in a very excited tone. During
this stage of development baby may associate the label “cat” with the whole
sequence of events—your steering his gaze toward the cat, your pointing at
the cat, and your saying the word “cat.” He probably will not turn toward
the cat if you give him only the label without the accompanying directing
gestures. In the next development stage, from six to nine months, baby may

 turn and point toward the cat as it walks by with no cues other than your
saying the word “cat.”
Expansion of baby-initiated language. Expansion carries labeling one
step further. When baby initiates interest in a familiar object, gazing at the
cat walking by, for example, expand on his interest by exclaiming, “There’s
cat!” Expansion capitalizes on a well-known principle of education:
Learning that is initiated by the baby is more likely to be remembered.
Follow through on other baby-initiated cues. When baby sneezes, quickly
exclaim, “Bless you!” After many repetitions of this response, baby will
turn toward you after a sneeze, anticipating your “Bless you.” Expansion
and following through reinforce baby’s emerging sense of competency,
making him feel that his primitive language has value. Therefore, he has
value.
Echoing. Another way to capitalize on baby-initiated language is to echo
the sound back to baby. Mimicking the sounds that baby produces further
reinforces that you hear what he says and are interested in his sounds—
therefore you are interested in him.
Taking turns. Remember that dialogue has a rhythm of listening and
responding. Try to develop a rhythm in your conversation with your baby.
Encouraging him to listen is an important part of language development.
Taking turns in conversation fosters attentive stillness, an important quality
in learning language and the state in which baby is most receptive to

 learning how to communicate. Taking an active part in helping your baby
enjoy language not only helps baby to learn to communicate better, it also
helps you communicate with your baby. Learning about your baby helps
you learn from your baby.
Mutual gazing. Watch your baby orient his head toward yours, smile,
wiggle, vocalize, and with these cues invite a social exchange. Baby is now
able to initiate, maintain, or stop a social interaction by simply moving his
head.
Mutual gazing is a potent interpersonal magnet. Adults seldom hold a
mutual gaze for more than a few seconds, except perhaps when falling in
love. Parents and babies, however, can remain interlocked in a mutual gaze
for much longer. I have seen babies gaze at their caregivers, trancelike, for
up to thirty seconds. Babies nearly always outlast their caregivers at the
staring game, holding their eyes focused and motionless much longer than
the adult.

OceanofPDF.com

 Social Signals

The ability to engage and disengage a caregiver or to direct caregivers
toward meeting his needs is one of the most fascinating social interactions
of the four-to-six-month stage. Now baby can tell you what he needs, not
with words but with body language that requires careful listening.

Martha notes: When Matthew wants to nurse he has a definite signal of
nuzzling, and when that signal isn’t picked up he goes into a vocalization
that is peculiar to wanting to nurse: a string of breathy vowel sounds—“aa-a-a-a”—during short bursts of inhaling and exhaling, all the while
orienting toward my breast.
One day Matthew was fussing a bit and squirming in my arms, and none
of my comforting measures worked. He would look over toward the rocking
chair and squirm his body in that direction. It took me a while to
understand what he wanted. When I finally got around to giving him the
rocking chair it was an instant success.

Social Gesturing Begins

 Gesturing is another exciting body-language behavior that begins during
this stage. At this point baby’s gesturing cues may be very subtle, such as
nodding his head toward a desired object or turning his body toward the bed
when you approach it. In a later stage of development baby will gesture
better with his hands and arms.
The better you listen and respond, the better baby learns to “talk.” The
feeling “I’m understood” is a powerful builder of baby’s self-esteem.

But What About Spoiling?

“Is baby manipulating me?” you may ask. Once upon a time there was a
school of misguided baby-care “experts” who taught vulnerable new
parents that responding so quickly to baby’s needs would spoil their babies,
that babies would be clingy, dependent, and manipulative. That school is
now closed. Volumes of research have disproved the spoiling theory.
Responsive parenting turns out secure, independent, less whiny children.
Put the fear of spoiling out of your mind.

OceanofPDF.com

 THE FIFTH MONTH: BIG REACHES
Reaching one-handed is an exciting developmental accomplishment at this
stage. To appreciate the serial development of baby’s ability to reach, let’s
review the sequence of reaching from birth to five months. Even in the first
couple of months a finger may momentarily flit or dart out in the direction
of the object of interest. This subtle, almost imperceptible gesture is the
beginning of reaching.
Around three months of age baby discovers that her hands are easily
reachable objects, and, even more amazing, they are a part of herself. Baby
begins pointing, swiping, and batting at close objects. Her misses usually
outnumber the direct hits. There is very little directionality in the early
swiping movements. From three to four months the beginning of midline
play (using the hands in front of the body) is another important milestone in
the development of reaching. One hand serves as a target for the other. The
development of binocular vision enables baby to begin gathering-in motions
in the fourth month, and baby develops some direction to his reaching.

OceanofPDF.com

 Reach Out and Touch Someone—With One Hand

Around the fifth month, the two-handed embracing type of reaching
progresses into an accurate one-handed reach. In baby’s first touch-grasp
motions, she uses her whole hand in a mittenlike grasp to trap the object
between all of her fingers and the palm of her hand. Also around the fifth
month, baby reaches out with one hand for objects that are nearly an arm’s
length away. Watch your baby grasp the intended toy precisely in her hand,
examine it, and then transfer it to the other hand or to her mouth.

Developing babies enjoy floor play with mom or dad.

 Martha notes: Matthew is now more of an interactive person. He will take
the toy I give him and is able to appreciate and use the toy.
When Matthew gets tired during a game it is often because I have been
handing him the same toy over and over. If I start handing him different
toys, then his interest in the game is renewed.
When Matthew is playing with an object he does primarily three things
with it. He explores it with his hands, he brings it to his mouth to explore it,
and he looks at it with his eyes. As he draws the toy closer to his face in
order to bring it to his mouth, his eyes try to stay on the object, but when it’s
right in front of his face it has probably gone out of focus, so in order to see
the toy again he will stretch his arms out to bring the object to a
comfortable seeing distance from his face. This is why Matthew seems to be
telescoping the toy back and forth in front of his face.

OceanofPDF.com

 Maintain Voice Contact

Baby’s developing ability to associate the voice with the person adds a new
dimension to keeping in touch with your baby. Use this ability of voice
recognition and localization to calm your baby. When your baby is fussing
in the other room, call out, “Mama’s coming.” Baby will often quiet down
and will be waving his arms and kicking his legs in anticipation when you
enter the room.
Not until around a year of age can you expect baby to keep an image of
you in his mind when he can’t see you. Voice contact (“Mama’s here”) will
help lessen baby’s worry, but expect baby to fuss during your disappearing
acts for many months.

OceanofPDF.com

 Favorite Five-Month Activities

Playing airplane. Place your five-month-old on his tummy and notice how
he flaps his arms, pedals his legs, rocks on his tummy, arches his neck for
the takeoff, and plays airplane.
Pushing off. Here’s how you help him “take off.” Push your hand against
the soles of his feet while he is on his runway and watch him propel himself
forward by pushing off on your hand. Digging in and pushing off is why
you may discover that your baby has squirmed all the way across the crib.
Pushing up. Last month baby was content to lift his head and chest up and
rest on his elbows. Now he can do a complete push-up, lifting his chest off
the floor with his arms extended as props.

 The “airplane” pose.

Playing with the feet. Reclining in your lap, baby may now be able to
crane his neck forward to grab and play with his flying feet.
Pulling to sit and stand. Now pull your baby up by the hands to a sitting
position and notice how he assists you by lifting his head forward and
flexing his elbows, making it easy to pull him to sitting and standing
positions.
First sitting. A favorite five-month pose is baby sitting without support,
leaning forward, propped up on both outstretched arms. In the previous
stage he might have immediately toppled over, but now he can spend a few
minutes enjoying these first sits and may even let go with one arm and start
playing with his toes or reaching for a toy while maintaining his balance
with the other arm. The ability to sit up with support gets baby his first high
chair, and the five-month-old may be ready to join the family table.

 By five months, baby can do a complete push-up.

Rolling over. The push-up position allows baby to roll easily from tummy
to back. Watch your baby’s rolling-over sequence: As baby pushes himself
up, he pushes higher with one arm and then leans his head and shoulders
backward and torques like a flywheel, increasing his twisting momentum.
Besides torquing himself all the way over from the complete push-up
position, baby discovers the following shortcut to rolling over: Place a
favorite toy alongside baby. He’ll notice the toy and try to roll toward it. He
tucks one elbow underneath him and pushes himself over with the other
arm, letting the elbow on the tucked-in arm act as a sort of roll bar. Most
babies roll from tummy to back before rolling from back to tummy because
they can muster up more leverage with their arms and roll better on their
rounded abdomen.

 Standing better. Previously, baby could stand only if you supported his
trunk under his arms. Now he can bear almost all of his weight himself, his
outstretched hands holding on to you only for balance.

OceanofPDF.com

 Playing with a Five-month-old

Here are some good ways for you and baby to enjoy his expanding skills.
Grab and pull. Any part of your body is fair game for reaching. As baby
grabs a fistful of hair, playfully yell “Ouch,” and he will squeal with delight
at the achievement. Baby can now reach for and hold on to the bottle or the
breast during feeding.

Martha notes: Matthew is now grabbing on to different parts of my face,
such as my nose, chin, and lips. He also grabs my face with a hand on
either side of my chin and pulls my chin toward his face, grabs on to my
chin with his mouth, and then begins to suck on my chin. He really enjoys
these reach and suck patterns.

Block play. There is no better toy than the simple block. Try these starter
blocks:

 • small enough (1½ inch/4-centimeter sides) to be easily picked up with
one hand
• contrasting colors: red, yellow, blue
• wooden blocks
Set your baby in a high chair, propping him up with pillows until he’s old
enough to sit steadily in the chair unsupported. Place the starter blocks on
the tray or table in front of baby and observe the amazing play skills of the
five-month-old. Watch your baby grab a block in a mittenlike grasp, fondle
it, study it, transfer it from hand to hand or from hand to lips. Soon he will
learn to bang the blocks, drop them, and stack them. Watch your baby turn
the block over and over from hand to hand.

TOY TIPS FOR THE FIVE-MONTH-OLD
squeeze toys and squeak toys
toys of different shapes and textures that baby can really sink his hands
into, such as several short pieces of yarn tied together at the center
blocks—a favorite at any age
grab-and-transfer toys such as rings

SAFETY TIP: Toys such as blocks and balls should have a diameter of at
least 1½ inches (4 centimeters) so that baby can’t swallow them.
Start with one block and let your baby get used to it. Then place a
second block before him and notice how he holds one block with one hand
and grabs the second block with the other. Now he looks at both hands full

 of blocks and wonders what to do. Probably he’ll start banging them
together. Within a month or two he will learn to put one block down to grab
another. Manipulating blocks is a valuable play and learning exercise for
baby. He has complete control of this toy, and it helps encourage thumband-forefinger grasping that will develop over the next few months.
Table fun. Sit baby on your lap at the dinner table and allow him to play
with paper or cloth napkins and spoons.

SAFETY TIP: At the table be careful to keep dangerous utensils, such as
knives and forks, and hot food and beverages far away from baby. If baby
does accidentally grab a sharp utensil, avoid trying to grab it from his
hand, which may cause baby to hold on more tightly and result in a cut.
Instead, squeeze the back of his hand and his wrist. This prevents baby from
clutching the knife tightly and waving it around. With the other hand slowly
pry the fingers off the knife until it falls out of his clenched fist.

Cushion play. Beginning around five months we have had the most fun
playing with homemade cylindrical and wedge-shaped cushions. You can
buy leftover pieces of foam at an upholstery shop. If you are really hip on
being an infant stimulator, cover the foam with patterned material, such as
black-and-white stripes.

 Cylindrical shapes (called bolsters), 7 to 10 inches (18 to 25
centimeters) in diameter and approximately 2 feet (60 centimeters) long,
make practical rolling cushions for baby to practice trunk, head, and
reaching exercises. For example, you can hold your baby by the feet and
play wheelbarrow or drape your baby over the cylindrical cushion and
notice how he enjoys the mobility that these floor cushions allow. He may
push himself forward by digging his toes into the carpet and learning to
rock himself back and forth on the cushion using his own foot power.
Wedge-shaped cushions can support baby’s chest, allowing him to
dangle his head over the edge of the wedge and play with toys within his
grasp. Use a wedge 4 to 6 inches (10 to 15 centimeters) high for this age.

Martha notes: Matthew is still very frustrated when he is on his tummy and
realizes that he could make tracks if he could only get his tummy off the
ground. He flaps his arms and kicks his legs, but it gets him nowhere. This
is one reason that I think he likes his foam wedges and rolls, because these
at least get his tummy off the ground and give him the sensation of moving
forward.

 Cylindrical or wedge-shape cushions are great props for floor play.

OceanofPDF.com

 THE SIXTH MONTH: SITTING BIG
From five to six months is a transition stage in baby’s development. Before
this period, baby is stuck. He can’t move around or sit and play by himself.
In the next stage, six to nine months, he becomes able to do both. In the
sixth month, then, baby begins learning to sit and move about, and it is
these major milestones that we focus on in the next few pages.

OceanofPDF.com

 The Sitting Sequence

Learning to sit is the master skill of the sixth month. The sequence of
learning to sit from four to six months is one of the most fascinating steps in
baby’s development. In the first few months (Figure A, here) baby seems to
have little strength in his lower back muscles. When put in the sitting
position he flops forward on his nose. Around three to four months baby
shows some lower-back-muscle strength by easing forward, but again goes
flop. Between four and five months (Figure B, here) baby still slumps or
topples sideways but begins using his outstretched arms as forward and
sideways props. Between five and six months baby may let go. His back
muscles are now strong enough to support sitting erect, but usually still with
the hands as props. Now sitting is just a matter of learning balance.
Watch how your clever beginning sitter learns balance. When baby starts
to let go, first with one hand, then the other, he holds his straight back
forward at a forty-five-degree angle. As balance and back-muscle strength
improve, he sits erect at 90 degrees to the floor (Figure C, here). The novice
sitter teeters and wobbles on his rounded bottom while thrusting out his
arms like sideways balance beams.
Once he masters sitting balanced, baby no longer needs his head and
arms for balance props but can use them for communication and play. When
the skillful sitter begins turning his head to follow you and lifting his arms

 to gesture or to play, usually between six and seven months, baby is truly
sitting alone.

Helping the Beginning Sitter

Because baby does not yet have the strength to right himself from a topple,
backward and sideways falls are the price to pay for a good sit. Your baby
will learn to sit well if you leave him alone. But if you help your baby enjoy
the early sitting experiences, he will realize the interesting views he has in
this position and will better enjoy developing his skill. Here’s how to help:

 • Cushion the inevitable backward and sideways falls by surrounding baby
with pillows. There’s nothing like a fall on a hard surface to scare baby
and dampen his motivation to sit. Let baby fall onto the pillows to
exercise his sense of balance.
• To steady the wobbly beginning sitter, place baby in a homemade
horseshoe-shaped piece of foam rubber. (We used a Nurse Mate pillow
purchased as a breastfeeding aid for the early months—a good example
of extending the usefulness of an item!)
• For the summer sitter, hollow out an area in the sand. (Cover the sand
with a blanket if you don’t want sand in the eyes, mouth, and diaper.)
• When enjoying floor play together, sit baby between your outstretched
legs so he can use them as grab rails.
• Use toy interactions to help baby learn balance. When enticed to use his
hands to reach for a toy, the sitting baby “forgets” to use his hands as
balance props and learns to rely solely on his trunk muscles for balance.
• If baby continues to rest on his hands as forward props, place blocks in
front of him to motivate him to lift his hands off the floor by grabbing the
blocks.
• To encourage hand play, dangle a favorite toy, eye level, in front of baby.
Then move the toy to each side, encouraging baby to move his arms
toward the toy while sitting.

 Figure A.

Figure B.

Figure C.

 During these balance-training exercises, notice how baby uses his arms
to maintain balance. At first, baby reaches with one hand toward a toy while
thrusting out the other for balance. As balance improves, watch baby reach
for a toy to one side with both hands and reach behind himself without
tumbling over.

The sitting baby becomes more adept at playing alone.

A Relief for Parents

When baby can sit alone better, parents can sit alone longer. Sitting
skillfully alone and playing is a major relief milestone for parents. Once he
masters sitting, a six-month-old becomes less of a lap baby and carried baby
and more of a high-chair and floor baby.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Pushing Up and Moving Around

The sixth month is literally a turning point for baby. Each month baby has
been raising more of her torso off the floor. Now she can push her tummy
off the ground almost as far as her belly button. Watch what baby can do
from the push-up position. She can let go with her hands, raise her feet, and
rock on her belly—playing teeter-totter. Or she can keep her hands and feet
touching the ground and pivot around in a semicircle in pursuit of a favorite
toy. As a finale, the rocker can pivot on her weighty abdomen by the sheer
momentum of her wiggling legs and waving arms—playing airplane.
Next comes pivoting. Using her arms to steer, baby tries to turn a circle
by pivoting on her abdomen, which still seems stuck to the floor. While
baby is in the middle of pivot practice, place a favorite toy to one side just
beyond her reach. Watch baby pivot around to get nearer the toy. If she is
really in a hurry, she may turn a quick flip and roll toward the toy.
Here’s how you can participate in baby’s developing skills.
Chest rest. While a baby likes to play on his tummy, frequent push-ups can
tire the young athlete. Also, he may be frustrated by having to use his arms
and hands for support and not for play. Place a 3-inch foam-rubber wedge
under baby’s chest. This prop frees his hands to play with toys in front of

 him more comfortably and for longer periods without getting tired. He can
also roll off onto the carpet without hurting himself.

PLAYPENS: DON’T FENCE ME IN
Babies don’t learn much in pens. In the sit-and-play stage some babies may
temporarily enjoy their own little “playroom” with lots of stuff within easy
grabbing distance. But in later months, as the beginning explorer peers
through the net at the whole big room out there, he is likely to protest
confinement.
Pens do have their place. A portable pen and a mobile baby may, of
necessity, belong together at your place of work. Plopping baby in a pen
while you answer the phone or remove dinner from the oven is often a
safety saver for the busy parent. But keep the sentence short; put pen and
baby within easy relating distance while finishing your work, making sure
to frequently acknowledge the inmate.
If you need baby to be in the pen, keep it safe. Beginning sitters and
crawlers flop around a lot on the pen floor. Keep hard toys out. Soft, cuddly
toys make good penmates and are safer to fall against. (See here for a
checklist of playpen safety.)
As baby progresses from the sit-and-play stage to the move-and-explore
stage, pack up the pen and put it in its rightful place (perhaps even next to
the crib) at your next garage sale and babyproof the whole house.
First scoots. Place an enticing toy just beyond the floor-baby’s reach.
Watch baby dig in with toes and fingers and squirm, scoot, or combat crawl
toward his target. Some babies can move a foot or two at this stage as they
practice their first crawls.

Martha notes: Matthew now fusses less when the toy rolls beyond his reach
when he is lying on his tummy. He knows he can propel himself forward and

 therefore does not start crying for help because he knows he doesn’t need it.
He can simply scoot himself forward enough on his tummy to grab the toy.
So he is combining both awareness of distance and the awareness of his
body’s ability to close that distance. He therefore has no need to fuss.

OceanofPDF.com

 RAISING HEALTHY TEETH
Going are those adorable toothless grins. Coming is a novel smile each
month. Around five to six months, parents become interested in teething.
Here are the most common concerns parents have about caring for those
precious pearly whites.
When should we expect our baby’s teeth to appear?
When teeth first appear is as variable as the timing of baby’s first steps.
Most babies begin to feel teething pain around four months. Expect the first
sharp nubbin around six months; some babies teethe earlier, some later. And
heredity plays a part. If you check your own baby book, if grandmother was
a tooth-record keeper, your baby’s teething schedule may resemble yours.
Actually, babies are born with a full set of twenty primary teeth. They
are just buried in the gums, waiting in line for their time to sprout. Teeth
push through in upper and lower pairs, usually the lower appear before their
upper gum mates, and girls teethe slightly earlier than boys. The “rule of
fours” is how teeth usually appear. Beginning around six months expect
four new teeth every four months until complete, usually by two and a half
years. Teeth come through gums at unusual angles. Some come out straight,
others first appear crooked but straighten as they twist their way through.

 Don’t fret about spaces. It’s easier to clean between spaced teeth, and the
spacing of the baby teeth does not necessarily reflect how the permanent
teeth will appear.
What are the symptoms of teething?
As you wonder why your sleeping angel turns night waker, you hear the
telltale ping against the spoon or feel the cutting edge. Actually babies don’t
“cut teeth,” nor do teeth “erupt.” Teeth slowly slide and twist their way
through gum tissue. But sharp teeth pushing through sensitive gums do hurt,
and babies protest. Here are the nuisances to expect and suggestions to
comfort the budding teether.
Drooling. During teething time expect the saliva faucet to be on. In
addition, listen for the young announcer’s voice to sputter. Many of the
following aggravations stem from this excessive drool.
Drool rash. Sensitive skin and excessive saliva don’t sit well together,
especially when the skin is rubbing against a drool-soaked bed sheet.
Expect a red, raised, irritating rash around lips and chin. Gently wipe excess
drool off the skin with lukewarm water and pat (don’t rub) dry. Lubricate
with a mild emollient such as lanolin ointment or cold-pressed coconut,
almond, or safflower oil.
Drool cough. Besides drooling out the mouth, the excess saliva escapes
through the back door, dripping down baby’s throat, causing gagging and an

 occassional but harmless cough.
Drool diarrhea. Not only does the face react to excess saliva, but so does
the bottom. Expect loose stools and a mild diaper rash during peak teething
time. This temporary nuisance self-clears as each teething burst subsides.
Fever and irritability. The inflammation caused by hard teeth pushing
through soft tissue may produce a low fever (101°F/38.3°C) and the
disposition of someone who hurts. Give baby acetaminophen or ibuprofen
(see here for appropriate dosage) when the pain becomes extreme.

SEARS HOME REMEDY FOR TEETHING PAIN
Iry this time-tested teether: let baby grow on a frozen banana. Cold is the
safest pain reliever.
Biting. The budding teether longs for something or some person to gnaw
on. Teeth marks on crib rails and clicking gums on silver spoons are telltale
signs of sore gums needing relief. Expect these hard gums to clench your
knuckles, arm, finger, and sometimes the breast that feeds baby (for
survival tips, see discussion of biting and breastfeeding, here). Offer
something cool and hard. Gum-soothing favorites are a cool spoon, healthy
Popsicle, frozen bagel, or teething ring.
Night waking. Growing teeth don’t rest at night; neither do teething babies
and their parents. A previously steady sleeper may frequently awaken
during peak teething times and may have difficulty resettling into the

 preteething sleep schedule. Judicious use of acetaminophen or ibuprofen
can provide some much-needed sleep.

6–12 months: incisors

12–18 months: first molars

 18–24 months: canine teeth

24–30 months: two-year molars

Refusing to feed. This is the most variable of all teething concerns. Some
teethers never miss a meal, some avid breastfeeders accelerate their nursing
for comfort, but a few may pass up even their most trusted human pacifier.
Offer cool, mushy foods—for example, applesauce and frozen fruit-juice
slush. Put these on a cool spoon to make a real hit.
How can I tell if my baby is teething?
Besides the trademark drool and other related signs, try the gum-massage
test. (Babies are more likely to accept a finger probing into their mouth than

 to allow a look.) Run your finger along the front edges of the gums, and you
will feel swollen ridges of preteething gums.
It is sometimes difficult to tell if a baby is teething because the amount
of teething discomfort varies considerably among babies. Some are steady,
once-a-month teethers; many teethe in bursts and pauses, where suddenly
baby has a miserable week and you feel four swollen ridges along the gum
line. Expect the most discomfort when many teeth come through at once.
Some babies experience exquisite pain and swelling during molar teething.
If allowed to look, you may notice a mound of swollen tissue around a
budding tooth. Don’t be alarmed if you notice a mushy blue blister above an
erupting tooth. This is actually a collection of blood beneath the superficial
layer of gum tissue. These painful swellings are best treated by cool
compresses (for example, Popsicles), which soothe the swelling.
I’ve taken our baby to the doctor several times for what turned out to be
false alarms. I thought he had a cold, or an ear infection, but it turned
out to be teething. How can I tell?
Here are some general ways to tell the difference between teething and an
illness such as an ear infection:

 • Ear infections are usually accompanied by cold and cough symptoms
with thick nasal congestion and drainage. Fussing and ear pulling without
cold symptoms are usually just teething.
• Excess saliva related to teething may cause noisy breathing but usually
not a runny nose. A cold or ear infection is typically accompanied by
thick yellow nasal discharge.
• Teething rarely causes a fever higher than 101°F (38.3°C). Severe ear
infections usually do.
• Babies pull at their ears during teething, probably because of referred
pain from the teeth to the ears. Ear pulling in babies is usually an
unreliable sign.
• Babies don’t act progressively sicker with teething. As a general rule,
when in doubt, check it out with the doctor.

When should we first take our baby to a dentist?
Sometime between baby’s first tooth and third birthday, schedule baby’s
first dental checkup. Better early than late. Getting your baby used to
painless dental checkups long before the first cavity drilling makes it easier
on baby, parents, and dentists. Ask to hold your child during any dental
procedures or at least to be present during the exam. Some pediatric dentists
ask parents to assist by sitting knee to knee (see the illustration here) with
the child’s head resting on the dentist’s lap. Well-teeth checkups, like wellbaby exams with your pediatrician, give the dentist an opportunity to teach
you some preventive care, such as proper teeth brushing, avoiding night
feedings, and correct fluoride dosage.

 A gauze-wrapped finger makes a good first “toothbrush.”

When should I start brushing baby’s teeth?
Dentists now recommend cleaning gums with gauze to remove plaque
before teeth first appear, usually six to seven months. Try the following
brushing tactics.
First toothbrushing. The best chances for a cooperative baby and clean
teeth is to use your moistened gauze-wrapped fingertip as a toothbrush.
Gauze also works well in the older baby who refuses to let you invade his
mouth with a toothbrush. A toothbrush isn’t necessary until molars come in.
Toothbrushing positions. Placing baby on your lap with his head facing
you is a good position for a wide-open-mouth entry. Sitting or standing

 behind baby with him looking up also gives you a good view. An older baby
can be held cradled in your arms to one side. Or try the two-person knee-toknee position as shown in the illustration above or sit on the floor with
baby’s head between your legs.

The two-person toothbrushing position.

Toothbrushing and toddlers. Once baby gets a mouth full of teeth,
especially molars, a toothbrush works better than a mommy-made, gauzeon-finger brush to get in the crevices between teeth. Don’t forget to take a
few gentle swipes over the surface of the tongue, which harbors the same
bacteria as the gums. Some toddlers will understandably protest teeth
brushing. Don’t force the issue at first. Stand in front of a floor-length

 mirror together and let baby watch you brush your teeth as she holds and
mouths her own toothbrush. Show excitement, capitalizing on “Brush off
the sugar bugs, just like mommy and daddy.” Emphasize the “eeeee” and
“ahhhh” sounds as you brush the front and back of your own teeth.
Hopefully she will begin to mimic your antics and become an adequate
brusher on her own. You can even take turns brushing each other’s teeth,
letting your toddler have fun brushing your teeth, then taking a quick turn
on her teeth to make sure all the “sugar bugs” are gone. Children mostly
protest brushing their back teeth for fear of choking, so begin with the front
teeth and ease toward the molars.
Which toothpaste? Toothpaste isn’t necessary for starter brushing, but if
desired, a half-pea-sized dab will do. Dentists caution against letting baby
swallow too much fluoride-containing toothpaste. (See the question about
fluoride here.) Toddlers enjoy the ritual of putting on the toothpaste, but
then they object to the sharp taste. Use a mild-flavored children’s paste if
necessary. We suggest using a natural brand, free of artificial colors and
sweeteners, which can be found in health food stores. Many commercial
children’s toothpastes are filled with so much junk that they may do more
harm than good.
Which toothbrush? Choose a short brush with soft bristles on a small
head. Store a spare brush. They get lost, get dirty, and wear out quickly.
Change brushes when the bristles get bent.

 Why all the fuss about first teeth? Baby will lose all of them anyway.
It’s important to care for the baby teeth. These primary teeth hold the right
spaces for the secondary, or permanent, teeth. Healthy first teeth also
contribute to proper alignment of the jawbones and eventual bite. And don’t
discount the healthy vanity of a smiling preschooler. No one likes to show
off a row of rotten teeth.
Besides brushing, what else can we do to help our baby’s teeth?
Here are suggestions for your own home-dental program for cavity-free
kids.
Breastfeed. Pediatric dentists who study the effects of breastfeeding on oral
development believe that one of the most beneficial contributors to healthy
teeth and healthy jaw alignment is a breast in the mouth for as long as
mother and baby are willing and able. Apparently the unique sucking action
of breastfeeding helps prevent malocclusion. A saying we have heard in
dental circles goes, “Your infant’s breastfeeding efforts will be later
reflected in his face.”
Avoid sticky stuff. Keep your baby off a steady diet of highly sugared junk
foods, especially tacky lollipops, caramel, and hard candy that stick and
lodge between teeth and have a long-enough contact time for germs and
enamel to get well acquainted. Tooth decay begins with the formation of
plaque—a sticky film that forms on the teeth and provides a residence for

 decay-promoting germs. The bacteria and the plaque react with the sugar in
the food, creating a decay-producing acid. The more plaque, the more
decay. The goal of dental hygiene, therefore, is to keep the plaque from
forming in the first place, by frequent brushing, and keep the sugar off the
plaque, by a healthy diet. When our toddlers would protest toothbrushing,
we’d tell them it was to wipe off the “sugar bugs.”
Don’t let baby sleep with a bottle of milk or juice. Bottles are not
friendly to a sleeping baby’s teeth. Especially blacklist honey-dipped
pacifiers. When baby falls asleep, saliva flow decreases, diminishing its
natural rinsing action on the teeth. The sugary stuff bathes the teeth. Plaque
and bacteria have an enamel feast, resulting in severe tooth decay called
bottle mouth. If a baby is hooked on the nap or nighttime bottle, try
watering down the juice or milk, each night diluting it a bit more until it’s
all water. If baby clings to his nighttime bottle and won’t settle for any
diluted substitute, be sure to brush the teeth well on the first morning trip to
the bathroom.
Check out advice on night nursing. “Nursing caries” does happen to
breastfed babies, but buffers in human milk allow it to be tolerated in the
mouth, so that tooth decay is much less likely than with bottles of juice or
formula. They are most likely to be found in those all-night snackers who
feel night nursing tops the list of baby’s bill of rights. We consulted
pediatric dentists who have thoroughly researched the night-nursing
concern. Many believe that nighttime breastfeeding only slightly

 contributes to tooth decay. In many cases the tooth decay would have
occurred with or without the night nursing.
If you are still night nursing and it’s working for you, consult a pediatric
dentist knowledgeable about the benefits of breastfeeding and oral
development. Have baby’s teeth periodically checked to see if they have
any beginning decay or enamel weakness that would prompt you to curb
night nursing. If you get your dentist’s okay to continue night nursing, it
would be wise, besides your routine before-bed brushing, to start the teeth
off each day with a thorough cleaning.
To stop breastfeeding or even night nursing when the teeth come in, as
an occasional dentist may advise, is like throwing out the baby with the
bathwater. Considering the overall medical and dental health-promoting
benefits and the emotional and developmental advantages of long-term
breastfeeding, a more prudent approach would be frequent dental checkups
and after-nursing brushing.
What about fluoride? How can I tell if my baby is getting enough?
Here’s what every parent should know about fluoride:

  • Fluoride helps teeth in two ways: The fluoride that baby ingests (in food
or water) enters the bloodstream and gets into the teeth, strengthening the
developing enamel, making it more resistant to decay. Fluoride applied
topically (through toothpaste or fluoride applications by your dentist)
helps strengthen the new enamel that is being formed as teeth repair
themselves (called remineralization) from the normal wear and tear.
• While still inside the gums, the permanent teeth begin mineralizing and
developing enamel even before birth. Fluoride administered after birth is
incorporated into the developing teeth, making them stronger.
• Nature’s own experiment: People living in areas where the fluoride is
naturally present in the water supply have 50 percent fewer dental caries.
• Fluoride, unlike many vitamins and minerals, has a narrow range of
efficacy-toxicity, meaning the right amount helps, and too much harms
the teeth by making them brittle—a condition called fluorosis. This is
why fluoride is available only by prescription and must be given to a
baby in the exact dosage prescribed.
• Formulas are not made with fluoride-supplemented water.
• Do not use more than a half-pea-size dab of fluoride-containing
toothpaste. Do not use both a fluoride-containing toothpaste and fluoride
supplements, as this would be too much.
• The amount of fluoride naturally present in drinking water varies in
different areas of the country. Check with your dentist or local water
company, inquiring how many parts per million. If your tap water
contains at least 0.3 parts per million, your baby doesn’t need, and
probably shouldn’t have, fluoride supplements.
• The Committee on Nutrition of the American Academy of Pediatrics
recommends that if the water baby drinks contains less than 0.3 parts per
million of fluoride, baby should be given a daily supplement of 0.25
milligrams of fluoride beginning at age six months and continued (with
increased dosage) until adolescence.
• Even though your local tap water may be fluoridated, some infants drink
little water, and some are always quenching their thirst. Also, if you drink
bottled water, it will not be fluoridated unless you specifically request it.
• Many foods, such as grains and vegetables, naturally contain fluoride.
B bi
g t fl id f
th f ll i g d t l
fl id

 Babies can get fluoride from the following dental sources: fluoride
supplements prescribed by your doctor (often combined with vitamin
drops or chewable tablets), fluoride applied topically in toothpaste or in
dental treatments, and aOceanofPDF.com
fluoridated water supply.
• The jury is still out on whether predominantly breastfed babies need
fluoride supplements. At this writing the evidence suggests they do not,
although little fluoride enters the baby through mother’s milk and this
amount is not altered significantly by a change in her diet.

 21

OceanofPDF.com

 The Second Six Months: Moving Up

During the first six months parents and trusted subs are the center of
baby’s universe. While this remains true during all stages of development,
from six to twelve months baby develops the skills to extend his world of
interest. He becomes less an arms and lap baby and more an exploring floor
baby. During this stage, growth accelerates. Baby’s weight increases by a
third, first words appear, and true thumb-and-forefinger pickups emerge, as
well as first crawls and steps. These skills also bring about parents’
development as safety patrol officers. Baby’s motor development allows
him to get more and more of his body off the ground. By six months he is
halfway there, sitting; by twelve months he’s on his own two feet, and the
baby chase begins.

OceanofPDF.com

 SIX TO NINE MONTHS: EXPLORING BIG
Two important skills form the next steps up the ladder of infant
development: progressing from sitting to crawling and learning to pick up
objects with thumb and forefinger. At each stage of development baby
masters one primary skill that then triggers a series of accomplishments. In
this stage, sitting without support is the master skill. This, in turn, opens a
wide new world for baby to explore. He now sees his environment straight
on, an entirely different perspective from the one he gets lying on his back.
By six or seven months, most babies can sit unsupported. Since he no
longer needs his arms to prop himself up, baby is able to use them more
fully for socializing and play.

OceanofPDF.com

 The Crawling Sequence

Line up ten beginning crawlers at the starting gate and watch them make
their individual ways around the track. They all reach the finish line, but
with different styles and different speeds. Each is normal. While no two
babies crawl the same, most follow a similar sequence of development.

Lunging Forward

Intense curiosity coupled with increasing strength in trunk, arm, and leg
muscles seem to plant an idea in baby’s mind: “I have the capability to
handle my toys. Now how do I get to them?” Here’s how one skill leads to
another. The ability to sit unsupported encourages baby to try lunging
forward in pursuit of a desired toy. Place your baby’s toys just beyond his
reach and you will notice that he lunges to lengthen his reach, extending his
hands and arms to rake the toy in pawlike fashion until it is comfortably
within reach.
Baby translates a stationary skill (sitting) into a moving skill (lunging).
This is the precursor to crawling. As you place the toy farther beyond
baby’s reach, notice what happens. He lunges his trunk forward as much as
possible, stretching his arms toward the toy. Next he learns to fold his

 outstretched legs in toward his body. This tucked-in position shortens the
rocking axis, allowing baby to roll forward over his feet. As he begins to
lunge forward on his little rocker bottom, he builds up momentum until the
forward-lunging movements of his body gradually overcome the weight of
his bottom, and he falls, usually on his tummy, just short of his intended
goal.

SAFETY TIP: When a baby is practicing these forward-lunging skills,
choose soft toys for him to go for in case he falls splat on top of his goal.
Such an encounter with a hard wooden, metal, or plastic object could be
very uncomfortable.

First Crawls

Baby’s first crawls are frustrating. As with many developmental skills,
intent precedes ability. Like a stuck turtle, baby kicks with propelling arms
and legs, but her heavy abdomen won’t budge off the ground.
The styles of beginning crawlers are variable. Some babies inchworm
along the floor. This early style progresses toward a commando-type crawl,
with baby squirming forward on her tucked-in elbows, her head scanning
from side to side searching for objects to capture. Some babies begin

 moving more backward than forward in a type of crab crawl as they push
instead of pull with their arms. Others prefer the thrusting motions of their
legs as they dig in with their feet, making a sort of bridge with their
extended legs and arms and then thrusting forward in leapfrog fashion,
propelling themselves ahead a foot or two at a time.

By age six or seven months, baby is able to sit without support, setting the
stage for lunging and then crawling, as he moves out to explore a wider
world.

Making a Bridge

Until baby can get her pelvis and abdomen off the ground, her crawling is
inefficient. Once her heavy middle is raised—“making a bridge”—she’s off.

 Baby first rocks back and forth on hands and knees. Now she’s up on four
wheels and ready to explore ways of rolling on them.

Cross-crawling

A major turning point in crawling skills is mastered when baby learns to
alternate arms and legs, getting the arm on one side and the leg on the
opposite side to move forward together and strike the floor at the same time.
This refinement in baby’s ground transportation is called cross-crawling.
This stance allows baby to balance steadily on the hand and knee that
remain in contact with the floor while elevating the opposite ones. This is
the most efficient and speedy of the crawling styles and takes baby in the
straightest line. Cross-crawling is a locomotor skill that teaches a baby to
use one side of his body to balance the other.
Want to really appreciate the efficiency of cross-crawling and have some
fun? Along with your friends, get down on the floor and start crawling.
Notice that most adults crawl “wrong.” They move the arm and leg on the
same side of the body together, which is off balance, instead of moving the
opposite arm and leg ahead and maintaining their balance. How smart this
nine-month-old engineer is to have developed such a balanced suspension!

The Mental Side of Crawling

 Imagine the learning power that a baby derives from learning to crawl. He
experiments with various styles and then “chooses” the one that works best.
Baby learns problem solving and cause-and-effect relationships—“I push
with my feet one way and I move faster than if I push another way.” Baby
also learns self-reinforcement: The more he moves and reaches the pursued
toys, the more motivated he is to improve his locomotor skills.

Cross-crawling: Each arm moves in conjunction with the opposite leg.
You can tell that baby is thinking about how best to crawl by watching
how he accommodates his crawling style to different textures. Place baby
on a deep-pile carpet and notice that he uses his feet and toes to dig in,
thrusting forward leapfrog style. Now place him on a smooth kitchen floor,
and he is likely to inchworm his way and slide along the smooth surface.
Some babies like to bear crawl on hands and feet on tiled surfaces because

 the soles and palms stick instead of slide. Watch how your baby learns to
navigate using different styles on different “roads.”
During this stage of development it is not so important how baby moves
in pursuit of a toy. The important milestone is that he realizes his
capabilities to move from place to place and experiments with various
methods. Sometimes he may dig in and scoot; other times he may twist and
roll toward the toy; sometimes he may crawl. During the next stage of
development baby refines these various modes of transportation and selects
the one that is most efficient.

Advanced Maneuvers

Babies like to crawl up and over obstacles. For fun and games, place a
foam-rubber roll or wedge between baby and an interesting toy. Also, make
yourself an obstacle. Lie down on the floor and place the toy on one side of
you and the baby on the other, and feel your baby crawl over you.

From Crawl to Sit

Besides developing new locomotor skills, baby enjoys combining skills.
Around seven months a baby can go from sitting to lunging to crawling
forward. Baby next learns how to maneuver his body in the opposite

 sequence, going from the crawling position back to a full sit. To master this
maneuver, baby uses the foot tuck. Watch baby crawl along and then
quickly stop, tuck one foot underneath, and swing sideways, vaulting over
the tucked-in foot while digging in and pushing with the other foot and
hand. Presto, he’s sitting upright! Baby’s ability to achieve a sitting position
by himself is another relief milestone for parents. Previously he would fuss
because he couldn’t right himself back to the sitting position. He needed a
nearby helper. Now he doesn’t.

Reinforcing the Little Mover

I, Dr. Bill, remember how each time our son Matthew showed a new skill,
he seemed to do best amid the encouraging cheers of his siblings. For
example, when baby crawls up the step, rolls over, or goes from crawling to
sitting, watch how she beams afterward. When you notice she is pleased
with herself, praise her. By acknowledging her performance, you share her
joy, and she may give an encore.

OceanofPDF.com

 Pulling Up and Moving Around

The desire to ascend from a horizontal to a vertical position stimulates baby
to grab hold of furniture, railings, or parent’s clothing and pull himself
upright. Watch the delight on your baby’s face at the thrill of his first pullup.

Taking a Stand

Once baby has mustered all the skill and energy needed to pull up to a
standing position, he wants to stay there awhile and enjoy the view. At this
stage baby may stand briefly while holding on to your hand only for
balance, not for support. An eight-month-old may be able to lean against a
sofa for five to ten minutes. Many babies at this stage still do not plant their
whole foot on the floor, preferring to stand on tiptoe with their feet turned
in, a position that greatly compromises their balance. The tiptoe tendency is
probably due to the baby’s tensing his whole body to get into this exciting
new position.
Help baby take the right stand. If he is hanging on to a sofa and his feet
are turned in and overlapping, gently turn them out and plant them flat,
teaching baby to use his feet as a firm base of support. If baby still crumples

 easily when standing, support his bending legs with your hands around the
back of his knees. By taking some of the frustrations out of failed attempts,
you can help baby enjoy a new skill and reinforce its development.

WAIVE THE WALKER
We strongly discourage you from exposing your infant to a walker for both
safety and developmental reasons. Providing exercise for baby, keeping the
pre-walking baby occupied, and as a baby-sitting aid to keep the mobile
baby happy are not good enough reasons to justify the safety and
developmental risks that walkers pose for babies.
The number of walker accidents steadily increases each year, prompting
the American Academy of Pediatrics to propose a law banning the sale and
use of infant walkers. Studies show that as many as 40 percent of infants
placed in walkers suffer a variety of injuries, such as skull fractures, neck
injuries, lacerations, knocked-out teeth, and burns. Some of the most
common injuries occur from falls, such as when a baby gets up enough
speed to crash through a safety gate and falls downstairs, tips over when
rolling over throw rugs or thresholds, or bends over to pick up toys on the
floor. Baby’s fingers can get caught in collapsible walkers, especially the
older models with exposed springs and coils. Walkers give babies wheels to
navigate into dangerous places.
The second reason we strongly discourage walkers is that they reverse
the normal sequence of motor development. Infants develop from head to
toe, with their upper-body skills progressing ahead of their lower-body
skills. In typical motor development from birth to one year, baby gets more
and more of his body off the ground. He begins by raising his head, then his
chest, then his tummy, then his hips, then raises himself on hands and
knees, then stands with support, then takes a few steps while holding on,
and then walks solo. In relying on the walker to do the work, baby loses the
ability to keep experimenting with his own body in order to develop
crawling and walking skills. In fact, studies have shown that babies who
spend a lot of time in walkers are more likely to be slower in developing a
normal gait. These studies showed that “walker-trained” infants
demonstrated a stiffer-legged gait.

 For infant product safety updates, see cpsc.gov.

First Cruises

Around eight or nine months babies lean against furniture only for balance,
not for support. Next baby cruises around furniture using the couch or
coffee-table top as his balancer. Finally, baby tries letting go with both
hands and may even stand momentarily by himself before grabbing on to
the nearby couch or table or crumpling to the floor from lack of balance.

OceanofPDF.com

 Pick Up and Play: Hand Skills

Baby may act like a little carpet sweeper, picking up even the tiniest pellets
that are lying around on the floor.

SAFETY TIP: The combination of a fascination for small objects and the
ability to move toward them makes mouthing objects that can cause choking
a prime safety concern at this stage. Be especially vigilant about what you
leave around for these curious little fingers to find. Any object smaller than
1½ inches (4 centimeters) in diameter can lodge in baby’s airway.

Development of the Pincer Grasp

One of the most interesting examples of how two skills develop
simultaneously and complement each other is the way a baby’s fascination
for small objects develops at the same time as the hand and finger capability
of exploring these objects—the evolution of thumb-and-forefinger pickup,
or pincer grasp.

 Watch your baby go for a pile of O-shaped cereal. She first rakes tidbits
toward herself, pawlike, and tries to grab them, mittenlike, with her fingers
and palm. She frustratingly loses the food bits in her pudgy little hands.
Pointing with index finger alone is the earliest sign that baby is about to
master the pincer grasp. She touches the object with a pointed finger,
tucking the remaining fingers into her palm. Soon the thumb follows the
lead of the index finger, and baby picks up objects between the pads of
thumb and forefinger. As baby’s picking-up ability matures to the tips of
thumb and forefinger, you will notice less pawlike action and more direct
thumb-and-forefinger pickups.

Learning to Release

An important part of baby’s reach-grasp learning is developing the ability to
release the grasped object. Babies become fascinated with holding
something, such as a piece of paper, and then opening their hand and
allowing the object to drop to the floor. Learning to release toys leads to one
of baby’s favorite games at this age, “I drop—you pick up.” She soon
associates the action of dropping with your reaction of picking up the toy.
Thus, she learns to associate cause and effect.

Transferring Objects

 Releasing helps a baby learn to transfer objects. Put a ring toy into baby’s
hands and watch what happens. He first pulls on the toy, playing a sort of
tug-of-war. If one hand lets go first, the other gets the ring, and baby’s eyes
go from the empty hand to the hand that holds the ring. He transfers the toy
from hand to hand, at first accidentally, then intentionally. The ability to
transfer a toy extends baby’s playtime. Now he can sit and entertain himself
for ten to twenty minutes, shuffling a toy back and forth from one hand to
the other.

Developing a Stronger Grip on Things

Around six months a baby’s reach-and-grasp sequences become more onehanded, purposeful, and tenacious. Baby can now consistently and quickly
grab a toy handed to him. Put a toy in front of the sitting baby and see how
steadily and accurately baby reaches his mark. Now try to take away the
toy. Notice how baby protests your pull. He tenaciously holds on to the toy
with a strong grasp. When you manage to extract the prized toy from baby’s
clasp, put it on the floor in front of him and observe the way he immediately
pounces and recaptures the toy in his grasp.
If you really want to appreciate how baby puts his mind into his reach,
videotape him reaching for a toy block. In the previous stage, baby would
strike and palm the toy, and his whole hand would encompass it, adjusting
to its shape only after he touched it. Now, watch baby begin to change the

 shape of his hand to fit the shape of the toy before he actually reaches it. He
is developing a visual “feel” for the object, which helps him determine its
shape before he touches it. He is now making in-flight corrections as his
hands approach the target.
Parents, if you are wondering why we go into such detail in describing
infant development, it’s because we want you to appreciate the big
capabilities in your little person. Also, remember you are growing together.
As your baby refines his developmental skills, you refine your skills as a
baby watcher—a valuable exercise in learning to read your baby.

Fun for Little Hands

Block games. Sit baby in a high chair and put two blocks in front of him.
After baby is engrossed with a block in each hand, place a third block in
front of him. Watch the decisive look on his face as he figures out how to
get the third block.
Next put the blocks on a place mat just beyond his reach. After lunging
toward the blocks and realizing they are out of his grasp, he may pull the
place mat toward himself and voilà! the blocks come, too. This may be
baby’s first experience in learning how to use one object to get another.
Now play the pounce-on-the-moving-block game. Put the blocks on a
place mat in front of baby. Slowly pull the place mat across his path. Watch
baby sit with his hands open, starlike, ready to pounce on anything within
his reach.

 Playing with body parts. Being able to reach for things stimulates baby to
explore his body parts. He cranes his neck forward and bends his legs
upward, bringing his toes within reach of his outstretched hands. As with so
many other objects, once baby has a firm grasp on his toes he often brings
them to his mouth. Notice that baby frequently points his big toe upward,
making it an easier target to grab.

Babies start engaging in block play at six months.
Not only does baby like to grab and suck on his own body parts, he also
frequently grabs the parts of you within his reach, such as your nose, hair,
or glasses. Within reason, try not to turn off this grabbing and pulling at
your person. It’s part of being a baby.

Martha notes: Matthew likes to practice his one-handed reaching while
nursing; he waves his arms, pats his head, pats my face or breast, and

 begins to explore my clothing. Often I enjoy this; sometimes it’s a
distracting nuisance during feeding.

Picking grass. Nature provides fun targets for inquisitive little fingers. Sit
baby down in the grass. At first he grabs a whole clump of grass with his
entire hand. Then baby becomes fascinated with the blades of grass
extending upward, and he tries to grab individual pieces of grass with the
thumb and fingers. He soon refines his grass-grabbing techniques by
picking up one blade of grass at a time with the thumb and forefinger.
Playing pickpocket. Capitalize on baby’s fascination for small objects,
especially pens in shirt pockets. Dads, wear a shirt with a vest pocket and an
obvious pen. Hold your baby and watch the pickpocket strike. Baby may
precisely grab the pen, hold it very possessively, and you will have
difficulty getting it back; he is not likely to put it back in your pocket at this
stage. Babies love the pickpocket game and learn to associate dad’s wearing
a shirt with pockets and pens to grab. One time I came home from work and
picked Matthew up. He reached toward my pocket, but to his amazement it
was empty. He looked surprised and very disappointed. He had stored in his
memory that pens belong in shirt pockets that belong on dads. Babies easily
become confused when expected patterns of association are not fulfilled.
Spaghetti play. Place a plate of cooked and cooled spaghetti in front of
baby—hold the sauce, please—and watch the little fingers pick.

 Pickpocket.

Hand Dominance

While baby may not reveal a definite hand dominance for several more
months, sometime between six and nine months you may get a clue as to
which is baby’s dominant hand. Put a toy in the midline in front of baby and
watch which hand consistently goes for the toy. Now put the toy to the left
side. If baby is right-handed, he may reach across his body with the right
hand, his left hand standing in readiness to assist the right. Now try the
same exercise with the toy on the right side of baby to see which hand
consistently reaches for the toy. Over the next three months most babies
will reveal their dominant hand.

 In Search of Baby Handcuffs

When babies master a skill, they have an insatiable appetite to use this skill
over and over. This is fun, but also a nuisance. Babies are especially
attracted to strings, buttons, or bows. Buttons are potentially dangerous
because they can be pulled off and mouthed. So intense is baby’s desire to
grab that it is wise not to show him or expose him to anything that he is not
allowed to touch.
At the dinner table, for example, all the reachable delights may set off a
grabbing frenzy as baby’s hands dart out and snatch plates, newspapers,
utensils, napkins, anything else that gets in the way of the windshield-wiper
arms. As you clean up your baby’s handiwork, remember this stage will
soon pass. If your lap baby is becoming increasingly a handful at the dinner
table, you can diffuse a grabbing frenzy by placing him on the floor with
some plastic cartons and let him grab to his hands’ delight.

 Reach out and grab someone. Anything within grabbing distance is enticing
to a six-to-nine-month-old.

OceanofPDF.com

 Language Development

In addition to crawling and the pincer grasp, baby’s first language is another
highlight of this stage. Babies cry less, talk more, and begin to combine
sound and body language to get their point across. A major breakthrough in
speech development occurs around five months of age when babies learn
they can change the sounds they make by changing the shape of their
tongue and mouth. By six months babies begin to babble, which consists of
long, repetitive strings of syllables containing a vowel and a consonant.
Between six and nine months baby learns to change “ba-ba,” sounds made
with the lips, to “da-da,” sounds made with the tongue. After going through
the consonant alphabet with all sorts of combinations—“ah-ba-di-da-gama”—baby begins to sort these first “words” together—“ba-ba-ba-ba”—
and razzes up these sounds with the wet noises of teething mucus. By nine
months many babies are saying “mama” and “dada,” but may not yet
consistently match the right word with the right person.

Gesturing and Social Directing

Gestures are one of the most important forerunners of verbal language,
because they are later replaced by their equivalent in words. Instead of

 crying to be picked up, baby often extends his arms and raises his big eyes
toward you in a “Please pick me up” gesture. Also, because of the ability to
use her hands for play and movement, a baby at this stage often becomes
less interested in being held and will give you a “Put me down” sign,
darting her hands toward the floor and squirming in your arms until you put
her down to pursue her target. Respond to baby’s hand signals as you did to
her cries. This reinforces the use of body language instead of crying as a
way of communicating. Besides using her own hands to signal needs, baby
directs your hands to move with hers. Watch her grasp your finger and
make your hand and arm move where she wants them to be. This hand-onhand directing is most noticeable during feeding.

Martha notes: Matthew shows different “Pick me up” signals when he is
upset and when he wants to play. When he wants to play, his arms are wide
open, extending completely outward from his body in an embracing fashion.
When he is upset, he doesn’t hold his arms outstretched but rather holds his
arms tightly to his side at the elbows with the forearms raised, his little
hands and fingers open, but in a pinched-together gesture which further
communicates his discomfort while also saying, “Please help me.”

OceanofPDF.com

 Reading Baby’s Language

By nine months most babies have developed a true language (sounds plus
gestures) that parents understand but strangers seldom do. Reading these
gestures is where your previous exercises in baby reading really pay off.
And watch for specific sounds to signal specific needs. Our baby Matthew
vocalized “mum-mum-mum-mum” when he wanted to be held. Here are
some favorite gestures and sounds.
Pointing fingers. Babies begin pointing and touching in a way similar to
how new mothers have been observed touching their babies for the first
time, first with their fingertips and then with their fully opened hands. Baby
also begins to understand your pointing.

Martha notes: Around six months Matthew began pointing at the family
cat. He approached the unsuspecting cat for the first time with his open
hand and his fingers extended, starlike. He first touched the cat’s head with
just the tip of his index finger. He explored the cat for a while with the tips
of all his fingers before resting his whole hand upon the cat and clutching
the fur with his clenched fist.

 Entry greetings. Look and listen to your baby’s special gestures to initiate
special play. When daddy enters the room, for example, baby comes to life.
His face lights up and lets out a big smile, his arms wave, and he turns
toward dad with a whole body language that says, “Let’s play!”
Mood sounds. Listen and watch your baby vocalize pleasure and
displeasure. When happy, baby brightens with uplifting facial gestures:
bright eyes, facial muscles drawn upward, and cheeks bulged out with a
smile. He giggles, squeals, belly laughs, and bounces his whole body while
muttering joyful sounds like “ba-ba-ba-ba.”
When sad, baby utters the grunts and growls of complaints. At this stage
the universal “n” sound emerges to signal negative feelings. Baby may
protest medicine taking by a string of “na-na-na-na.” Baby puts on his
unhappy face: mouth twisted into a grimace and facial muscles drooping.
And, if you don’t quickly get the point, these sounds and body language
escalate into a cry.

Helping Language Development

Language, like a sense of humor, is caught, not taught. You don’t directly
teach your baby to speak. You fill her ears with the right sounds, and baby
catches the spirit that talking is fun. Speaking is more natural that way. Here
are some ways to foster language development.

 Play word games. Word games teach baby that language is fun and
stimulate baby’s developing memory. One of our favorites is:
Round and round the garden goes the teddy bear,
(draw a circle around baby’s tummy with your finger)
one step, two steps,
(walk your finger from his belly button to his neck)
tickle you under there!
(tickle baby under the chin)

Give cues. Cue words are words or phrases that trigger a response from
baby because of a pattern of sounds he has heard before. One of our
favorites is the bump-heads game. When Matthew was in this stage of
development, I, Dr. Bill, would say, “Bump heads!” and Matthew and I
would gently bump foreheads. After repeating this game a number of times,
Matthew took the cue and actually started moving his head toward mine as I
said, “Bump,” even before I started moving toward him. What was going on
in Matthew’s mind? I believe that he had stored this game in a series of
“records” in his memory. Upon hearing the cue word “bump,” he dropped
the needle into the right groove and set the whole record playing. Playing
word games and watching your baby’s response to certain cue words lets
you know how your baby’s memory is developing.
Associate words with objects. During this stage, watch your baby begin to
associate words with the most important objects in his environment. When

 reading to your baby, connect persons and objects in the book with those in
his environment—saying, for example, “See cat” as you point toward the
cat in the book.
Table talk. Place baby at a table full of kids and adults and watch him join
in the conversation. Notice how baby follows the discussion, turning his
head from speaker to speaker and learning a valuable language art—
listening.
Narrate your life together. As you go about your day with baby, talk out
loud about everything. Label every object, body part, and activity you do
together. The constant input of words paired with experiences will imprint
on the language centers in baby’s mind.

Your six-month-old will enjoy grabbing and holding a soft ball.

OceanofPDF.com

 Fun and Games for the Six-to-Nine-month-old

The best activities are those that hold baby’s attention and stimulate the two
master skills of this stage, crawling and thumb-and-forefinger pickup.
Play ball! Balls rank next to blocks as the best baby toys. Don’t expect
your minor leaguer to field or return your throws just yet. But baby can grab
and hold a ball. Use balls that are large enough to be held with both hands,
preferably made of soft foam or cloth that baby can get his fingers into and
hold on to with one hand. Sit on the floor facing baby with your legs
stretched out in front of you and roll the ball toward him. This pregame
warm-up sets the stage for opening day of the real ball game in a few
months.
Mirror play. Sit baby within touching distance of a mirror (floor-to-ceiling
mirrors are the best). Watch your baby try to match her hands and face to
the image in the mirror. Now you appear alongside, and baby becomes
fascinated at your image next to hers in the reflection.

 Babies of this age become fascinated with mirror images.

Roll games. Playing on foam bolsters, which began in the previous stage,
becomes even more fun at this stage, because baby can crawl up and over
these cushions and entertain himself. Drape baby over the bolster cushion
and place a toy just beyond his reach. Notice how baby digs his feet in,
pushing and rolling himself forward on the foam cylinder in hot pursuit of
the toy.

OceanofPDF.com

 NEW FEARS AND CONCERNS IN THE
SECOND SIX MONTHS
A friend of yours, but a stranger to baby, wishes to greet you and your babyin-arms. You open your arms to your friend, but your baby doesn’t open
hers. Instead she fearfully clings to you, periodically peering over her
shoulder to check out the intruder. The harder you work at making a proper
introduction, the tighter baby clings.
Your baby is experiencing what is commonly called stranger anxiety.
This—and its close relative, separation anxiety—is normal among children
in the second six months; it seems to be a protective behavior that keeps
babies close to home base at a developmental stage when their motor skills
entice them away.

OceanofPDF.com

 Stranger Anxiety

Stranger anxiety normally occurs between six and twelve months, when
your onetime social butterfly turns shy. While she formerly enjoyed the
game of going from arms to arms, now she settles only for yours. Your baby
may reject even her closest significant others previously dear to her. This
social behavior is a normal and passing phase, no reflection on your
parenting, nor an indication of child insecurity. In fact, some of the most
securely attached babies may go through periods of stranger anxiety before
eagerly embracing unfamiliar persons.
Your baby regards you as the standard by which she measures everyone
else, and she rates everyone else by your reaction. She sees strangers
through your eyes. If your baby needs a social chairman, here’s how to help.
Easing into strangers. Quickly greet the advancing person with a
welcoming smile and begin a joyful dialogue, but still keep a distance. Give
your baby time and space to size up the stranger and read your happy face.
Based on your reaction to the stranger, baby forms a concept about the
unfamiliar person. If she’s okay to you, she’s okay to baby. Then you take
the lead. Make the proper third-party introduction: “See Aunt Nancy, she’s
nice.” Meanwhile Aunt Nancy makes no advances. Then you gradually
close the distance. When Aunt Nancy is within baby’s intimate space, take

 baby’s hand and pat Aunt Nancy’s face, all the while reading baby’s body
language for when to advance and when to retreat. Brief Aunt Nancy about
your strategy so she knows not to rush at baby. Grandparents, especially,
need to understand how important it is to let baby approach them. This
avoids hurt feelings or lectures on how you are spoiling that baby. This
method also helps babies approach “strange doctors.”
For more difficult cases. If your baby is very stranger anxious, set the
stage for a more subtle introduction. Warn your friend about what your baby
is experiencing. This is a matter of normal infant development; don’t be
apologetic (“But she really is a good baby”), trying to cover up for these
first impressions. Suggest the stranger begin by warming up to one of
baby’s favorite toys; for example, cuddling T. Bear or pulling out a special
toy so that baby will want to approach the stranger to get the toy.
If all your social strategies fail to release the clinging vine, sit baby
securely on your lap while you enthusiastically relate to the stranger and let
baby join the fun at her own pace.

OceanofPDF.com

 Separation Anxiety

Separation anxiety usually begins around six months with the crawling
phase and may even intensify from twelve to eighteen months when baby
begins walking. A wise parent will respect the normal phase of separation
anxiety and, if possible, plan necessary separations from baby outside of
this sensitive period. Because this phenomenon is of such concern to
parents, let’s take a closer look.

IS BABY TOO DEPENDENT?

Our eight-month-old baby cries every time I put her down and walk into
the next room. I can’t seem to leave her without her getting upset. We’re
very close, but could I have made her too dependent on me?
No! You have made her secure, not dependent. Your baby is experiencing
separation anxiety, a normal and healthy behavior that is not caused by your
making her too dependent.
One day as we watched eight-month-old Matthew playing, we
developed a theory as to why separation anxiety occurs and why it’s
healthy. While Matthew crawled around the room, every few minutes he

 would look back to see if we were watching. He would get upset if he saw
us walking out of the room or couldn’t keep a fix on us.
Why this curious behavior? As experienced baby watchers, we have
learned that babies do what they do for a good reason. Separation anxiety
seems to peak at the time when baby begins experiencing locomotor skills.
Could separation anxiety be a safety check that clicks on when baby has the
motor abilities to move away from the parents but does not yet have the
mental capabilities to handle separation? Baby’s body says go—his mind
says no. Otherwise, he would just keep on going.
Giving “It’s Okay” signals. Don’t feel you have made your baby too
dependent on you and that he will remain clingy and not develop a healthy
independence. On the contrary, separation anxiety is often a measure of
how secure a baby’s attachment is and how securely he will ease into
independence. Here’s why. Suppose baby is playing in a room full of
strange toys and strange babies. Baby begins to cling to you. Instead of
reinforcing his fears of the strange and unfamiliar, you give baby “It’s
okay” cues. Baby releases from you and becomes familiar with the strange
environment, periodically checking back into home base for reassurance
that it’s okay to proceed into more unfamiliar situations. The presence of a
strong attachment figure, usually the parent or a familiar, trusted caregiver,
acts as a coach to give baby the go-ahead to explore further. During a
strange situation the attachment figure interjects a reassuring “It’s okay” as
baby begins to explore another level. As soon as baby becomes familiar

 with one level, he goes on to another level. As baby climbs the ladder of
independence, he checks in to be sure someone’s holding the ladder.
Easing baby into separation. If baby can’t see you, he does not yet have
the mental capacity to figure out that you are just around the corner or will
soon return. Making voice contact sometimes reassures a baby who can’t
see you, and it stimulates baby’s ability to associate your voice with a
mental image of you, quelling an attack of separation anxiety before it
happens. Not until the second year do most babies develop object and
person permanence, the memory ability to make and retrieve mental images
of a person or thing he cannot see. This ability to retain a mental picture of a
trusted caregiver will enable baby to move more easily from the familiar to
the unfamiliar. (See here for more discussion of object permanence.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Close Parent-Infant Attachment Fosters Independence

As we mentioned earlier in a different context, we think it helps to
understand mental development if we compare baby’s mind to the process
of making a phonograph record; this is our deep-groove theory. The
stronger the parent-infant attachment, the deeper the attachment groove in
baby’s record and the easier baby can click into this groove when needed.
Earlier theories about spoiling claimed that an infant who is strongly
attached to his mother would never get out of the groove, become
independent, and explore on his own. Our experience and the experiments
of others have shown the opposite. In a classic study, called the strangesituations experiment, researchers studied two groups of infants (labeled
“securely attached” and “insecurely attached”) during an unfamiliar play
situation. The most securely attached infants, the ones with the deepest
grooves, actually showed less anxiety when separated from their mothers to
explore toys in the same room. They periodically checked in with the
mother for reassurance that it was okay to explore. The mother seemed to
add energy to the infant’s explorations. Since the infant did not need to
waste effort worrying about whether she was there, he could use that energy
for exploring.
When going from oneness to separateness, the securely attached baby
establishes a balance between his desire to explore and his continued need

 for the feeling of security provided by a trusted caregiver. When a novel toy
or a stranger upsets the balance, or mother leaves and thus reduces baby’s
sense of security, baby feels compelled to reestablish the original
equilibrium. The consistent availability of a trusted caregiver provides
needed reassurance and promotes independence, confidence, and trust,
leading to an important milestone by the end of the first year—the ability to
play alone.

OceanofPDF.com

 NINE TO TWELVE MONTHS: BIG MOVES
Progressing up the developmental ladder from crawling to scaling to
cruising and finally walking is one of the most exciting motor sequences in
infant development. Get your video camera ready. This budding
choreographer will show you a parade of interesting moves as he climbs the
ladder of developmental success.

OceanofPDF.com

 Locomotor Development

By nine months most babies have mastered the style of crawling that is
most efficient, comfortable, and speedy. For most babies this means crosscrawling, which allows better balance by keeping one limb on each side of
the body on the floor at all times. Cross-crawling teaches baby to coordinate
the use of one side of his body with the other and prepares baby for other
physical skills.
Once baby masters a developmental skill such as crawling, she wants to
experiment with variations on that skill. Baby may get a bit cocky in her
crawling style, wiggling her bottom, wobbling her head, and getting her
whole body into the crawling act.
Crawling opens up a new social avenue for baby. Now she can come to
you and doesn’t have to wait for you to come to her. Like a puppy eager to
greet her owner, baby crawls right up your pant leg, pulling herself to a
standing position and giving you “Let’s play” overtures.

WHAT ABOUT SAFETY GATES?
Putting a gate at the top of the stairs is like waving a red flag in front of a
baby bull. The impulsive explorer scales right up the gate and rattles it back
and forth until sometimes baby and gate come sliding down the stairs.
Whether to rely on a gate or teach your baby how to crawl safely down
stairs is a matter of baby’s temperament and crawling abilities. Watch your
baby crawl toward the top step. Around ten to eleven months most babies
develop some caution about heights (see here). Some crawl toward the

 edge, stop, look, and feel over the edge with their hands. These are the
babies who can be trained to back down the stairs safely. Impulsive babies,
however, do not take time to slow down and feel for the edge; they are
likely to hurl themselves down the steps. These babies and those who show
quickly progressing motor and climbing skills (early walkers) are ones who
need watchful monitoring and a secure safety gate.

Bypassing the Crawling Stage

Some infant development specialists feel that a baby who misses the
crawling stage is at risk for coordination problems later on because
crawling is a prelude to learning balance. While this may be true for some
babies, there are many perfectly normal, well-coordinated children who
quickly bypass the crawling stage to move on to other forms of locomotion.
One of our babies “walked” on her knees instead of crawling. Another
scooted on his bottom with one leg straight out and the other leg bent under.
Some babies scoot so well that they quickly lose interest in crawling. And
perhaps the enjoyment of these cute styles of locomotion by baby’s
cheerleaders reinforces them.

From Crawling to Scaling to Climbing

Watch baby crawl over to the bed or sofa. He grabs the bedspread or
upholstery and pulls himself up as far as he can go, a skill called scaling.

 Climbing and scaling are simply crawling upward rather than forward, an
example of how baby expands one skill into another. Because
neurologically baby develops from head to toe, his arms are stronger and
more coordinated than his legs and feet. Baby first pulls up with both hands
while his weaker legs bow and his feet curl inward. Finally, baby learns to
push up with his legs while pulling with his hands. After baby scales the
side of the sofa or high chair, he looks around in amazement that he got
there all by himself and enjoys his new view. Then, for a moment, he
appears stuck in the standing position. Eventually his legs give out and he
crumples quickly to the floor.
Now the fun begins. After baby has mastered crawling and scaling, here
comes the climber. Baby will enjoy climbing over a pile of cushions and
especially the climbing-over-pop game while dad lies on the floor. Then
baby discovers the ultimate climbing activity. You’ll catch him looking up
at his staircase to the “sky.” Your baby may be able to climb a whole flight
of stairs by the end of the first year, especially when encouraged by a
cheering squad of proud parents and siblings. But notice your baby’s
confused body language when he is stuck at the top of the stairs. Babies
don’t know intuitively that the safest way to get down stairs is backward.
They are likely to turn around and propel themselves recklessly forward.
While babies do not need any help climbing up, they are likely to need help
getting down. Teach your baby to back down steps by turning his body
around. Show him how to dangle one foot over the edge of the step to touch
the step below. Baby will then use his feet as feelers to test the distance for
climbing down steps (or off the sofa). You know that your baby can

 comfortably handle stairs when he swings his body around at the top of the
staircase and approaches the second step feet first.

As locomotor development progresses, baby will advance from crawling to
scaling, using his arms to pull himself up.

Standing Supported

Once baby has learned to scale a piece of furniture, he likes his newly found
skill and the view from up there and decides to stay there awhile,
developing the skill of standing supported. But the first efforts are off
balance as he tries to unfold his wobbly feet and get off his tiptoes. Once

 baby learns to stand like a little ballerina, feet flat and turned out, he can
balance better.
Let the beginning climber scale your pant leg, and you can feel the
progress that baby makes in learning to stand. Initially you feel a lot of
weight as baby grips your pants for both balance and support. Gradually
you feel less and less of baby’s weight as he holds on only for balance.

Cruising Along

Once baby can stand leaning against a sofa or low table, don’t expect him to
stay put. When first cruising, baby is likely to get his sidestepping feet
entangled. He soon learns that cruising sideways is uncomfortable. Watch
how baby compensates. He turns his legs, then his feet, so they can walk
frontward instead of sideways, and then turns the upper half of his body to
align with the lower half. Now he learns to get one foot in front of the other,
and around the table he goes, holding on first with both hands, then one
hand.

 Take the time to teach baby how to safely crawl up and down the stairs.
Now that baby can stand and cruise, he wants to stand and play. Put toys
on a low table and watch him entertain himself for five or ten minutes.

SAFETY TIP: Cruising gives baby a motor skill not only to enjoy but also
to use to get into trouble. Now that baby has a fascination with tabletop
play, he will want to grab and bang anything within reaching distance.
Remove sharp breakable and mouthable objects from your coffee table or
any low-lying table that the cruiser is likely to explore. Babies love cruising
along desks and reaching for dangling phone cords or any object they can
grab.

 To help baby enjoy standing, place some favorite toys on a waist-high table
and let baby stand and play.

SAFETY TIP: Falling against the sharp corners of coffee tables or
climbing on them and falling off are common accidents for beginning
cruisers. Either store the coffee table for a year or place protective covers
on the edges. A soft ottoman without any hard corners is safer living room
decor.

From Cruising to Freestanding to First Steps

 As the cruiser sidesteps along furniture, he periodically lets go. Amazed at
his courage, baby looks up for a cheering audience. His legs quickly give
way and he goes boom. Here’s an exercise to put him on cruise control.
Arrange furniture (sectional sofas work best) in a circle and watch baby
cruise around the inner circle, holding on with one hand for support. Then
put increasingly wider gaps between the sections. This setup motivates baby
to close the gap by toddling across the open spaces. This show may lead to
baby’s first freestanding and first steps.
Standing free. During one of baby’s around-the-living-room cruises, watch
him let go and freestand. Baby is surprised and puzzled. Now that he’s left
standing alone, he’s faced with two decisions: how to get back down and
how to move forward. He will plop down on his well-padded bottom, crawl
over to the sofa, and pull back up to a standing position and try again, this
time standing longer.
First steps. Once baby begins cruising, she is ready to walk in front of you
being supported by your hands. Stand baby between your legs, hold both
hands, and take steps together. Then, as baby learns to freestand longer,
she’s ready to take her first solo steps. Watch the balancing act as she
figures out that moving forward from a standing position is just a matter of
learning to balance on one foot while the other foot shuffles ahead. (Notice
how your baby’s ankles roll inward, exaggerating her knock-knees and

 flatfeet. The rubberlike ligaments supporting the ankles do not strengthen
for several years, so enjoy these flatfeet for a few more birthdays.)
To start out, baby widens her stance, opens her arms sideways, and
keeps her head pointed forward—all positions that achieve better balance.
Her first steps are quick, staccato, and stiff legged—like a wooden soldier’s.
Her face has a mixed expression of wonder and caution, but after a few
days of stepping better, she consistently has an “I can do it” look.

A standing baby soon becomes a cruising baby, supporting himself on
whatever furniture is within reach.

 A cruising baby is ready to try walking supported by your hands.

Helping the beginning walker. To reinforce baby’s walking skills, take her
hands and walk with her between your legs or alongside you, gradually
letting go with one hand, then the other. And as baby practices her first solo
steps, stand a few feet away, holding out your encouraging arms and giving
baby a “Come on.”

From Crawl to Squat to Stand

Even though baby may be taking a few steps, when he zeros in on a desired
toy across the room, the rookie walker usually plops down from standing
and clicks into a faster mode of ground transportation—often cross-

 crawling or scooting. The next decision for the beginning walker is how to
get back to the walking position. Initially baby needs a crutch, and he
crawls over to the wall or a piece of furniture, scales it to a standing
position, lets go, and takes a few steps, falls, and begins the same cycle all
over.
“If only I could short-circuit the couch and go directly to standing,”
baby might imagine. And in the next stage that’s just what he does (see
here).

OceanofPDF.com

 Hand Skills

In the previous stage, when you placed a tiny morsel of food within baby’s
grasp, baby would rake it toward himself and maneuver it into the ends of
his thumb and finger, eventually picking it up with thumb and forefinger. In
this stage, after dozens of pickup practices, baby develops a neat pincer
grasp. Put a tiny O-shaped cereal pellet in front of him and watch him
unerringly grab it with a clean thumb-and-forefinger pickup, without first
raking it in or resting his hand on the table. Baby puts the tip of the index
finger on it and curls the finger toward the thumb and, snatch! he’s got it.

EARLY WALKERS—LATE WALKERS?
Around 50 percent of babies walk by one year, but there is a wide normal
range for walking, from nine to fifteen months. Walking is a matter of
coordinating three factors: muscle strength, balance, and temperament, and
the latter seems to influence the age of walking the most. Babies with easier
temperaments often approach major developmental milestones more
cautiously. Since, early on, crawling is speedier than walking anyway, the
confirmed crawlers are content to zip around the floor like miniature race
cars and show no interest in joining the tall and busy world up there. Late
walkers are more likely to be content to entertain themselves with seeing
and fingering fun than with motor accomplishments. A late walker goes
through the crawl-cruise-stand-walk sequence slowly and cautiously,
calculating each step and progressing at his own comfortable rate. When he
does finally walk, he walks well.
The early walker, on the contrary, may be the impulsive, motor-driven
baby who has raced through each motor milestone before parents could get

 their camera ready. While there is no definite profile of early walkers, they
tend to be high-need babies who early on left the lap stage and squirmed out
of infant seats. Body type may also affect the age of walking. Lean babies
tend to walk earlier. Early and impulsive walkers are often more accidentprone than their more cautious walking mates.
Parents who carry their babies a lot often ask, “Will I delay her walking
by carrying her around so much?” The answer is no. In fact in our
experience and in the studies of others, babies who are the product of the
attachment style of parenting (for example, worn in a baby sling for many
hours a day) often show more advanced motor skills. No matter which baby
in the neighborhood walks first or wins the speed race, the age of walking
has nothing to do with eventual intelligence or motor skills. Baby walking,
both the timing and the style, is as unique as personality.

Baby Accommodates Hands to Objects

Place a new pencil (unsharpened) on a table and watch baby grab it. Now
turn the pencil at a different angle, and watch baby turn his hands parallel to
the long axis of the pencil, making in-flight corrections on the way to the
target. Before, baby impulsively grabbed a toy whole-handedly without first
figuring out how best to pick it up. Now baby makes decisions about how to
manipulate the toy before grabbing it.

Container Play

 The master curiosity of this stage is the relationship between toys: how a
big toy is related to a little one and how a little object fits into a bigger one.
Improved manipulating skills enable baby to figure out play combinations
of objects—banging toys together, stacking, and the ever-favorite fill-anddump. Being able to manipulate two toys together opens endless play
possibilities for these curious little hands, and near the end of the first year
baby discovers containers and the concept of emptiness. Here are some
activities that will help baby enjoy his new skills.

The pincer grasp enables baby to pick up small objects.

 • Give baby a large plastic glass or a shoe box and watch the curious hands
poke around inside the container. Now give baby a block and observe
how he introduces the block and the container. Hand and mind work
together to figure out how to put block into box and, of course, how to
dump it out. After mastering put-in-and-dump-out, baby shakes the
container and listens to the block flopping around inside. Notice the
figuring-out expressions on baby’s face as he goes through the many play
combinations with a simple block and a simple cup.
• Put cotton in your ears and bring out pots and pans! Baby delights in
putting little pots into bigger pots and, of course, the noise of banging
and dropping.
• Bathtub and sink play (always supervise) gives the master dumper an
exercise in filling and pouring. Scooping up a cup of water and pouring it
out makes a big splash on baby’s list of favorite games.
• Place baby in a large laundry basket half full of small clothes, preferably
socks and baby clothes. After baby takes the clothes out of the basket, put
your little helper outside the basket and show her how to “put it in,”
picking up a sock and putting it back into the basket for her.

OceanofPDF.com

 Getting Into Your Baby’s Mind

If only you could get into that little mind and find out what your baby is
thinking. Well, you can—sort of. You can learn what baby thinks by
observing how she plays. You can deduce what mental processes baby is
capable of by giving her an opening cue and noticing how she responds. We
call this the fill-in-the-blanks approach. A guess, yes, but until your child
can tell you what she is thinking, it’s the best you can do. While baby can’t
yet talk, she can use body language to tell you her thoughts.

Signs of Developing Memory

Mental pictures. One day I, Dr. Bill, was reading to nine-month-old
Matthew. I pointed to a picture of a cat and said, “Cat.” Watching his face, I
saw a light of recognition go on. He looked toward the door because the
family cat resides outside. Then he began patting the cat in the picture. The
picture of the cat triggered a mental association. Matthew had stored in his
memory the image of a cat and remembered that he usually pets the cat.
Also, I observed that he now had the mental capability to recognize the
similarity between the cat in the book and the cat in his life.

 Name that tune. At this stage babies do remember recent events. One day
we took nine-month-old Matthew to an exhibit at Disneyland called “It’s a
Small World.” The theme song and the accompanying visuals made quite an
impression upon him. The next day when we sang the melody of “It’s a
Small World,” Matthew’s excited eyes and smile showed that he was
remembering what he had seen and heard the day before.

Martha notes: Matthew is becoming very set in what he wants to do and
where he wants to be and is beginning to remember activities when we’re
interrupted. He seems more aware of places. If he is anticipating being
taken in one direction and we go the opposite direction, he will protest with
intensity depending on how badly he was hoping for his own direction.

Cue words. We believe babies store bits of information, and if they hear a
cue word it’s just like pressing a button in a baby’s mental jukebox and a
whole memory record comes down. For example, Matthew and I would
enjoy daily walks to the ocean. When he was nine months I would say “Go”
and Matthew would crawl over to the door because the word “go” triggered
visions of playing outside, going for a car ride, or any other activity
associated with going out the door. He didn’t react any differently no matter
what I added to “go.” By one year, however, his mind was capable of more
complete memory. Now when I said, “Go ocean,” he anticipated not only
being carried out the door but also going for our usual walk to the ocean. If

 I turned in a direction away from the ocean, he would protest. He could
associate definite words and actions with definite events to follow.
Anything that didn’t fit his mental expectations merited a squawk. This
illustrates the value of talking with your baby, explaining things step-bystep so he won’t be taken by surprise or unnecessarily disappointed, a setup
for tantrum behavior.
What’s behind the door? Baby’s vivid memory now enables him to
remember what is behind closed doors. At eleven months Matthew sat in
front of an open kitchen-cabinet door and noticed the enticing pots and
pans, which he grabbed, pulled off the shelf, and rattled in a way only a
parent could love. (Fortunately for human ears, baby’s playtimes are short.)
When Matthew finished his sound effects, we took away the pots and pans
and closed the door. From then on Matthew remembered the noisy toys
behind the closed door and daily crawled toward the cabinet, scaled up the
door, and tried to open it.

Games to Play

Find the missing toy. A mental skill that may begin to mature at this age is
the concept of object permanence—the ability to remember where a toy is
hidden. Previously, out of sight was out of mind. If you hid a toy under a
blanket, baby showed little interest in finding the toy. Try this experiment.
Let baby see you place a favorite toy under one of two cloth diapers lying in

 front of him. Watch baby momentarily study the diapers as if trying to
figure out which diaper is covering the toy. By the “I’m thinking”
expressions on his face, you get the feeling that he is trying to recall in his
memory under which diaper the toy is hidden. He makes his decision, pulls
off the diaper covering the toy, and shows great delight in making the right
choice. Try this several times, always putting the toy under the first diaper,
then let him watch you put the toy under the second diaper. If you have
consistently hidden the toy under the first diaper, even when baby sees you
put the toy under the second diaper, most of the time he initially searches
under the first diaper because that scene is still fixed in his memory.
Sometime between twelve and eighteen months, as baby’s reasoning
abilities mature, he may consistently remember that you switched the toy
under the second diaper or see the bulge under the second diaper and realize
the toy must be under there.

Near the end of the first year, baby may show interest in finding a toy he has
seen you hide under a diaper. This is the beginning of awareness of object

 permanence.

Hide-and-seek. Baby’s new ability to remember the place where a parent’s
bobbing head was last seen makes this game a favorite. Let baby chase you
around the couch. When she loses you, peer around the edge of the couch
and call her name. Baby will crawl to where she saw you peering.
Eventually she will imitate you by hiding and peeking around the couch
herself.
Next, add the game of sounding. Instead of letting baby see where you
are hiding, stay hidden but call her name. Watch her crawl, and later toddle,
around the house in search of the voice she mentally matches with the
missing person. Keep sounding to hold the searching baby’s interest.

Mental Protections

Babies become more mentally discerning at this stage and begin to have a
feel for harmful objects or situations.
Awareness of heights. Usually by one year of age babies develop a mental
awareness of heights, as demonstrated in the classical visual cliff
experiment. Crawling babies were placed upon a long glass-top table.
Immediately beneath the glass of half the table was a checkerboard pattern.
The same checkerboard pattern was placed beneath the other half of the

 glass table but on the floor 4 feet below. The babies were positioned on the
checkerboard half of the table and encouraged to crawl across it toward
their mothers. When babies reached the end of the first checkerboard
pattern their hands still touched glass, but their eyes told them there was a
drop-off, and the babies stopped crawling when they reached the apparent
cliff. This experiment demonstrated that babies at this stage do have the
mental capabilities to determine edges and heights and are able to decide
not to go over the edge. But don’t leave your baby playing on a tabletop!
For particularly impulsive babies, called hurdlers, their temperament
overrides their mental awareness of danger, and they may crawl right over
the edge.
Mother gives the go-ahead. As an interesting twist to the visual cliff
experiment, when the babies crawled toward their mothers and their
mothers projected a happy, nothing-to-fear attitude, most babies crawled
across the visual cliff. When mothers projected an expression of fear, the
babies stayed put. The conclusion: Mother acts as an emotional regulator of
the infant, who is able to read her facial signals or bounce his own signals
off her and react to a situation according to the feedback he receives.
Babies read our faces about everything, especially as it relates to them.
If you tend to be chronically anxious or depressed, your baby applies what
he sees on your face to himself and to life in general. A face that radiates
genuine joy toward life is a wonderful legacy to give your child (and
yourself).

 OceanofPDF.com

 Mastering the World of Words

As baby masters the wonderful world of words, you may finally feel you
are getting your point across. At last, baby understands you, though he still
does not consistently comply. Simple and familiar questions usually trigger
an understandable response: “Do you want to nurse?” “Do you want to go
outside?” No “yes” or “no” words yet, but baby’s body language is crystal
clear. Unless, of course, he doesn’t know himself what he wants.
Under one year of age babies still say very little with words, understand
a lot with their mind, and have very powerful body language. A baby’s
receptive speech (the ability to understand) is always several months ahead
of expressive speech. Just because a baby says very little does not mean she
does not understand what you are saying. In fact, if you double what you
actually imagine your baby understands, you will probably accurately
assess her language comprehension at all ages.

Baby Words

As well as understanding your verbal and body language, baby now
increases his own repertoire. Though still mostly jabbering, baby surprises

 you by periodically changing inflections and intonations in his talking,
giving you the feeling that he knows what he is saying even if you don’t.
The term “word” means a sound used consistently to refer to an action
or object, even if the sound is not intelligibly articulated. This is true of
most baby words, which are not always intelligibly articulated, thus not
understood—except perhaps by parents. Most babies at this stage have
familiar words (“dada,” “mama,” “cat”). Babies love to imitate your speech
sounds, including coughing and tongue noises such as hisses and clicks.
Baby not only has more language at this stage than the last, but it’s
definitely louder. The shouting stage begins, followed by the screaming
stage. Plug your ears. This soon will pass. Baby is just trying out his voice
and is amazed at the intensity of sounds he can generate and the response of
those within earshot. If you feel you must do something to teach your baby
to use his “quiet voice” in the house or car, show him how by whispering.
This “secret voice” gets his attention and gives him something else to
imitate.

“NO-NO-NO!”
By the end of the first year most babies understand “no” to mean “stop.”
How quickly baby complies depends on the gestures and tone of voice that
accompany “no.” When a baby is about to pull on a lamp cord, gently grab
his little hand, look in his big eyes, and point to the cord while saying, “No,
don’t touch—hurt baby!” Then redirect his curiosity to a safer and yet
equally interesting activity. At this stage baby may even shake his own head
to mimic your gestures, as though this helps him understand. Avoid saying
no in a rude, punitive way. Maintain respect for your baby when you speak
to him. Your goal is to teach, not to frighten. And, of course, expect your
baby to come back at you with frequent noes. Some creative alternatives to
“no” are “stop,” “hot,” “shut,” “dirty,” “hurt baby,” or “down.” Make up a

 universal “no” sound that immediately gets baby’s attention. Our “stop”
sound was a sudden loud “ah”; it halted Stephen in his tracks.

Gestures and Body Language

Besides baby’s having more words at this stage, his body language,
especially facial and arm gesturing, helps you know where you stand and
what he needs. Baby may pull on your pants and raise his arms to get
picked up. He gives you squirm cues in your arms to let you know he’s
ready to get down. If your baby intensely needs to get your attention, he
may grab your nose or chin and turn your face toward his. This expressive
body language matures long before the ability to say intelligible words.
Perhaps a baby at this stage feels, “If you can’t read my words, read my
body.”

Word and Voice Associations

By this stage, baby may be able to associate voices and names with people.
Who’s on the telephone? Baby may now associate the voice with the
person on the phone. One day when eleven-month-old Matthew heard my
voice on the phone he turned and looked toward the door. My voice
triggered the mental flash card of daddy coming through the door.

 What’s my name? Besides responding consistently to his own name, baby
may now associate the name with the person. When seated at our busy
family table, Matthew, by ten months of age, would catch the drift of the
conversation. When I asked, “Where’s Bob?” he would look at brother Bob.

Fun and Games with New Words and Gestures

Here are some favorite word games that will help you get a feel for how
much body and verbal language your baby understands.
Waving bye-bye. In the previous stage baby probably could imitate your
gestures for waving bye-bye. In this stage he might even initiate it. Baby
learns to associate the sound-gesture “bye-bye” with departing actions, such
as going out the door. You have repeated the bye-bye game so often that
your baby imitates your waving. Now try saying “bye-bye” without waving
or waving without saying “bye-bye.” Once baby has learned the soundgesture association he may wave when hearing the sound or say something
that sounds like “bye-bye” when he sees you wave. Gestures and sounds
trigger the mental associations that help baby put the two together.

 “So big!”

Imitating gestures. By now baby is a master imitator. Favorites are gesture
games incorporating hands and arms, facial expressions, and simple words
—for example, so-big, and don’t forget the oldie but goodie, pat-a-cake.
Peekaboo. A baby at this stage really gets into a game of peekaboo. Place a
card in front of your face or a handkerchief over your head, meanwhile
maintaining voice contact as you disappear, saying “Where’s mommy?” As
you remove the card from your face or baby pulls the handkerchief off your
head and you reappear, notice the delight and laughter on baby’s face.
Reverse peekaboo is also fun. Drape a diaper over baby’s head and say,
“Where’s baby?” As baby removes the covering and reappears, burst out

 with a “There he is!” Peekabo games stimulate baby’s developing memory.
Baby stores the image of the disappearing parent momentarily in his
memory, and when you reappear he takes great delight in confirming that
the image he sees is an accurate representation of the image he stored.

Babies at this stage love ball games and can usually follow simple requests
like “Give the ball to mommy.”

More ball games. Babies love the game of pitch-the-ball-and-go-fetch-it.
One-step requests—“Get the ball for daddy!”—are inconsistently followed
at this stage. A few months later baby may consistently follow one-step and
even two-step commands: “Get the ball and throw it to daddy.”

 BALL TIPS: Babies like small, lightweight plastic balls. A Ping-Pong ball
is a favorite because it makes an interesting noise when bouncing on the
floor, it moves quickly, and babies can grab hold of it and control it easily.
Babies also like large foam balls or soft, lightweight rubber balls that they
can hold with two hands and throw or roll to you. Some babies at this stage
may begin throwing a lightweight ball over their heads.

KEEP THE GAME GOING
When playing word games such as waving bye-bye and pat-a-cake,
periodically give only half the message, such as the gesture without the
sound or the sound without the gesture, and let baby complete the action.
For example, say “pat-a-cake” without touching baby’s hands, and let your
sound trigger his memory pattern to clap his hands. Then be sure to
reinforce baby’s memory by clapping back. Keep these games going as long
as you can, but remember that most babies at this stage have an attention
span of less than one minute. When you feel that baby is really tuned in to
what you are saying, keep his interest. For example, if you point to a bird in
the sky and say “bird,” and you notice baby also looks at the sky and utters
what sounds like “bird,” acknowledge how correctly baby perceived this
sound, saying with a smile, “Yes, that’s a bird!” This acknowledgment is the
beginning of a mental skill that develops better in the next stage—baby’s
ability to make himself understood and to feel that his words are
understood. While you are playing language games with your baby, notice
that sometimes baby pauses as if to think whose turn it is. Language is now
becoming more of a cognitive skill with baby thinking about what you are
saying and about his reply.

OceanofPDF.com

 CARING FOR YOUR BABY’S FEET
Caring for your baby’s feet is just one more part of loving and caring for
your entire baby. To help you get your baby off on the right foot, here are
answers to the most common questions parents ask about their baby’s feet
and footwear.
When should I buy shoes for my baby?
Between nine and twelve months of age, when babies begin to pull
themselves up and stand on their own, parents should begin thinking
seriously about their baby’s footwear needs.
Why does my baby need shoes?
Shoes help protect your baby’s tender feet from the rough surfaces,
splinters, and sharp objects that often lie in wait for the young adventurer.
When your baby is learning to walk, she looks ahead, not down, and these
uncautious little feet are likely to tread on anything.
Will shoes help my baby walk?

 The flat, even bottoms of a shoe provide stability for a young tenderfoot.
Usually we advise parents to let their baby take the first few steps barefoot
and, once baby is walking well, make their first trip to the shoe store. A few
beginning walkers, however, walk better and stumble less when wearing a
well-fitting flexible shoe.
How can I tell if baby has outgrown her shoes?
Check your baby’s feet periodically. Curled toes, blisters, indentations, or
red burnlike marks on the soles of your baby’s feet (friction rubs) are signs
of an ill-fitting shoe. Most toddlers outgrow shoes before they outwear
them. The average toddler outgrows her shoes around every three months.
Here are signs that your baby has outgrown the shoes:
Toe room. While your child is standing, you can feel his pinkie, or little toe,
pressing against the inside of the shoe. You should be able to press a
distance of around ½ inch (1½ centimeters) between baby’s farthestforward toe and the front of the shoe.
Throat room. The leather across the throat looks very tight and there is no
give when you pinch it. A well-fitting shoe should allow you to pinch a
small fold of material at the throat of the shoe.
The counter. The back of the shoe hangs over the heel either on the inner or
outer side of the shoe.

 OceanofPDF.com

 22

OceanofPDF.com

 The Second Year: From Babyhood to
Toddlerhood

Enter the official toddler. The three master skills of this age, walking,
talking, and thinking, are baby’s ticket to advance from babyhood to
toddlerhood.
Wave bye-bye to the sitting-still stage. Now you have a baby on the
move. During the second year baby progresses from walking to running to
climbing as he scurries around the house, flitting from one experience to the
next. He seems to have wheels on his feet and is driven to get his hands on
everything in grabbing distance, learning something from everything he
touches. Knobs are to be turned, buttons pushed, and drawers pulled out.
This is the age to explore and experiment. The maintenance stage of
babyhood eases up as the supervision stage comes on strong.
Language fuels the fire of a curious house rover. Now baby has the
capability to express what he wants, and the added power to direct his
widening world. Increasing mental abilities add more excitement to the
toddler adventure. Rather than impulsively rushing into a solution by trial
and error, baby is able to figure out things in his head first.

 But toddlerhood has its ups and downs. Separation anxiety adds some
balance to baby’s intense drive to explore and experiment. One minute baby
will shadow you for security; the next minute he darts away from you in hot
pursuit of some intriguing object. The ambivalence of dependence and
independence and the desire to explore bring on emotional bursts of delight,
laughter, fears, anger, and temper tantrums when overloaded. Baby not only
experiences feelings but now has the ability to express them. Even though
baby wants to “do it myself,” reality tells him he can’t.
While mental and motor growth surge, physical growth slows during the
second year. During the first year the average baby may add 14 pounds and
10 inches (6.4 kilograms and 25 centimeters) to his growth; during the
second year baby may add only 5 pounds and 5 inches (2.3 kilograms and
13 centimeters). This growth deceleration brings about a corresponding
decrease in appetite, justifying the toddler label of “picky eater.” Not only
does baby take in fewer calories, but he runs off much of the first year’s
baby fat, becoming a leaner-looking baby.

OceanofPDF.com

 TWELVE TO FIFTEEN MONTHS: BIG STEPS
Get ready. The walking show is about to begin. But while most babies can
walk 50 feet (15 meters) by fifteen months, some are just beginning to take
their first steps. Some babies walk everywhere, and some walk halfway
across the room and then revert to crawling, especially if in hot pursuit of a
desired toy or the family pet. Either is “normal” for this age.

OceanofPDF.com

 Walking Stronger and Longer

First walks are aptly described as “drunken sailor” gait. Baby weaves and
bobbles, teeters and staggers, waddles, falls, and crawls and then gets back
up again to repeat the performance. Watch how baby orchestrates his arms,
legs, and trunk muscles to balance and counterbalance and attempts to walk
a straight line. As baby ambles across the room, notice that he bends his
trunk slightly forward, thrusts arms out in front, and waddles with his legs
wide apart. After a month or two of practicing these first steps, baby
progresses from a wide-based, stiff-legged plop-plop gait to a more
rhythmic knee-bending and heel-toe step with feet closer together,
advancing to a determined marching type of gait.
Get-up-and-go maneuvers. Two master maneuvers at this stage help baby
click into gear for a better walking start. Previously when baby wanted to
go from crawling to walking he needed first to get to a standing position by
scaling up a piece of furniture or the wall. Now baby can go directly from
crawl to stand, bypassing the scaling stage. Watch your baby progress
through the crawl-squat-stand-walk maneuver. Baby is sitting with his toys
and suddenly decides to make rounds throughout the house. First he
assumes the bear-crawl position (on hands and feet). Next, using his feet as
the fulcrum of balance, baby lunges the weight of his bottom backward and

 moves his torso to assume the squatting position, resembling a quarterback
about to say “hike.” Then he straightens up his trunk to a standing position
and off he goes. At first the steps in this maneuver are jerky and staccato,
but gradually they become fluid. This is the master motor maneuver that
gets baby from sitting to walking throughout most of the second year and
the one that he uses to regain his stance after falling.

Now baby is able to go from a sitting to a standing position using the crawlto-squat-to-walk maneuver.

Entertainment steps. As baby masters walking forward, backward, and in
circles, she begins to use walking games to entertain her admiring audience.
With a sly look on her face she begins her antics. The helicopter game of

 wheeling around in circles with arms outstretched, ending in a dizzy fall, is
a favorite. Another favorite game is looking through her legs. In the bearcrawl position, baby discovers she can peer through her outstretched legs
and look at the world upside down. She holds that pose briefly, as though to
say, “Hmmm, this view is different,” and then raises herself to the standing
position to toddle on.

OceanofPDF.com

 Walk and Play

As with all developmental skills, mastery leads to enjoyment. A baby enjoys
walking around holding on to a toy such as a foam ball. Walking under a
table that just clears his head is another favorite challenge. As balance
improves, baby enjoys stooping over to pick up a toy with one hand while
stretching out the other for balance.
Babies still like assisted walking at this stage. Here is a fun game of
walking together: Stand facing each other, holding a foam ball in your
hands, and get baby to hold on to it also. Begin walking backward, causing
baby to walk toward you. Walk faster and faster, and notice baby chuckle as
he tries to keep up the pace.
Toys for walkers. Push-pull toys are near the top of the list of favorite
toddler toys. Watch baby mow the grass, toddling behind his toy lawn
mower, or shop, pushing a cart. Ride-on toys are fun at this age, too. Baby
can now sit astride a riding toy and maintain his balance for a few feet of
locomotion on wheels. Because his balance is still precarious on these little
bikes, parents should avoid letting baby ride on hard surfaces such as
concrete. In addition, you should make sure the toy has a wide base of
support and a low seat.

 Play shelves. Easy-temperament babies, even at this stage, may be content
to stand and play with toys on shelves. Impulsive babies, on the other hand,
may stand and fling every toy in grabbing distance and may not be ready for
ordered toys and play for many more months. If you place toys on shelves
approximately 12 to 18 inches (30 to 45 centimeters) off the floor, baby can
toddle over to his own shelf and learn about taking off and putting on. He
can select his toy and even use the shelving to help him stand and brace
himself while he examines the toy. This gives him a complete and new
perspective on playing. Expect baby to sometimes sweep his hand like a
windshield wiper across the shelf, knocking off the toys.
Parents’ little helper. To your surprise the kitchen may be baby’s favorite
playroom, a place where baby can use his new skills to “help” mom and
dad. A play activity that comes about as a result of baby’s standing skills is
helping unload the dishwasher. Baby pulls himself to a stand when the
dishwasher door is open, and he gets especially excited if he can reach the
silverware basket. Because silverware attracts babies, sharp knives and
other dangerous utensils must be kept out of reach, and of course you must
supervise his “on-the-job training.”
Walking together. Babies still like a social walk between parents, holding
on with both hands, or alongside one parent holding on with one hand.
Babies especially enjoy walking up and down the steps with the assistance
of a parent, since most babies have not mastered solo stair climbing at this
stage.

 Joint ventures. Take exploratory walks around the house holding your
toddler by one or both hands. As you navigate from room to room, show the
young investigator how to safely use various pieces of furniture (only those
that are safe for toddler climbing) and other interesting items on his level.

OceanofPDF.com

 Hand Skills for Play and Self-help

Besides baby’s being able to get around by walking, his rapidly developing
awareness of his body parts and how to use them leads to the development
of self-help skills.

Uses Tools

A favorite self-help activity is the use of tools, especially common
household “tools,” which baby has grown accustomed to seeing you use and
now wishes to imitate: toothbrushes, hairbrushes, telephones, spoons and
forks, plates, and cups. At the dinner table baby usually isn’t as interested in
eating the food as he is in using the tools.

Cooperates in Dressing and Grooming

Another self-help activity is trying to dress and undress. In the earlier
stages, putting on and taking off clothes was often a wrestling match. While
babies still squirm at one year, dressing them is usually a bit easier. Your

 toddler may put her foot out for her shoe, push her arm through her sleeve,
pull her shirt over her head. She may even learn to blow her own nose or
comb her own hair. Cooperation is the result not only of increasing hand
skills, but also of the increasing desire to imitate grown-ups and to “do it
myself.” You can help your baby increase her attention span during dressing
and grooming by talking about the steps involved in what you are doing:
“Now let’s put your shoes on… give daddy your foot.” Another way to ease
dressing hassles is to make the clothes interesting and easy to put on:
zippers, baggy sleeves and loose necklines, bright colors and eye-catching
patterns. It helps, too, to make a game out of getting dressed. Play
peekaboo, and ask “Where’s baby?” when placing the shirt over your tot’s
head, followed by “There she is!” when her head pops through. Exercising
baby’s legs, “bicycling,” as you put on baby’s trousers helps baby’s lower
half cooperate. “This little piggy…” and a shared giggle ease the hassle of
putting on shoes. Baby may lift her foot to put her pant leg on or raise her
arms before you take off her shirt if you give short clear directions like
“foot in” or “arms up.”

CLOSING OUT PLAY
Toddlers become so engrossed in their play that they protest when asked to
stop playing and depart. Instead of just picking up your baby when it’s time
to eat, to get ready for bed, or to leave someone’s home, here’s a departure
tip we have used successfully with each of our children: A few minutes
before it’s time to go, tell him it’s time to go (or eat or sleep) and begin to
help baby sign off by waving bye-bye to each toy. “Bye-bye truck, bye-bye
blocks….” These departure gestures help baby properly close out this play
activity as if finishing a chapter in a book. This also helps parents realize
that toddlers are little persons with strong wills who need creative

 discipline. Another effective closer is the “three more things” game. Ask
your toddler to pick three more toys to play with or activities to complete,
then announce when he’s down to two more, then the last one. Emphasize
that it’s the “last one!” in a fun, playful voice. Baby will begin to
understand this cue phrase and feel a sense of closure.

Toys and Activities for New Hand Skills

Container play. Watch your baby opening and closing and reopening the
cabinet doors and then hauling out all of the plastic containers and lids and
sitting there on the floor with them spread around, trying to fit them
together, and his skills coach cheering, “Put it in, take it out.” Notice how
he talks and sings to them and gives them orders and waves them around.
Graduated cylinders, such as measuring-cup sets, help baby to develop the
concept of relationships of sizes, how little containers fit into big. Baby
becomes more aware of the relationships among playthings such as lids and
containers and particularly enjoys playing with lids. There is more interest
in dumping out contents than putting the contents back in. Your toddler will
join you, however, in putting the contents back in the container if you
initiate this play activity and show him how the game is played.

BABY’S OWN CABINET
To save wear and tear from your toddler’s banging on your latched kitchencabinet doors, give him his own cabinet to toddle to and open as he wishes.
Fill the shelf with container-type toys (graduated plastic cylinders, pots and
pans, and a few of his favorites) and rotate the stock of toys frequently to
hold your toddler’s interest. Giving your explorer his own doors to open

 and a place to go may keep him from exploring less-safe areas. Choose a
cabinet far away from the oven and stove so baby can play safely while you
cook.

Shapes and matching. Form boards are favorites. At around one year of
age, the baby looks selectively at the round block and round hole, but
misses usually outnumber hits. He may bang around the hole and seem to
recognize the association between the block and the right-sized space, but
he has neither the fine motor coordination nor the attentive patience to fit
one into the other. Begin with a round-hole board because it’s much easier
for a toddler to put round shapes into round holes. As baby’s matching skills
and attention span increase, progress to the square pegs, which require baby
to orient the peg’s corners to the square hole.
Labeling: During container play and form board matching, if you
demonstrate the correct matching, most babies by fifteen months can
adaptively match the blocks and holes. You can help your baby enjoy and
match containers and blocks by giving encouraging instructions such as

 “That’s right, put the block in” while pointing to the correct space. Your
baby will increasingly demonstrate the ability to follow your directions
during play activities. This giving of directions (“Put the block in”)
accompanied by the appropriate pointing gestures is called labeling, a
language feature that increases baby’s interest in play and encourages
repetition of the specific activity. Emphasize play activities that encourage
decision making. Set up the activity for baby and let him follow through.

Your child will increasingly be able to follow directions during play.

 As baby gets bigger, blocks get bigger. Try 4-inch rubber blocks that baby
can either hold and stack with both hands or grab single-handed. Stacking
three to four blocks and toppling the tower is a favorite sit-and-play
activity.

Toy of the month. Our vote for the household hand toy of the month is a
shaving cream cap. Imagine all the fun things baby can do with this simple
cap: bang it, transfer it, watch it drop, pick it up with thumb and forefinger
or with one whole hand around the circumference or side, roll it across the
floor; and in the bathtub, pour water from it, watch it submerge, reappear,
and float.
Now if you want to do some mental games with the cap, drop it over the
side of the bathtub and let baby watch it land on the floor. Then pick up the
cap and hide it under your hand so that the cap is out of sight. Watch baby
first look at the floor where he last saw the cap. Then show him the cap in

 your open hand. Close the hand over the cap and watch him reach for the
hand with the cap. Then put your hands behind your back and change the
cap to the other hand. Baby will reach for the hand that he previously saw
the cap under, indicating a fairly accurate short-term memory at this age.

“Don’t Touch”

The mind says to the hands, “Touch everything you can get your hands on,
fill me with new touches. That’s how I learn.” And the legs, friends of the
mind, are willing to take the hands where they want to go. But someone
from above is always shouting “no!” Such is the world of the curious
toddler. Here are alternatives for the baby who’s into everything.
Touch-mes and touch-me-nots. Accompany the young explorer on his
next trip around the house, showing him what things he can touch.
Encourage safe touches: “Oh, look at pretty flowers, touch nicely,” and
model a soft touch. Provide baby’s own special drawers and special cabinets
(leave one in every room if possible) to keep busy hands into the right stuff.
The trading game. Just as baby’s hands are opening to grab the lamp cord,
your mouth is opening for a reflex “no!” but as a veteran at keeping one
step ahead of baby you quickly channel her interest into a more exciting toy,
“Mary, look what’s in the box….” Mary turns to the surprise box, and the
lamp is safe.

 Elevate your world. Rather than playing guard and blaring constant noes,
raise your breakable world a few feet for a few years. Put up the dog dish
and hide the wastebasket. Hearing “No, don’t touch” too often creates a
negative atmosphere in the house. The toddler may feel that everything is
off-limits. This dampens baby’s instincts to explore, therefore to learn.
Direct your baby toward the hands-on approach with the right touches. (See
“The 12-Inch Rule,” here.)

SAFETY TIP
Possession meaning ownership begins as baby tenaciously holds on to a
prized toy. If baby grabs a dangerous item, such as a knife, resist the
impulse to snatch it out of his hand. Baby might protest, and one or both of
you get cut. Instead, grab and gently squeeze baby’s wrist with one hand to
keep him from tightening his grip. (Try this maneuver by grabbing your
own wrist and notice how wrist compression inhibits the fingers from
closing.) Now say, “Give it to mommy,” and substitute an equally enticing
but safe toy while removing the dangerous one. Babies cannot yet
understand why you are removing the dangerous object from their hand.
Substituting toys is also handy for solving play squabbles and the inevitable
“my toy” scene of possessive toddlerhood.

OceanofPDF.com

 Language Development

The second year is aptly called the walkie-talkie stage. Both verbal and
body language take giant steps. You will notice two parts to your baby’s
language development: expressive language—intelligible words, what baby
says—and receptive language, what baby understands. In all stages of
development receptive speech is months ahead of expressive. In the early
part of the second year baby says little but understands all.

First Words

Many babies don’t voice a lot of new words at this stage, perhaps because
they devote most of their developmental energy to walking. Once steps are
mastered, words also take off. The average baby may speak only four to six
intelligible words by fifteen months. Favorite first words are
• b words: ball, ba-ba (bottle), bird, bye-bye
• c words: cat, car
• d words: dog, dada
• g words: go
• m words: mama

 Baby may not yet say the whole word, but may utter only the initial
sound to give you a hint of what he’s saying, as if he expects you to fill in
the blanks: “ba” for “ball,” “buh” for “bird,” “ca” for “car.” But the
accompanying pointing gestures leave no doubt what word he means.
Beginning toddler speech usually has all the right tones and inflections,
only the mature words are missing.
First “noes.” Baby can express “no” or a related negative expression, “nana-na,” and, in case you missed the cue, reinforce his wish by shaking his
head or pushing your hand away when you try to feed or give him
medicine.
Using labels. Continue putting a label on each person and thing that fills
your toddler’s everyday world. You point to the truck, give it a name, and
your nearby little parrot echoes a sound that, at least to your trained ear,
resembles what you said, “Tuck.” Take nature walks. Stroll with your
toddler in the park or woods, stopping frequently to name things. Take cues
from your baby. When he points to an insect, give it a name, “bug.” When
baby echoes “buh,” agree, “Yes, that’s a bug.” When baby points to the
moon and utters “moo,” respond, “Yes, that’s a moon.” Reinforcing that you
correctly understand him motivates baby to be a better parrot. That’s how
babies learn to talk.

 Giving names to things as you go about your daily activities will help
baby’s language skills.

The young parrot. The great imitator loves noise games, such as blowing
bubbles or making raspberry sounds. He loves to mimic animal sounds, like
the “woof-woof” of the family dog, or character sounds on TV. Use baby’s
desire to imitate to your advantage. At this age Matthew hated getting his
nose wiped. So we let him participate in the procedure, by saying, “Blow
your nose as I blow mine.” Then we helped him mop up with a gentle wipe.

Be Alert to Your Toddler’s Cues

 Though you may be physically exhausted from coexploring with young
Christopher Columbus, a combination of good language and good parenting
skills makes living with a toddler easier because your baby can finally tell
you what he wants. For example, baby tugs at your sleeve or brings you his
coat to go outside or brings you a CD to play. Listening to your toddler is
the most important activity for skill building and self-esteem development.
When you actively listen you establish lifelong communication skills
between yourself and your child. Give him the same respect you would give
any adult who talks to you. He may be little, but he has big things to say.
And remember, the main reason a toddler learns to whine is that when you
don’t listen the first (or second or third) time, his voice reflects his
frustration, and the whine pitch “works.” You are also modeling to him that
you don’t expect him to listen the first time. He’ll do as you do, not as you
say.
“Asks” for help. Besides saying intelligible words, baby uses gestures and
body language to seek assistance. When frustrated because she can’t get the
lid off a container or a toy is stuck, baby shouts “help me” noises or toddles
over and yanks at your sleeve for assistance. These sounds and body
language say to you, “Come help me pry this toy loose,” as she hands you
the toy, expecting adult help.
“Feed me.” Besides cues for help during play, baby gives feeding cues.
Baby may pull up your blouse to breastfeed or ask for “ba-ba” (bottle) and
point to it. And even your own meals are not without some intervention

 from the toddler sitting next to you. As you take a spoonful of food, your
toddler may grab your hand to redirect the food his way. The ability to use
sounds and body language to get help and meet needs is a valuable social
milestone.
Showing moods. Along with using sounds and actions to signal needs, baby
can now use specific facial language to reflect moods: downcast eyes, lips
overlapping a fussy pucker, furrowed forehead, and jutting jaw. All these
baby-face contortions convey an “I’m upset” feeling.

Word Associations

Baby begins to connect what he hears with what he sees, realizing that
everything in his widening world has a label.
Associates words and pictures. Words make looking at books and pictures
more fun. Watch for the day baby will toddle over to a picture, point to the
dog, and holler, “Gog, gog!”
Words make minding easier. Picture this scene. It’s time for a snack, but
your toddler is busily into a pile of toys. Rather than pry away a protesting
baby, suggest, “Let’s go get a banana.” The word “banana” triggers a
pattern of association in her mind: “Banana on the counter in the kitchen,”
as baby trots off to the kitchen.

 A word for the wise. Words make thinking easier. Now that every thing
and person in baby’s intimate world has a label on it, he can store lots of
mental pictures and recall them when hearing the label. We have used this
cognitive ability to make traveling in the car seat smoother. Matthew has
always adored his older brother Peter. One day as fifteen-month-old
Matthew was fussing in his car seat we pacified him by saying, “We’re
going to see Peter.” The word “Peter” triggered the mental association of a
favorite person, and he stopped fussing to think about Peter. Baby’s
growing vocabulary and growing mind work together to make the toddler a
very interesting little person to talk with and be with.

Following Directions

In addition to saying and imitating more words at this stage, baby more
consistently understands one-step requests such as “Go get ball,” and
retrieves the ball from the pile of toys. In a later stage she may be able to
understand and remember two-step and more complicated requests: “Get
the ball in the kitchen and bring it to daddy.”

Sign Language

 Besides understanding more words, the toddler begins to associate gestures
with the meaning of words. During this stage, Matthew would grab and bear
hug our indestructible family cat. We would rescue the cat and show
Matthew a kinder approach, “Be gentle to the cat,” as we took his hand and
showed him how to handle the cat. He understood our gentle gesture by the
tone of our voice and actions of our hands. And this helped him understand
when we needed to clean his face or wipe his nose, because we would tell
him, “Mama be gentle” (and then be sure we were).

Show-and-tell

A precious scene well worth recording is toddlers greeting each other.
Watch what happens when you put an affectionate kissing toddler with a
more reserved one. Mr. Affectionate embraces Miss Reserved in a beautiful
gesture of tenderness. Meanwhile you monitor these advances to be sure
your baby doesn’t love too hard. As Miss Reserved draws back, Mr.
Affectionate tightens his grip and comes on too strong. One baby cries and
the other is confused, and a struggle follows. As a watchful parent you
intervene with an encouraging “Love the baby” as you teach both babies a
softer touch. To teach a baby proper social graces, take baby’s hand and
demonstrate with both words and gestures the touch you want your baby to
learn.

 A House Person

Toddlers now become more aware of household sounds and their sources.
The doorbell rings, and she toddles in that direction. The buzzer on the
stove sounds, and she changes course toward that sound; the telephone
rings, and she runs to say hello. It’s fascinating to watch how this little
person is so aware of her big and noisy world.

OceanofPDF.com

 FIFTEEN

TO

EIGHTEEN

MONTHS:

BIG

WORDS
In this stage of development babies do all the things they did in the previous
one, but they do them better.

OceanofPDF.com

 Moving Faster

Baby continues to experiment with his newly found walking skills. He
pivots and circles, walks backward, and walks up steps (still holding on to a
railing or person). As is true with most developmental skills, baby’s desires
exceed his skills; his mind travels faster than his feet. Both falls and
frustrations remind the growing wanderer that he’s still a baby.
First running. Like the first steps, baby’s first runs are likely to be stiff
legged, short, and end in frequent falls. When baby first shows the desire to
progress from walking to running, take him to a wide, long, well-padded
area and turn him loose. Once baby learns to bend his knees more and lift
his feet higher, he walks and runs faster and trips less.
Stop and stoop. Baby may be walking briskly across the room and notice a
tempting toy on the floor. He stoops, picks it up, and is on his way. Adding
the skill of stooping and picking up makes walking around the house
gathering treasures fun for the young adventurer.

SAFETY TIP: Every skill has its ups and downs. Now that baby can stoop
and pick up, shadow baby when out walking around cluttered terrains. The
curious scavenger may pick up objects such as cigarette butts.

 Mountain climbing. No chair, tabletop, or sofa is beyond the reach of the
young climber. Respect the urge to climb by providing a safe climbing
environment.
• Tuck seats under the table to deter a tabletop explorer.
• Keep climbable furniture away from dangerous objects. A chair close to a
stove invites disaster. A toddler can push a step stool or child’s chair over
to the stove.
• Be especially vigilant for the toddler who climbs and stands on the seat
of a chair and leans to peer over the back while he holds on. A trip to the
emergency room is soon to follow.
• Create a safe climbing area. To satisfy the beginning climber we keep a
fold-out futon and piles of foam squares and cushions in our family
room. A climbing yard is also fun for the young scrambler, and piles of
old tires make a safe obstacle course. Another winner is a short ladder
and slide, which satisfy two favorite toddler desires: the urge to climb
and the urge to slide.

 Baby’s urge to climb won’t be denied, so be sure to provide a safe area.

Pull up a chair. By this stage most babies can feed themselves. Get baby a
toddler-sized chair and watch how he navigates into it. He may first climb
onto it but soon realizes this is neither comfortable nor safe, and the chair
topples over. Then he learns to hold it with both hands behind as he backs
his bottom into the chair. We gave one of our babies a tiny, lightweight
canvas director’s chair, which he carried behind him for a few yards after he
learned to negotiate sitting in it. Perhaps once he had mastered getting
seated in the chair, he didn’t want to let go and start over.

Scaled-down chairs and tables are toddler magnets. Be watchful!

 Remember that it’s safer and more fun to bring the adult world down to
baby’s size. A toddler-size table and chair to contain the busy baby plus
attention-holding toys such as interlocking blocks may keep the house rover
sitting still awhile.
First rides. Toddlers seldom sit still, but they do sit and ride. Choose a
riding toy with four wheels and a wide base that baby can easily handle.
Before purchasing it, take baby to the toy store for a test drive. If he is
learning to drive, let his first rides be on a soft carpet to cushion the falls.
First pitch. As with blocks, as baby gets bigger, balls get bigger. Watch
your baby throw a ball by getting up on one knee with one foot planted on
the ground and pitch with the whole arm, an improvement over the forearm
fling of the previous stage.
Throw and kick. Attention baseball and soccer scouts! Now baby can do
both sports. She can throw a ball from the hands-at-chest or overhead
position with more force. Think about the learning value of a simple ball.
As the young pitcher learns the most efficient windup, she needs to figure
out when to release the ball, in which direction, with how much force, and
what body parts to put into the throw.

GETTING PHYSICAL
Babies and parents love playing physical games. Favorites include the
following:

 Give me five. The best of hand-slapping games has many variations: one
handed, two handed, high five, low five, and “too slow five,” as baby
misses your moving hands. This is a good game to spring on baby suddenly
to introduce him to interaction or to redirect undesirable behavior.
Riding high. Baby loves riding on dad’s shoulders, but be sure to duck as
you go through doorways and under chandeliers, and avoid carrying baby
under ceiling fans.
Ticktock. Hold baby by both feet and swing back and forth like a
pendulum.
Other favorites. Ring-around-the-rosy, climb-on-pop, climb-over-pop,
ride-horsey-on-daddy, hide-and-seek, and mimicking adult antics are other
games toddlers enjoy.
Kicking balls around the yard is a favorite game. First kicks are likely to
be more misses than kicks. Initially baby may approach the ball timidly and
barely connect. Other times, the kick may end in a fall and a surprised look
on baby’s face, as if the holder moved the ball from the placekicker.
Bring out the big tools. Babies love activities and playthings that allow
them to imitate an adult lifestyle in miniature. Toddlers have the skills to
push, pull, pound, and pour. As a toddler, Matthew spent hours pushing
along his toy lawn mower in imitation of daddy cutting the grass. Pull toys
and push toys, such as baby buggies, are fun. Pound toys with toy hammers
and pegs are good for the beginning carpenter. With a small sprinkling can,
baby waters the plants.

OceanofPDF.com

 Activities and Challenges for Hand Skills

As baby’s hand skills increase, toys become more challenging. Besides
stacking more and larger blocks higher—usually four is tops for the young
master builder—babies like interlocking blocks and those that stick and
stack.
Sorting shapes. Graduated cylinders and rings are play-tested favorites that
capitalize on baby’s emerging cognitive skill of figuring out a sequence in
her head before attempting it with her hands. Watch the decision-making
and attention-holding expression on your baby’s face as she puts graduated
rings on a pole. Initially she may impulsively fling any ring onto the pole
without regard for size. As her mental and hand skills mature together, she
puts the largest ring on the bottom.

 Increasing hand skills set the stage for more challenging toys, which also
challenge the toddler’s growing mental ability.

Hand-held toys. The combination of a keener mind and more skillful hands
helps the toddler figure out and correctly use hand-held items. Previously,
hand things were for banging. Now, for example, she can use a safe fork
and spoon to feed herself.
Besides wanting his toys, baby wants to use adult hand “toys.” A razor is
very enticing, particularly when baby sees all the gooey fun dad has with it.
Drawers are a red flag to your baby bull, especially those you put your
“toys” in. To keep baby out of your drawers, give him his own and rotate its
toy stock to hold his interest.

 First art. Crayon marks on your walls are telltale signs of a scribbling
toddler on the loose. For his first art lesson give baby an easily held,
nontoxic crayon and a large white piece of paper. Either hold or tape the
paper down. Trying to hold the paper with one hand while creating his first
masterpiece with the other is frustrating to the budding artist. First art is
random lines, called scribbles. Baby holds the crayon fistlike, makes back
and forth lines and an occasional wiper blade–like semicircle, and, to sign
his art, stabs the tip of the crayon into the paper.
Let baby enjoy simply messing around with crayon and paper before
sharing your artistic skills with him. Once baby controls his waving arms
and begins to think before scrawling (watch the decisive look on his face),
it’s time for another art lesson. Encourage baby to imitate your sketches.
First draw a simple vertical line and show baby, hand on hand, how to
match your line. Then draw a horizontal line and encourage baby to copy.
Next, draw a V shape, a semicircle, and eventually graduate to a full circle,
which baby may not match until after the second birthday when true
drawing begins.

OceanofPDF.com

 Language Development

Toddler language development can be summed up in baby’s favorite word
—more.
More words. Baby’s speech explodes from an average ten words at fifteen
months to as many as fifty by twenty-four months, though many sounds are
still unintelligible except to parents. A fun exercise to chart your baby’s
speech development is a word-a-day chart. Write down the new word your
baby says today.
More intelligible. Baby’s starter words progress from half to whole words
as baby adds the right ending. “Ba” becomes “ball.”
More syllables. Baby’s speech lengthens from pronouncing short onesyllable words—“uh” and “cat”—to putting short words together: “all
done,” “bye-bye,” “night-night,” “no-no.” Baby may now attempt
multisyllable words, and what comes out of his mouth may top the laugh
meter. Our favorite was “Ben-ben-ben”—toddler lingo for “Benjamin.”
Understands more. Toddlers begin to seem more tuned in to the
conversations around them. We call this secondhand language. One day
Martha casually mentioned to Erin, Matthew’s older sibling, that she should

 go upstairs and get the laundry because it was laundry day. I, Dr. Bill,
noticed fifteen-month-old Matthew marching very purposefully over to the
laundry basket. He picked out several articles of clothing from the basket
and marched back to Martha. He had caught the gist of the conversation
although he was not directly part of it.

First Sentences

A baby’s early phrases and sentences resemble a budget telegram or news
headlines—only nouns or only nouns and action verbs, such as “Bye-bye
car” or “Go bye-bye.” Baby associates “bye-bye” with leaving the house
(which he learns from your gestures when you depart) and “car” with the
moving object that transports him from one world to the other. Baby may
even begin to open a two-word sentence with “I,” such as “I go.” This
language gives him the conversational skills to express an “I” desire, and it
affords him a tool by which he can use his adult companions as resources to
help him get his desire. One day I was playing a little kissing game with
Matthew, kissing him on the leg and on the toes. When I stopped, he looked
at me and said, “More… kiss… toes.” Baby spurts out skeletons of the
entire sentence and leaves the listener to fill in the missing words.

Responds to Words Without Gestures

 Not only do toddlers speak in cue words, they also think this way. When I
would say “go,” eighteen-month-old Matthew would get his sweater and
run to the door. To a toddler, language is a combination of gestures and
verbal sounds. In the previous stage of development most babies would not
follow a request unless accompanied by both a sound and a gesture (that is,
pointing and saying, “Give it to daddy”). By eighteen months babies can
understand most verbal cues without the accompanying gestures.

Social Talk

Baby becomes better at putting word labels on favorite everyday activities,
especially during feeding, and continues giving both verbal and body
language feeding cues. The toddler may pull up your blouse to breastfeed,
asking for “nur” (nurse) or “num-num” (breast). He may ask for “ba-ba”
(bottle) and point to it. Babies often get into social greetings, such as saying
“hi-yo” (hello) when picking up the ringing telephone. He may even
surprise you with an occasional “ta-too,” for “thank you.” Many of the
words that you said hundreds of times in the previous stage now come back
to you during social exchanges that take place during daily activities such as
dressing. One day as I was undressing Matthew for bed he tugged at his
shirt and said, “Up”; then he tugged at his pants and said, “Off.” He had
filed away the association of these words with these actions and could recall
them.

 New Concepts

Words make teaching safety and caring for baby easier. Many babies by this
age learn the meaning of “hot.” When you say, “Food is hot,” baby may
avoid touching it and look respectfully at the food while whispering what
sounds like “hot,” imitating the way you emphasize the danger by speaking
in a long, drawn-out, whispering sort of inflection. When you say, “Let’s
change diaper,” baby may acknowledge that he understands by looking
down at his diaper, tugging at it, and either walking toward you or running
away.
In addition, a toddler at this age can often point to and name his siblings.
Older brothers and sisters naturally reinforce speech for the toddler by
constantly encouraging baby to “say it again.”
The concept of “other” is a major cognitive and verbal achievement.
Beginning with body parts, baby may be able to point to an ear when you
say, “Where’s ear?” and then point to the opposite ear when adding
“Where’s other ear?”

First Songs

Singing adds a delightful musical touch to baby’s speech explosion. Baby
may begin humming while engrossed in her happy little world of sound and

 play. Capture these merry sounds on tape while you can. These are the
sounds you wish that baby would never outgrow.

Gesticulating

Combining words and actions is a language skill that mushrooms midway
through the second year: “up” accompanied by the arm-raising “Pick me
up” gesture; “shhhhh” accompanied by an index finger by the mouth to
gesture hush; and the inevitable “no-no-no!” accompanied by a firm and
often comical shake of the head, or if firmly grounded in a negative
response, baby scrunches up her eyebrows and puckers her lips in a
scolding facial gesture and waves her finger at you while saying “No-nono!” Perhaps she is mimicking her own scoldings. Babies also love gesture
games like so-big. Even when baby can’t come up with all the words for
what she needs, her gestures are so much more understandable at this stage.
For instance, while sitting at the table Matthew was presented with a dish
that contained a little bit of leftover cranberry sauce. He gestured with his
hands and vocalized some sounds that conveyed to us “I need a spoon.”
Although he didn’t say any of those words, his meaning was very clear. If
you are doubtful about what baby enjoys doing, watch and listen to her
body language. One time I was patting Matthew on his tush, and when I
stopped, he reached behind and patted himself a few times, giving me the
message that he wanted me to continue the patting.

 Parents’ Speech Changes

As baby begins talking more like an adult, you may notice yourself talking
less like a baby. You may resume speaking in a normal tone of conversation
rather than in baby talk, as baby understands what you are saying to him
without exaggerated inflections and a high-pitched tone of motherese.

OceanofPDF.com

 ENRICHING YOUR TODDLER’S LANGUAGE
Most parents have a natural intuition about their toddler’s language
development and need no instruction manual. The “method” a mother (or
father) uses flows naturally as part of intuitive parenting. These tips are only
to reinforce and add variety to what you are, in all likelihood, already doing.
Look at and talk about picture books together. This is one of the primary
ways in which children develop their word-object association. As your child
advances, you can select increasingly stimulating books and prompt his
recall of names by pointing to an illustration and saying, “What’s this?”
Show him the whole page of assorted objects and ask, “Where is the ball?”
Associate the figures in the book with the same figures in real life. As you
point to a tree in a book, also point to the real tree in the yard. Your child
will develop a mental image as to what characteristics constitute the label
“tree.”
Expand a word or gesture into an idea. For example, if your child asks,
“What’s that?” and then points to a bird, you answer, “That’s a bird,” and
add, “and birds fly in the sky.” You have not only answered his question,
but you have also given him a word-associated idea. When you notice your
baby’s interest in a sound, such as an airplane in the sky, pick baby up and

 point to the airplane and give it a name, “Airplane in the sky.” Put as many
labels on as many objects and persons as you can. This helps make baby’s
mental filing system of object labeling easier. Babies seldom speak in full
sentences with all the words until after the second birthday but rather
continue to use cue words within each sentence. Picking up on cue words is
particularly important for the child with lazy speech habits who gets what
he wants by pointing all the time.
Play word games and sing action songs. These make learning language
fun. Babies love to play games about their own body parts and learn quickly
what their toes are after they have played this-little-piggy several times.
Rhythm games that employ counting and finger play, such as one-twobuckle-my-shoe, and actions songs such as “Pop Goes the Weasel” are
particularly helpful for encouraging gestures and cue words. Eventually
baby will be able to complete the song when you sing the opening word as a
cue.
Talk about what you do. In the earlier months you probably talked baby
through every step of the diaper change. Now it’s easy to mechanically go
through maintenance exercises such as diapering and bathing without much
dialogue. But continue the chatter: “Now we lift up your arm… now we
wash your hands…” and so on.
Speak in questions. Toddlers seem to enjoy the inflections and intonations
of your voice when you ask a question. A query implies that you welcome a

 response of some kind, and the toddler usually obliges.
Don’t use too much disconnected chatter. Your child will tune you out.
Instead, speak slowly in simple sentences and pause frequently to give your
child time to reflect on the message.
Give your child choices. For example, “Matthew, do you want an apple or
an orange?” This encourages him to reply and stimulates decision making.
Make eye contact and address your child by name. As a pediatrician, I
find that looking intently into a suspicious toddler’s eyes during a physical
examination has a calming effect. If you can maintain eye contact with a
child, you can maintain his attention. You want your child to be comfortable
looking into another person’s eyes when he addresses them. The ability to
be comfortable with eye-to-eye contact is a language-enrichment exercise
that benefits your child throughout his life. Also, addressing your child by
his name when opening the dialogue teaches your baby a valuable social
lesson—the importance of one’s own name. And this teaches him to use
names when speaking to others.
Go easy on correcting a toddler’s speech. Remember, the main goal of
toddler language is to communicate an idea, not a word. Much of a toddler’s
speech may be unintelligible under the age of two. This is normal. It is
important for some babies to babble awhile and experiment with sounds
without outside attempts to refine them. These toddlers are simply storing
their language information for a sudden rush of intelligible words and

 phrases at around two years of age. If you sense your child is having trouble
with certain words, make a special effort to repeat these sounds frequently
yourself and capitalize on your child’s desire to imitate. Correct by
repetition, not by embarrassment. Remember, speech is primarily a skill to
be enjoyed rather than a task to be learned. The more your child enjoys
communicating, the better she will learn to speak.

OceanofPDF.com

 DOES YOUR CHILD WALK FUNNY?
Toddlers’ walking styles are as variable as their personalities. Most begin
walking with feet turned out, a position that improves balance. Next, as you
are beginning to worry about turned-out feet, baby exchanges one worry for
another and turns the feet inward and becomes pigeon-toed. You can put off
your mother’s suggestion to take baby to an orthopedic specialist. Most
toddler’s legs and feet straighten by themselves by three years.
Toeing in. In the first two years nearly all babies toe in. This is due to two
conditions:
• The normal bowing of the legs left over from the fetal position in the
womb.
• Normal flatfeet. Babies seldom develop much of an arch until the age of
three years. To compensate, babies turn their feet inward while walking,
in effect to make an arch and better distribute their weight.
The normal developmental timetable for feet and legs is as follows:

 • bowed legs from birth to three years
• toeing out, ballerina style, when beginning to walk
• toeing in from eighteen months to two to three years
• walking with feet straight after three years
• knock-kneed from three years to teens
If your toddler runs without tripping, don’t worry about turned-in feet.
This should self-correct. If, however, your child is tripping over his feet
more and more, orthopedic treatment may be necessary, usually beginning
between eighteen months and two years. (Rarely needed treatment usually
consists of a brace placed between special shoes to keep the feet turned out;
the brace is worn while sleeping.)
Besides curving in of the lower legs, called internal tibial torsion, or
ITT (twisting of the major lower leg bone), another reason for toeing in is
internal femoral torsion (twisting inward of the upper leg bones). Here’s
how to tell the difference: Watch your child standing. If the kneecaps are
facing straight forward, the toeing in is most likely due to ITT. If the
kneecaps turn toward each other (kissing kneecaps), that’s internal femoral
torsion.

 Nearly all babies are pigeon-toed in the first two years.
Encouraging correct sleeping and sitting positions can lessen both
deformities.
• The saying “As the twig is bent, so grows the tree” certainly applies to
baby’s legs. Discourage your child from sleeping in the fetal position (see
Figure A, here). If baby persists in sleeping in this postion, try sewing the
pajama legs together.
• Try to keep your toddler from tucking his feet and legs beneath him
while sitting; this aggravates internal tibial torsion (see Figure B).
• To lessen internal femoral torsion, discourage your child from sitting in
the W position (Figure C), but encourage sitting cross-legged (Figure D)
or sitting with his feet straight out (Figure E).

 Figure A. The fetal sleeping position.

Figure B. The tucked-under sitting position.

 Figure C. The W sitting position.

Figure D. Sitting cross-legged.

 Figure E. Sitting with feet straight out.

Flatfeet. These pancake-bottom feet probably won’t last long; usually by
three years the arch appears. Persistent flatfeet beyond age three may or
may not need support. Here’s how to tell if flatfeet are a problem. From
behind, observe your child standing barefoot on a hard surface. Draw a line
or place a ruler along the Achilles tendon to the floor. If the line is straight,
flatfeet seldom bother a child, and they require no treatment. If the line
bends inward (called pronation), your child may be helped by orthotics—
plastic inserts that are placed in regular shoes. These devices support the
arch and heel and align the anklebones and leg bones. Although controversy
exists, some podiatrists feel that treating a child with severe pronation with
orthotics from approximately three years through seven years may
minimize leg pains and the risk of later bone and joint deformities.

 Toe walking. Most toddlers go through a brief period of toe walking,
heaven knows why! This is usually a habit or a bit of monkeying around. If
it persists, your doctor should examine your child’s calf muscles and
Achilles tendons for tightness.
Limping and walking funny. It’s important to notice unusual walking
habits in your child and report them to the doctor. Limping must always be
taken seriously in a child and warrants a thorough medical exam. If your
baby walks funny (for example, waddles like a duck or drags one foot),
report your observation to baby’s doctor.

To determine if flatfeet are a problem, observe the line of the Achilles
tendon while your child is standing on a hard surface. An inward-curving
line (left) may indicate a need for orthotics; a straight line (right) usually
indicates that no treatment is necessary.

 Refusing to walk. If your previously normal walker suddenly refuses to
walk, as happens occasionally, report this to baby’s doctor. Take notes based
on the following:
• Can you recall anything that may have triggered the refusal to walk, such
as an injury or scare after a recent fall? Record the details of the day’s
activities before the walking strike.
• Do a parent exam: Undress baby. Feel and look all over the legs and feet
for bruising, redness, swelling, and areas of tenderness as you carefully
squeeze all the leg bones and anklebones. Compare one leg with the
other; move the hip, knee, and ankle joints. Does the child wince in pain
while you do? Examine and tap around the soles for splinters and pieces
of glass.
• Is baby sick? Has she been running unexplained fevers?
• Have there been any recent emotionally traumatic events?
Take your baby (and your notes) to the doctor for a thorough exam.
Growing pains. These common toddler pains, which are experienced when
the child is otherwise well, are hard to describe and difficult to localize.
They usually occur in the evening and in both legs and are never
accompanied by a limp. They are soothed by massaging the sore legs, and
the child grows out of them. We believe many of these pains are muscle
strains left over from daylong jumping and twisting. Also, we have
observed that children’s pains subsided after an arch and heel lift was put
into their shoes, taking some of the strain off leg muscles during standing
and walking, especially in a child with pronated flatfeet.

 OceanofPDF.com

 EIGHTEEN TO TWENTY-FOUR MONTHS: BIG
THOUGHTS
Baby is now more aware of who he is, where he is, what he can do, and,
frustratingly, what he cannot do—yet. The main reason for this surge of
awareness is the rapid development of the ability to think and reason—
cognitive development. This section will put to rest the adage “You can’t
reason with a toddler.”
Around eighteen months baby’s motor, verbal, and mental skills take off.
Baby runs faster, speaks more clearly, and thinks better. The master
developmental skill at this age, and the one that makes the motor, language,
and social skills work better, is baby’s mental development. Now he can
figure out concepts in his head before he does or says something. These
skills make the toddler a more fun person to live with.

OceanofPDF.com

 Motor Skills: Running, Climbing, Jumping

Moving from walking to running is a motor highlight of this stage. It’s as
though someone installed a faster engine and put better wheels on this little
machine, and baby is determined to use this new power full throttle.

Clear the Runway

Prepare for this scene: You and your baby are taking a walk. You open the
door, step outside, and, like a jet plane, baby darts from you and takes off.
You sprint after your baby. What started out as a casual stroll becomes a
race. Baby enjoys the chase but does not enjoy the frequent falls as the
refugee, looking back at his pursuer, loses his balance and falls. The
beginning jogger loves wide aisles and long halls (supermarket, theater,
church). These are his runways, and he is determined to use them. Perhaps
this is why toddlers—and often their parents—slim down during this stage.
Besides having faster wheels, another reason that babies dart off from
the security of their parents is that the safety net of separation anxiety often
wears off by eighteen months. If you are exhausted from chasing the
beginning runner as soon as he lets go of your hand, try this. While he is
still within hearing distance, yell “Bye-bye, [name]” and walk in the

 opposite direction. This often causes baby to stop and reassess whether or
not he wants to stray that far from the home base. If his home base is
moving in the other direction, he may turn about and run back to you.

EASY ON THE ELBOWS
You’re in a supermarket, and your child darts from you, or it’s time to go
and your child throws a tantrum. You grab your runaway by the wrist. He
yanks one way, you pull the other, and the elbow, which was not made for
this tug-of-war, pops out of the socket. Result: Your child won’t use his arm
as it hangs limply at his side. This is a pulled elbow, which your doctor or
emergency room physician can easily pop back into place, without any
lasting harm. During swinging play or if you must grab your child by the
lower arm, holding both arms is unlikely to strain the elbow.
Not only does the beginning runner scurry faster, she runs more safely
than in the previous stage, when baby still needed her head up and forward
to keep her balance. Now she can look down at her flying feet and dodge
the things in her way.

Climbing

Upstairs and downstairs. Toward the second birthday baby may go up the
stairs without holding on but still will do one step at a time with both feet
instead of alternating feet on each step. By twenty-four months most babies
can also go downstairs while holding on.
Crib worries. The master climber may try, and succeed in, climbing out of
the crib. When he can do this with the mattress in its lowest position, this is

 a sign that he is no longer safe left alone in his crib. He is now ready to
graduate to a toddler bed.

Jumping for Joy

Baby gets cocky with his motor skills and starts jumping around. He may
stand on one foot for a second or two while holding on and even progress to
freestanding on one foot momentarily. Jumping and having fun with new
steps naturally lead to moving in rhythm. Turn on the dance music, and the
show begins. Baby turns circles, lifts and stomps feet, and delights in
watching his own steps. Babies love to mimic adult antics and enjoy
playing the up-and-down game as you bend at the knees, saying “Down,”
and then rise “up.” Toddlers also love repetition. They like to repeat over
and over tasks that they have mastered—jumping off a wall, coming to a
safe landing, and “do again,” to the exasperation of the waiting parent who
is already late.

Playing on the Move

First gymnastics. Baby now has an overall awareness of what acrobatics
can do for his body. Somersaults are a favorite. Gymnastics for two is a fun
way to teach baby various moves while also toning yourself.

 First wheels. Vehicle fascination peaks around two years of age. Between
two and two and a half, your child progresses from scooting about on a
four-wheeled riding toy to a tricycle. For ideal size, your child should be
able to just barely touch the pavement with the tips of his shoes when seated
on the tricycle. He usually propels himself forward with his tiptoes before
learning to pedal, and touching the ground gives him more control of the
vehicle.

Baby’s developing motor skills may leave him literally jumping for joy.

Ball playing. Playing with a ball remains a favorite activity, and you can
tell a lot about your toddler’s cognitive development by playing ball with
him. For example, one day two-year-old Matthew and I were playing with

 the soccer ball in the driveway. He ran after the rolling ball, but when he
stopped to kick it he found the ball had rolled past him. He then figured out
that if he ran slightly ahead of the ball and turned around, he could stop and
control the ball in order to kick it. This is the stage in which your baby may
astonish you with his ability to think and plan ahead during play activities.
The master mover. Want to rearrange your furniture? Call Toddler Moving
Company. Babies love to move furniture around, especially chairs on
smooth floors. Be prepared for distress calls when the frustrated mover gets
stuck. When baby gets bored with moving larger-than-baby-size furniture,
he picks on furniture his own size. Wastebaskets are a favorite target as
baby grabs and flings their contents.

Gymnastics for two is fun for mom and baby.

 Before she reaches tricycle age, your toddler will enjoy scooting about on a
four-wheeler.

SAFETY TIP: Baby’s rearranging can make a room unsafe—for example,
putting chairs next to windows or stools next to balconies. Since you don’t
want to nail down your furniture or your toddler, keep liftable objects above
his reach and keep a watchful eye on the mover.

Parents’ little helper. This may be the last stage when your child is such a
willing helper, but you get what you don’t pay for—a little mess. Encourage
your aide to assist in “housework,” making cookies, watering plants with a
small sprinkling can. To get some useful help give your child a “special

 pail” and let him roam around the house and yard collecting clutter. There is
a bit of a pack-rat tendency in toddlers anyway.
Redirecting play. We live in a busy home. Eight children who often have
playmates who all have noisy toys. It’s easy to turn down the volume of
teenage noise, but noisy and dangerous toddlers sometimes need to be
redirected. If your child likes to pound, get him rubber hammers. If she
likes to bang, a toy xylophone may save furniture dings. If he’s a thrower,
Ping-Pong and foam balls get high marks.

Mommy’s little helper.

 Order in the house. Even though your toddler is always on the go, the twoyear-old begins to show an appreciation for order. Respect this by providing
appropriate storage and space. An orderly playroom with eye-level shelves
helps to unclutter his world. Work and play surfaces should be from 18 to
20 inches high. Low shelves with 1-foot-square compartments, each
containing one or two valued toys, are much better than a pile of toys in a
toy box, which encourages flinging frenzies. Child-size furniture and his
own table and chair allow your child to be comfortable sitting for a longer
period of time, thus encouraging task completion and concentration. Lowlevel wooden pegs, where he can hang his own clothing, encourage a sense
of responsibility for belongings.

OceanofPDF.com

 Busy Hands

Blocks. The favorite activity of stacking blocks continues into the two-yearold stage, but blocks are still getting bigger as baby gets bigger. The master
builder loves stacking big foam or corrugated cardboard blocks taller than
his height and then falling over them.
Knobs and buttons beware. This stage is literally a turning point for
curious toddlers. They love to turn knobs and push buttons. If your TV
suddenly blasts, you know you have a curious toddler at large. Babies are
especially attracted to turning knobs and pushing buttons on radios, stereos,
and televisions, which produce a change in sound. The cause and effect of
turning knobs and making sounds fascinate baby, and he may continue to
stand in front of your electronic toys pushing and turning all the moving
parts to see what happens.

 Even at two years of age, your child has an appreciation for order;
convenient areas for play and storage will help cultivate this.
Supervise his exploration so he can learn without damaging your
equipment. Talk about it. “On” and “off” can be his job. He’ll be thrilled
with the power this gives him. If he abuses his power you may choose to
remove knobs or move the equipment to higher ground for a while. Better
yet, get baby his own knobs and buttons to turn and push. Used radios and
flashlights (from garage sales) are proven winners. Make-things-happen
toys, such as push-down and pop-up toys, are interest-holding favorites.

THE 12-INCH RULE
Toddlers are fascinated by what’s on top of tables, counters, and desks.
They frequently reach an exploring hand over table edges in search of
things to grab. Be table-edge watchful. Get into the habit of pushing
dangerous items back at least 12 inches (30 centimeters) from the edge, out
of the reach of curious hands.

 Turning pages. Babies love turning pages in a book but prior to this stage
usually grab two or three pages at a time. Around eighteen months baby
may begin to turn one page at a time, especially if you show him how and
have books with thick, tearproof cardboard pages.
More toddler art. By the time your toddler is two, you may have a
collection of kid art plastered all over your kitchen walls and refrigerator.
As baby scribbles a maze of lines or maybe even an occasional circle, she
takes great pride in her work and expects applause and to have her creations
hung in a place of honor.
Lid play. Babies love playing with lids and may begin screwing them on
and off at this stage. We have found a shoe box and lid to be a perfect match
for a toddler’s hands.

 Puzzles. For the older toddler who loves the challenge of matching and has
the patience to try all the fits, puzzles are a hit. If your baby has a low
frustration tolerance, sit next to him as he tackles an inset puzzle. Let him
try himself, but if frustration signs are escalating, bring show-and-tell to the
rescue.
Keep cell phones out of sight. Toddler video games and apps on cell
phones and laptops can be fun and keep a toddler quiet, but they can also
become obsessions. Research has shown some negative effects on learning
and behavior in young kids who overuse portable electronics. Resist the
temptation to let your toddler routinely zone out on your cell phone. Toys,
puzzles, books, and other interactive toys are much better for developing
minds.

Puzzles can be fun for youngsters who enjoy a mental challenge.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Language Development

This is the new-word-a-day stage. Your toddler not only adds new words
but adds new ways of using familiar words.
Babies develop speech at different rates. Some show a steady word-aday increase in their vocabulary, some jabber in bursts of new words, and
others don’t say much until near the end of the second year, as if storing up
a lot of words for the opening two-year speech. How many words a baby
says is not as important as how he communicates. Some babies, even at two
years, are in the “says little—understands all—communicates well” stage of
speech development. They still primarily use body language to express a
want.
As in all stages of language development, in this stage you’re building
more than a vocabulary, you’re building a relationship. You are not just
teaching words, you are teaching trust.

Put a Label on It

The toddler increasingly learns that everything and every person in the
world has a name. As you walk around the house or drive in the car, give
everything a label. Naming everything you drive past also helps settle the

 restless toddler. Words build memory, and it is easier to store a labeled than
an unlabeled object in the child’s growing memory file.
Spot-check to see if your child remembers the name of household
objects by frequently asking “What’s that?” as you point to items such as
the piano. If he responds “Pee-no,” add a reinforcing “Yes!” to praise baby
for getting the right word and also add “That’s a pi-a-no” as you model the
correct pronunciation, but not in a corrective tone.
The question-and-answer game. Be prepared for a barrage of the classic
toddler learning phrase, “What’s that?” Once baby learns that everything
has a name, she naturally wants to learn what all the names are. As you play
the name-that-thing game, if you see your baby looking intently at an
object, quickly put a label on it—“That’s a box.” Return to the box a few
minutes later and check baby’s memory, asking, “What’s that?” as you point
to the box. If baby points to an object but doesn’t know its name, baby is
signaling for you to fill in the missing word.

KEEPING A SPEECH DIARY
You can chart your baby’s speech progress by recording words and phrases
your baby says at each stage of development. In addition to recording the
words, record the length and complexity of the sentences and especially the
long words that he humorously messes up. Even more exciting is to keep a
thought diary: what you guess baby is thinking by what he says and does.
Reading and playing back this record when baby is older helps you relive
one of the most exciting stages of baby’s development.
Provide a running commentary. Babies learn that actions have words,
too. Talk about daily rituals such as bathing and changing and eating. “Now

 we lift our arms, now we put them down.” Toddlers easily master action
words: “up,” “down,” “off,” “go.” And they love action phrases such as
“Hug the mommy.”
Read my lips. The two-year-old is a near-perfect parrot and soon becomes
an accomplished lip-reader. During this stage when Stephen and I, Dr. Bill,
would be at head-to-head level, I noticed that he watched my lips during
most of the conversation until he had a handle on the words I was saying.
The pointer. What about the baby who has good body language
communication but says only a few clear words? He grunts “uh-uh” as he
points to the cookie jar, and you understand he wants a cookie. Question the
pointer: “Tell mommy what you want. Do you want a cookie?” As he
shakes his head with an affirmative yes, acknowledge his body language:
“Yes, I understand you want a cookie.” Don’t put pressure on the pointer to
speak, but let him hear the right words to complement his gestures. You can
also pretend as if you aren’t sure what your child wants. Touch a few wrong
objects first: “Do you want your cup? No? Do you want a banana? No?”
Then finally get it right by handing baby the desired object.

Right Associations

Language helps a toddler express that he understands how certain actions
go together. Baby may grab her coat and hat and wave bye-bye. The

 doorbell rings, and baby says “Door.” Your baby may walk into the kitchen
if hungry. Toddlers store patterns of association in their minds, and words
help them express these.
Babies now also associate pictures and books with familiar objects and
persons in their environment. By two, some may even differentiate boys and
girls and correctly point to each sex in a book or in person.
Misunderstandings.

Expect

humorous

word

confusions

as

baby

mismatches thoughts and words. Matthew was into Band-Aids. One day we
were talking about his sister’s headband, and he called it a Band-Aid
because of the common root word “band.” Idiomatic and figurative
language are particularly confusing. For example, I was telling Stephen, “I
really blew it,” and he started blowing at imaginary candles (we have lots of
birthdays in our family).
Nuances. Babies not only learn that objects have names. They also learn
that the things that objects do have names: Plates get “hot”; Popsicles are
“cold”; and even these properties have further divisions. Notice the intense
look on your baby’s face as she struggles to get the right word. Sometimes a
baby is about to say a word, realizes it’s not the word she wants, and then
changes it. For example, when feeling water temperature, a toddler may say,
“Hot… no… warm!” In the previous stage she could understand only hot
and cold. Now, she’s aware of nuances of temperature, such as warm.

 The theme doesn’t fit. One night Matthew heard us talking about going out
and naturally surmised that he would be going along. As we tried to put on
his pajamas, he protested, “No, no!” He had computed that if he was going
out, why was he being dressed for bed? He accepted the explanation, once
he understood it.

Baby Talk

Challenge words. Babies become bored with words like “dog” and “cat.”
They enjoy being challenged by tough words. “Helicopter” was Matthew’s
favorite at this age; “dinosaur,” a close second. Oh, sure, baby will mess it
up, but often the messed-up version is more fun to hear.
Communicates preferences. Gone are the pointing grunts, almost. By age
two, baby can communicate nearly all of his daily wants with words: “Go
outside,” “Play ball,” “Want cookie.” When given choices—a valuable
learning exercise—baby can communicate preferences. At eighteen months
Matthew was asked if he wanted to take a walk outside with me or take a
bath with mommy. He couldn’t give me a verbal answer, but he understood
he had a choice. When I picked him up to take him outside, he used the
squirm cues of his body language to lunge toward Martha and convey his
preference. By the time he was two, when given a choice, he responded in
words such as “go outside” or “mommy.”

 Read my words. In this stage of speech development not only are you
teaching baby to understand your language, you are learning to interpret his,
and baby expects that. As baby learns how to talk, you learn how to listen.
Many toddlers still do not articulate many of their words correctly at this
stage, but they do refine their ability to use correct inflections when
communicating a word. “My-nun” means “raisin,” and you will know this
by the inflection in his voice. Good parenting skills include being able to
decode the toddler’s jargon and give him the feedback that he is truly
understood by his caretakers.

Naming Games

Name those parts. By eighteen months most babies can name all their
body parts and enjoy traveling around their body playing “Where’s nose?”
and so on. Upon hearing the cue word “nose,” baby may point to his nose.
Now you can add, “Where’s mommy’s nose?” and see if baby points to
your nose. “Eyes” and “foot” are also on the favorite parts list. “Belly
button” may not yet merit a point. During diapering or bathing baby may
grab his penis or her vulva—this is a good time to start labeling (“That’s
your penis [vulva]”). Body-part naming becomes an attention-holding game
because you are engaging the normally egocentric toddler in talking about
himself. It’s a good game when you’re stuck with a restless baby without
any toys as props.

 Name those persons. Many two-year-olds can say their own first name and
sometimes their last name. Baby may even name siblings and familiar
caregivers or match the picture of a person and say the right name. Hold
baby up to a wall full of pictures of familiar family members and play
name-that-face. Put this on your list of what to do when there’s nothing to
do.

Social Interactions

Use my name. A beautiful feature of advanced second-year speech is
starting sentences with direct address; “Mommy, I want…” or “Daddy,
go…” Baby uses your name and that of familiar caregivers more if you
have modeled opening your comments with baby’s name and given eye
contact as an added touch.
Happy words. Note the happy-to-see-you words your baby has when you
return after an absence. Matthew would jump up and down hollering “yay”
when we came home.
Giving orders. By two years old, most babies have the verbal and gesture
language to direct their social interactions. “Jimmy wants to come over and
play. Is that okay?” you ask your toddler. You may get a smiling answer, “
’K.” Baby may push you away from his toys with a “Go away” or “Move”
if you are in his way. Amazed by his power to push people around with

 words, he also whines less during socializing. Baby can now ask for things
at the table—juice, milk, and so on—and can go to the pantry or refrigerator
in search of more food as a clue that he is still hungry.
Don’t conclude, “This young upstart is bossing me around.” Giving
orders like “Come here” or “Get water” has nothing to do with who’s in
charge. Babies talk like that. Babies also try on new words and phrases to
test adult reactions. If you like the words, affirm them; if not, change them.
Babies think like that.

Little Persons with Big Ears

The astute awareness of the two-year-old is beautifully illustrated in his
grasp of ambient language, that is, conversations that go on around him. In
the previous stage baby began to understand the gist of the conversation.
Now he verbally chimes in. One day Martha asked me a question that
required a yes or no answer. Matthew, who was sitting next to us,
immediately looked me square in the eye and said, “No!” We were
astonished that he was, first of all, tuned in to our conversation and, second,
that he was so ready with an answer (the correct one as it turned out) to a
question that had not even been addressed to him.

GENITAL AWARENESS
The normal exploration of body parts, noticeable as thumb-sucking and
finger play in the first year, progresses to penis pulling and vagina probing
during the second year. The normal curiosity progresses to the experience of

 genital sensitivity and the pleasure of self-stimulation. Like thumb-sucking,
the ability to use body parts for pleasure is a normal fact of growing up.
Handle genital play like nosepicking: Discourage it in public (consider
family areas public) and gently distract the child when the actions are
obvious. Avoid saying, “No, that’s not okay,” or other negative statements.
Don’t deliver the “dirty” speech. Part of a growing child’s healthy sexuality
is to be comfortable with and to value all of his or her body.
Another time Matthew was just finishing his lunch when his brother
Peter asked if anyone had seen his soccer ball. Matthew quickly finished
eating and then started looking for the ball. Peter repeated the question,
“Where’s the soccer ball?” Matthew shrugged his shoulders and raised his
hands in a puzzled gesture, as if to say “I don’t know,” then he gestured to
Peter to come with him to look in the family room. From this dialogue we
learned three things about Matthew’s development. He now paid attention
to what was going on, he had body language to express his desire to join in
the search, and, finally, his mind was capable of re-creating the missing ball
scene. Again, we learn how babies think by how they act.
This increased awareness should make parents more careful about what
they say around baby. Recently in my office I observed how a twenty-onemonth-old child reacted to a conversation we were having about whether or
not her parents should leave her for a week’s vacation. While not yet having
the verbal ability to say, “No, don’t leave me; take me with you,” she
exhibited a worried look that communicated to us only too well that she
understood there was a plot afoot that she didn’t like.
To determine your own baby’s level of conversation awareness, try
encouraging him to finish the sentence you begin. We call it the fill-in-themissing-word-game. For example, after shopping one day, we found we had

 left one of Matthew’s toys in the store. As we got into the car, I said,
“Matthew, I guess we’ll have to go back to the store and look for the…” He
piped up, “Duck!”

Finishing Touches

The period leading up to baby’s second birthday is like finishing school for
toddler language. Sentences remain telegraphic but get longer and more
accurate. “More” progresses to “More peace” (as he hears you say “please”
repeatedly) to “Want more” to “I want more.” When going into a dark
room, initially baby may point to the light switch and holler “On”; later he
adds “light” and eventually lengthens the sentence to “Turn light on.” It
seems that baby conceptualizes the full sentence and then gradually fills in
the whole thought with words. And, of course, the “I do it” stage now
begins.
One-step,

two-step.

A

noticeable

maturity

in

baby’s

language

comprehension is progressing from following a one-step to a two-step
request: “Go get the pretzel, and bring it to daddy.” Baby now has the
memory and the attention span to go specifically and get a pretzel (amid
many other objects in the kitchen) and remember to bring it to daddy once
he has found it.

 Let me tell you how I feel. Besides words to express wants, babies at this
stage have words to express feelings. Babies become aware of “owies,” or
scrapes and bruises. And, of course, baby pleads for the magical Band-Aid
to repair his body. Toddlers normally overreact to bodily injuries.
Babies still don’t have many words to express disappointment when
being left, but the “I miss mommy” looks are unmistakable. When and how
long to leave your baby is a difficult decision, especially when trying out a
new caregiver. Learn to read your baby’s body language for signs of
approval or disapproval.

OceanofPDF.com

 Developing Memory

Baby’s improving memory helps him at this stage begin to think out an
action before he acts, making toddler behavior less impulsive. I marveled at
our son Stephen’s ability to think ahead at nineteen months. One day I
watched him holding a cup of yogurt as he approached the stairs. I saw in
his expression that he was thinking through the process, and, just as he
rounded the corner to start climbing the stairs, he reached out and handed
the cup to me as though he had, ahead of time, recognized the fact that he
could not negotiate the stairs with it in his hands. He gave the cup to me,
understanding that his dessert would be safe in my care until I delivered it
to him at the top of the stairs.
The ability to think before acting is most clearly illustrated in a toddler’s
normal daily play. Our other children enjoyed playing ball with Stephen.
One day as he and his older brother Peter were sitting a few feet away from
each other throwing a ball back and forth, the cat perched between them,
right in the trajectory of the ball. Stephen realized he would hit the cat if he
threw the ball in that particular direction, so he moved over to be able to
throw the ball to Peter without doing so.
Your baby’s increasingly vivid memory also helps him make more
correct associations of how things belong together: The ball goes with the
baseball bat, the crayons with the paper. The ability to make right

 associations is best illustrated by the way a child correctly matches apparel
at this stage—who belongs to what. Try this fun experiment: Place a pair of
daddy’s, mommy’s, baby’s, and older sibling’s shoes on the floor in the
same room and ask your toddler to get daddy’s shoes. Notice how your
baby matches which shoes belong to whom. Laundry day is another
opportunity to test associating abilities. As you take the clothes out of the
dryer, initially label them with the owner’s name: “Daddy’s shirt… [baby’s
name] shirt…” After you have initiated this naming game, notice how your
toddler can correctly match the person with the apparel as you take each
piece out of the dryer.
The toddler’s ability to remember, associate, and think before he acts
makes teaching safety easier at this stage. Feeling the heat emanate from the
stove elicits the verbal reaction of “hot,” so that a toddler can now
understand “hot” and “hurt,” concepts that lessen the impulsive urge to
touch hot objects. Parents often feel more comfortable teaching safety to a
child of this age because they feel that they are finally beginning to get
through to him on what he can safely touch and play with and what he
cannot.
Growing together with your baby is what infant—and parent—development
is all about.

Moving Forward

 Obviously development doesn’t end at the second birthday. Many exciting
changes continue to unfold before your eyes as your child grows through
the years. In The Portable Pediatrician (Little, Brown) we continue this
saga and describe the many developmental, nutritional, and behavioral
changes still to come throughout adolescence.

OceanofPDF.com

 23

OceanofPDF.com

 Bothersome but Normal Toddler
Behaviors

You may have noticed that up till now we have seldom mentioned the
word “discipline.” Actually, the entire book is about discipline, for as we
said in the first chapter, true discipline is the product of a trusting
relationship between parent and child. One of the benefits of the attachment
style of parenting is that it helps you to really know your child, to be attuned
to what is behind his actions, and to work with him to help channel his
behavior in desirable directions.
Parents, have realistic expectations for typical toddler behavior. Every
child is supposed to say no, throw tantrums, grab toys, refuse to share, and
hit, bite, and kick. It’s more abnormal for a child to not show most of these
traits at some point during the second and third year. Yet such behaviors can
really become a drag if your toddler doesn’t mature past them in a timely
manner. Notice that we say your toddler should “mature past them” instead
of “you should be able to ‘discipline’ them” out of your child. These
behaviors aren’t a reflection of poor parenting skills. They are a normal part
of your child’s learning to get what he wants, stand up for himself, and
climb to the top of the social ladder. In this chapter we will show you how

 you can use your attachment parenting skills to guide your child through
these behaviors so he can successfully mature into a caring, empathetic,
generous, well-behaved child.

OceanofPDF.com

 THE REAL MEANING OF DISCIPLINE
During baby’s eighteen-month checkup mothers often ask, “Should I begin
disciplining my baby now?” What these mothers don’t realize is that
everything they have been doing with their baby is discipline. We believe
that discipline begins at birth and evolves with each interaction you have
with your baby, from the first cry to the first “no,” and that discipline has
different meanings at different stages.

OceanofPDF.com

 Discipline Begins at Birth

Discipline begins as a relationship, not a list of methods. The first stage of
discipline—the attachment stage—begins at birth and develops as you and
your baby grow together. The big three of attachment parenting
(breastfeeding, wearing baby, and responding to baby’s cues) are actually
your first disciplinary actions. A baby who is on the receiving end of
attachment parenting feels right, and a person who feels right is more likely
to act right. An attachment-parented baby is more receptive to authority
because he operates from a foundation of trust. This baby spends the early
months of his life learning that the world is a responsive and trusting place
to be.
Parents who practice this style of parenting develop an inner sense of
their baby’s preferences and capabilities at each stage of development. They
refine their ability to get behind the eyes and into the mind of their baby and
understand the reasons for their infant’s behavior. Connected parents and
infants grow naturally into a disciplined relationship. As the relationship
matures, attachment parents are better able to convey what behavior they
expect of their child and the child is better able to understand these
expectations. The parents are able to give better discipline and the baby is
better able to receive it. With each interaction, parents become more
confident in their own methods, not someone else’s borrowed out of

 desperation from a book or “expert” adviser. By being open and responsive
to their baby, parents do not let themselves become locked into a set of
methods, instead realizing that discipline must evolve and adjust to
changing family circumstances and the child’s developmental stages.
This first stage of discipline is one of nurturing in which parents and
infant have an interdependence—a mutual shaping of each other’s behavior
that helps them to know and trust one another. On this foundation both the
connected parent and the connected infant can more comfortably graduate
to the next stage of discipline—setting limits.

OceanofPDF.com

 HEADSTRONG MIND-SET
The toddler has a clear image in his own mind of what he wants to do, and
he doesn’t easily accept alternatives. In adult jargon we call this a mind-set.
The two-year-old is particularly known for having a strong mind-set when
associating persons, places, and events, meriting the description “stubborn”
or “headstrong.” These babies like set routines and are unwilling to accept
any breach in the routine without protest.
A very important social principle that masterful negotiators have long
appreciated is that if you want to win people over to your mind-set, you first
meet them where they are, and then gradually carry them to where you want
them to be. Parents can use this valuable negotiating principle in
overcoming a common and very frustrating hassle—taking toddlers to the
supermarket. Develop a supermarket routine and then try to stick with it.
Stephen liked certain fruit Popsicles and had fixed in his little mind that as
he was wheeled through the maze of supermarket aisles, he would
eventually be rewarded with a Popsicle at a certain aisle, which he had
learned to remember and anticipate. A periodic reassuring “We’re going to
get that Popsicle” often buys you time to get your week’s shopping done en
route to the tantrum-saving treat!
“Mine” and “me” are by-products of the mind-set stage. Two-year-olds
stake out their territory and often refuse to share space with their sibling. In

 fact, “sharing” may not yet be a part of your toddler’s social repertoire.

OceanofPDF.com

 Setting Limits

In our family we believe in consistent boundaries, not only for the
discipline of the children, but for the sanity of the parents. At this stage,
discipline is the skill of conveying to your child what behavior you expect,
the benefits of desirable behavior, what behavior you will not tolerate, and
the consequences of misbehavior. It also involves having the wisdom to
consistently carry this out. Discipline is not something you do to a baby, it
is working with a baby; the deeper your nurturing during the attachment
phase of discipline, the firmer you can afford to be in setting limits.
Toddlers and children derive a sense of security from knowing their limits.
Appreciate normal toddler development. In Chapter 22 we discussed
how toddlers normally behave. By understanding infant development in
general, and your baby’s in particular, you will not expect too much or too
little of your baby. Being around more experienced mothers and their babies
also helps. (By the time your child is four years old, you will have the
equivalent of a college degree in your child’s discipline.) Babies need
boundaries that take into account their capabilities at each stage of
development. A twelve-month-old will need and expect different boundaries
than a two-year-old. Around nine months baby starts showing she has an
opinion, and it doesn’t always agree with yours. Remember, a strong will is

 a sign of health. Baby needs a strong will to achieve all of the milestones of
the following months and years. If she had no will, how would she ever be
able to take all of the tumbles and spills and get right back up to try again?
“I’ve told my two-year-old over and over again not to pull the cat’s tail.
He just doesn’t listen to me!” Sound familiar? Many of your directives
don’t seem to sink in, not because your child is being defiant, but because
toddlers under two don’t yet have the cognitive ability to internalize your
discipline directives. When you say, “No street” to your two-year-old, he
may act like he’s never heard it before. Yet when he’s three, he’s likely to
give you the look, “Oh, yes, I remember.” The ability to internalize
discipline is why age three is much easier to discipline than two.
Develop the wisdom to say no. As your toddler progresses from a lap baby
to a house explorer, your role broadens to include that of boundary setter.
When babies have clear boundaries they can proceed with growth and
development instead of wasting energy dealing with uncertainty. As parents
we are to be in charge of our children, but not to the extent that we control
them like puppets. Rather than being threatened by the independence of the
toddler stage, a wise parent will find ways to channel the child’s behavior.
Convey who’s in charge. Be consistent in your discipline, and remember
that lasting discipline requires persistent effort. Your child is about to
handle a forbidden object. Rather than shouting from your easy chair, go to
him, take him by the hand, look him squarely in the eye, demand his
attention, and show the young adventurer why this behavior is not

 permitted. Sound firm and offer an alternative. Try to remember the golden
rule of discipline and treat your child the way you would like to be treated.
Even a toddler in an obstinate mood will find it hard to resist warmth and
fun.
Keep your requests simple. Conversational dialogue is great for
socialization, but wordiness can get in the way of your toddler’s processing
exactly what behavior you expect of him.

Martha notes: While sitting with Stephen over my morning cup of coffee as
he finished his cereal, I realized he was interested in my cup. I very
chattingly explained over and over that he shouldn’t touch, that it was
mama’s cup, not Stephen’s. Finally, as he was on the verge of tears because
I was restraining him, it occurred to me that I had failed to use the one
word he understands best—“hot.” When I finally communicated to him in
glowing tones “h-o-o-t-t,” he repeated the word with respect and stopped
his single-minded efforts to scald himself.

Put balance into your discipline. Give your child enough slack so he can
safely test the waters. Give him a chance to mess up. If you routinely keep
the rope too tight, he’ll never fully learn what he can do and he will never
fail. It is from his parent-supported failures that he will learn. Rather than

 prohibiting a child from climbing, for example, make the environment a
safe one in which to climb.
Create a child-considered environment. One of your roles as
disciplinarian is to be on safety patrol, keeping one reach ahead of those
lightning-fast little hands. You may find it easier to simply raise everything
breakable up a few feet for a few years, rather than constantly raising your
voice to a monotonous “No!” And reserve noes for the big things. (See
alternatives for saying no, here.)
These insights are only starter tips. We advise you to do your own “study.”
Consult with parents whose concepts of discipline you admire. Ask them to
suggest books on discipline (yes, books can be helpful to supplement your
knowledge, but don’t let them replace your own experience). Becoming a
wise disciplinarian will make life easier for yourself and is a valuable
inheritance to leave your children.

OceanofPDF.com

 TOY SQUABBLES
“My two-year-old seems so aggressive during play. He’s always pushing
other children around and grabbing their toys.” Sound familiar? Mix lots of
kids (or just two) together with lots of toys in a small room, and you have
the recipe for a clash. When it comes to play, first be sure you understand
the difference between aggression, meaning infringing on someone else’s
territory, and assertiveness—protecting your own turf. It’s sometimes
difficult to draw the line between the two.

OceanofPDF.com

 The Law of the Jungle

A toddler play group can seem like it follows the rules of the jungle. The
one who shoves the hardest and grabs the most keeps the toys. This scene is
an aggressor’s heaven. But the more passive baby either withdraws from
social play because he can’t handle the aggression or rises to the occasion
and fights back. In other words, the soft get hard, and the hard get harder. In
older children’s lingo, they become street smart. The aggressive child learns
that aggression pays, and the gentler child learns that gentleness doesn’t.
You can help soften this scene by orchestrating your child’s play.
While it’s not wise to control your child’s play too much, you can
monitor the setting. The “mine” stage of toy possessiveness is a normal
passing phase of toddler play, and you can help lessen annoying play
conflicts. Here’s how:
Set the ground rules with other parents. Before a play date, moms should
learn about the other child’s temperament and the other parent’s opinions on
play. A first-time parent of a quiet and timid little boy may be horrified at
the thought of your rambunctious daughter being aggressive in any way
toward her son. But you might view your child’s “assertiveness” as a
positive trait. Learn about each other’s expectations to avoid hurt feelings
among parents. What will you do if one child grabs a toy from another?

 Will you let the two toddlers work it out or will you intervene? Will you let
one lead and the other follow? Do you have to hover nearby or can you sit
back and relax? After several get-togethers, you will learn which kids seem
to be a good fit with your child, and which parents share your discipline
ideals.
Hover nearby. If your child has a tendency to push, hit, or bite
unexpectedly, you may need to hang out behind him during playtime with
others, ready to intervene and move him away if he appears ready to strike.
Don’t be too quick to jump in. You don’t have to teach a toddler how to
instantly share toys and respect others’ possessions right away. There is
something to be said for letting kids play naturally among themselves. If an
assertive child takes a toy from a passive one who seems to care less about
it and moves on to another toy, you can just let it rest.
Match playmates. Pairing two aggressors is a guaranteed fight, but if that’s
the case, sit between them and show how much more fun it is to play nicely.
Act as referee. Sometimes you have to be the referee, handing each child a
toy, setting a timer, and then announcing round two—a strategy called
trading: “Now it’s time to trade toys.”
Model gentleness. Acting as a role model is especially important if one
child is throwing potentially dangerous projectiles, like metal cars. Say, “A
car is for rolling,” as you show the child how to play with a car.

 Sharing. If sharing is a major problem, ask parents of other children to
bring a few of their own toys when they come to visit. Capitalize on the
grass-is-always-greener attitude: Children like to play with another child’s
toys. As your child grabs his playmate’s toy, his playmate grabs his toy. He
soon learns to give a toy to get a toy. Possession means ownership at this
stage, and sharing does not come naturally to children, unless, of course,
they see that giving up one toy gets them another.
Discourage grabbing. It also helps to teach nongrabbing ways of give and
take. (Model “Give it to mama” when he is very young rather than just
taking something quickly or forcefully.) Many children don’t object to the
sharing aspect, but rather to the aggressive removal of a toy from their
possession. It seems so final in their eyes, especially when they see the glint
of victory in the eyes of the grabber.
If toy squabbles continue, separate the players.

OceanofPDF.com

 TEMPER TANTRUMS
When was the last time you pitched a good fit? Adults have tantrums, too,
but we excuse them as letting off steam. When our desire to do or have
something or our anger at making a wrong decision or losing a valued item
exceeds our ability to simply shrug it off, we release our emotions by
stomping our feet, slamming doors, throwing things, pounding fists on a
table, and shouting with rage. Then you feel better (usually) and go about
your business. Sounds childish? But it’s also adultish. Add this normal
behavior of any emotional person to the ambivalent feelings of a growing
toddler, and you have the makings of a temper tantrum.
Two basic feelings prompt most temper tantrums. A child has an intense
curiosity and a desire to perform an act, but very often the desire is greater
than the capability. This leads to intense frustration, which is released in a
healthy tantrum. Second, newly found power and the desire for “bigness”
propel him toward a certain act, when suddenly someone from above,
especially someone he loves, descends upon him with a “no.” Acceptance
of an outside force contrary to his own will is very difficult. It is a conflict
he cannot handle without a fight. He wants to be big, but reality tells him
how small he is; he is angry but does not yet have the language to express
his anger, so he does so in actions. Because he cannot yet handle emotions

 with reason, he chooses to cope with his inner emotions by a display of
outward emotions, which we call a tantrum.

OceanofPDF.com

 Handling Tantrums

Temper tantrums become a problem for both the parent and the child. How
should you handle such episodes? First, realize that you can’t “handle”
them; you can only respect them. They reflect your child’s emotions, which
he has to learn to handle. You are not responsible for the cause or the
treatment of these outrages. Your role is to support your child. Too much
interference deprives him of his power and a release from inner tension,
whereas not enough support leaves him to cope all by himself without the
reserves to do so. This can be an exhausting and frightening experience for
both the child and the parents. Here are some ways to turn down the heat.

Learn What Sets Off the Fire

Keep a tantrum diary. Know what sets your child off. Is he hungry, tired?
Are there circumstances that he can’t handle? What triggers undesirable
behavior? For example, if your toddler cannot handle the supermarket
scene, shop during off hours and leave baby with your spouse.
Watch for pre-tantrum signs. If you notice that a few minutes before the
flare-up, your baby is usually bored, doesn’t seem connected to anyone or

 anything, whines, broods, or asks for something he can’t have, intervene
when you hear these grumbles, before the little volcano erupts.

Keep Cool

Model calmness. As baby sees, baby does. If your baby sees you tantrum,
expect him to imitate your behavior. Older children can handle a behavior
outburst from parents and siblings because they can understand an
explanation of the behavior, and you eventually end it with an apology and
a therapeutic laugh. Toddlers may be confused when witnessing too many
angry explosions and feel this is standard operating behavior within the
family.
Who’s having the tantrum? “He knows how to push my buttons,” stated a
mother who asked us for counseling to better handle her toddler’s rage. If
you are a volatile person, it’s easy for a toddler to set off your own
explosion, ending up in a shouting match that neither person hears or wins.
He is already out of control and needs you to stay in control.

REDIRECTING IMPULSIVE BEHAVIOR
Babies learn by doing things. Their growing minds are driven to explore
and try out new behaviors, both for their effect on caregivers and for the
way they work for the children themselves. Beware the noncurious baby.
When a baby is in a mood or stage to try out a certain behavior, attempt
to channel it into one that is tolerable to you and has learning value for

 baby. Distracting the volatile toddler when he is about to explode may
thwart a blowup.
Does this scenario sound familiar? Baby is throwing a hard ball in the
house and is about to do some damage. You shout, “No!” and snatch the
ball from the toddler’s tenacious hands. He erupts into a flailing, kicking,
stomping, angry tirade and disintegrates into a curled-up heap on the floor
beneath your feet.
Scratch this scene. Instead, as you retrieve the dangerous ball with one
hand, offer a soft ball with the other and a tantrum-aborting, “Here’s a fun
ball.” Or as baby begins his “no-no” pleadings for his ball, channel his
throwing into a more suitable ballpark: “Let’s go outside and play ball
together.” This is a win-win situation: You make your point, toddler gets to
play ball.
First of all, know yourself. If your child’s cries or tantrums make you
angry or anxious (“push your buttons”), it is important for you to
understand what went on in your past to cause this. Sometimes just
knowing that there is a connection helps a parent deal with upset behavior
in their children in a mature way. Often the issues run quite deep, especially
when abuse of any kind was inflicted on a person as a child, and counseling
becomes necessary. It is important to the emotional health of your child that
you seek help in counseling or therapy so that you can understand yourself
and your reactions to your toddler’s disturbing behavior.
Don’t take it personally. If baby’s rage easily gets under your skin,
remember you are responsible neither for baby’s tantrum nor for stopping it.
The “goodness” of the baby is not a reflection of your goodness as a parent.
Tantrums are as common as frequent falls as a baby climbs the shaky ladder
toward independence.

 A private scene. Temper tantrums in public places are embarrassing, and it
is often difficult to consider a child’s feelings first. Your first thought is
more likely to be, “What will people think of me as a parent?” If you feel
trapped and embarrassed—in line at the supermarket, for example—rather
than lashing out, calmly carry your child (kicking and screaming if
necessary) to a private place such as a bathroom or your car where your
child can perform his act and you can calmly perform yours without
worrying about audience approval.
Stay cool in hot places. Toddlers throw fits at the worst times, and this
“bad” behavior makes you look bad around your friends. Tantrums often
occur when parents are in a hurry and preoccupied with non-baby-oriented
tasks, such as preparing a dinner party, or when babies sense that parents
are not tuned in to them. Undesirable behavior often takes place when we
impose unrealistic expectations on a child. To expect a curious toddler to be
the model of obedience in a supermarket, where he is surrounded by a
smorgasbord of tempting delights, may be asking too much. Go when you
both are rested and fed and make it a time for dialogue about your
purchases, letting him help from the safety of his belted shopping-cart seat.
Remember, he is a person. Schedule upsetting events, such as getting shots
at a doctor’s office, at your child’s best behavioral time of the day.
Expecting a child to be the model of good behavior at the end of the day
when he is tired and hungry (and so are you) is asking too much.

 Choose your battles wisely. To survive the tantrum stage, we divide
toddler desires into “biggies” and “smallies.” Staying in a car seat is a
biggie. It is nonnegotiable, and all the tantrum theatrics in the world will not
free the safely contained protester. But which outfit to wear on a given day
is a smallie. A clothing mismatch is not worth a fight. When wearing a shirt
is nonnegotiable, offering choices may save face for both parent and child:
“Do you want to wear the red or blue shirt?” This lets your child feel as if
he has control over his chioces. Make sure what you decide to say no to is
really worth it. Many toddlers throw a fit over having to put shoes on before
leaving the house. Instead of starting a fight every time, maybe it’s okay to
simply bring the shoes along in the car and put them on when you reach
your destination. In our home we do not have the time or energy to hassle
about small things. If our child demands peanut butter on top of the jelly but
refuses to eat the stuff when smeared the other way around, we are not
afraid to accommodate a minor whim. If grandma wonders, this is not
spoiling.

Is It Okay to Retreat?

You will occasionally find that you’ve triggered a tantrum by saying no,
your child has really lost it, and you wish you had said yes in the first place
because you now realize it was a “smallie.” Can you change your mind?
Yes, as long as you don’t do it too often (which would reinforce the
tantrums). Explain to your child that you have changed your mind but not

 because of the tantrum. This gives your child the message that you love him
and that you are flexible enough to reconsider what’s best in any situation.

The Ostrich Approach

Should you ignore a tantrum? Most of the time the “ignore it” advice is
unwise. Ignoring any behavior in your child deprives your child of a
valuable support resource and deprives parents of an opportunity to improve
their rapport with the tantrumer. Your simply being available during a
tantrum gives your child a needed crutch. Temper tantrums bring out the
best of your intuitive parenting. If your child is losing control and needs
help to regain control, often a few soothing words or a little help (“I’ll untie
the knot, and you put on the shoe”) may put him on the road to recovery. If
he has chosen an impossible task, distract him or channel him into an easily
achievable play direction. Keep your arms extended and your attitude
accepting. Occasionally a very strong-willed child will lose control of
himself during a tantrum. It often helps to simply hold him firmly but
lovingly and explain, “You are angry, and you have lost control. I’m
holding you because I love you.” You may find that after a minute or more
of struggling to free himself, he melts in your arms, as if to thank you for
rescuing him from himself.
Just as adults want to share their misery with someone, toddlers seldom
tantrum alone. We believe that most babies actually want and need help
during a tantrum. The fact that babies have more tantrums in the presence of

 someone they love and trust should not be interpreted as manipulation; it is
rather that they feel safe and trusting enough to lose it in the presence of
their favorite support person. Often a toddler tantrums because she does not
have the words yet to express her needs, thoughts, or feelings. She may
resort to a tantrum in order to break through to you if you are being distant.
In these cases, you can usually help by giving her the words, verbalizing for
her what you think and feel she needs.

Be Empathetic

A common impulse is for parents to try to fix a situation that has triggered a
tantrum. While this may be appropriate in some situations, toddlers may
simply be looking for empathetic understanding. For example, when a
toddler throws a fit over the fact that he just took his last bite of cookie and
he wants more, a parent may try to offer other snacks to calm the child.
Instead, let your child know that you agree with him; it is sad that the
cookie is all gone. You wish there were more cookies, too. You love cookies
and can’t wait until tomorrow when there will be more! Simply hearing that
someone agrees with him and feels the same way he does about this tragic
situation is often enough to calm a child down and help him move on.

OceanofPDF.com

 Tantrum-Prone Kids?

Some children are like volcanoes with pent-up emotions that need to erupt
occasionally, spilling their feelings all over everyone, then settling down
waiting for those around them to clean up the mess. High-need children are
especially prone to tantrums when their desires are thwarted. Compliant
children are easily directed into behaviors that take them away from their
tantrums, whereas strong-willed children are not so easily distracted. Look
at temper tantrums from behind the eyes of your growing child. He is trying
to be assertive, independent, and curious without the ability to understand
why he cannot safely hold the crystal vase. There is a conflict between what
he wants and what he can safely have. He understands his wants, but does
not understand his “can’t haves.” As you teach a child what behavioral
limits you will accept and he learns what he can handle, tantrums subside,
but prepare to clash with the strong-willed child during this declaration-ofindependence stage.
Most babies who lose control during a tantrum settle when you hold
them and hug them tightly, snuggling chest to chest, teddy-bear style. The
tantrum-prone child is likely to squirm and protest being restrained during a
tantrum. If you feel this child needs to be held to regain control of himself,
hold him on your lap facing outward. This hold is less restraining but still
gives him the security he needs during a tantrum. This kind of holding

 literally can help you to see the situation from behind the eyes of your child:
why a strong-willed child becomes frustrated when he can’t pull two blocks
apart or his toy gets stuck under the sofa. In this case sit with the child
awhile and become a partner in his play frustrations. Give your child words
for his feelings: “You are angry because…” Sharing emotions with a child
is a prelude to one of the best ways to get through the shield of the older
child who needs help but is not very transparent. Nothing opens up a child
more than the feeling that someone truly wants to empathize with his
position. If you think about it, adults may spend thousands of dollars with a
therapist in order to be able to say, “I’m angry.” You cannot reason with a
toddler (or anyone) in the midst of a tantrum, so wait until he settles before
beginning parental counseling.

EXCESSIVE TANTRUMS: COULD IT BE FOOD
ALLERGIES?
Every toddler throws tantrums, but if you feel the frequency or the intensity
of your child’s fits are extreme, consider that she might have food allergies
or sensitivities. Allergic rashes or chronically loose stools may be a clue.
Cow’s milk allergy is a common cause of behavioral reactions, as are
sensitivities to wheat and corn. Sugar overload may also be a culprit, as
well as artificial colors and sweeteners. See “Food Allergies,” here, for
more information on identifying and eliminating allergenic foods.
Fortunately, toddlers have strong resilience for recovering from tantrums.
They usually do not sulk for long periods, and a properly supported temper
tantrum wears off quickly in the child, although it may leave parents
exhausted. Temper tantrums are self-limiting. As soon as your child has

 developed language to express emotions, you will find that this disturbing
behavior subsides.

OceanofPDF.com

 Breath-Holding Spells

These are five-star tantrums that exhaust the child and frighten parents.
They are common following an injury, such as head bumping or a fall. At
the peak of rage a child may start to quiver his lower jaw and hold his
breath, first turning red in the face from anger and then turning blue. At this
point you are holding your own breath for what happens next. Just as you
are about to panic, the child takes a deep breath (so do you), and all is well.
While most babies resume normal breathing just as they are on the brink of
passing out, some do become limp and faint. These most alarming of
breath-holding episodes resemble convulsions. But immediately after
fainting, the child resumes breathing and seems none the worse for wear.
The spells rarely harm the child but leave parents a wreck. Try to intervene
with soothing words and gestures and distracting activities before the
tantrum escalates this far. These episodes usually stop between two and two
and a half years of age, when the child is old enough to express her feelings
in words.

OceanofPDF.com

 BITING AND HITTING
Most of the playful nips and slaps, awful as they look and feel, are normal
baby communications and not angry, aggressive behavior. Much of baby’s
behavior is oriented around hands and mouth, and it is only natural to use
these as social tools. Baby likes experimenting with biting and hitting
different surfaces, both for the feel it produces and the reaction it gets.
During tantrums toddlers often bite or hit parents or other trusted caregivers
rather than a stranger. Don’t take this personally. Babies do bite the hands
that feed them.
Besides being social tools, biting and hitting are forms of undesirable
aggressive behavior that may hurt all those on the receiving end of sharp
teeth and clawlike scratching. Resist the temptation to reach for the muzzle
and handcuffs. There are easier ways to tame the biter and hitter.
Teach alternatives. Give baby words and gestures to express feelings. Help
him make a good social impression and not a lasting impression on your
skin: “No bite… biting hurts mama!” Offer alternative social gestures:
“Hug daddy… give me five.”
Track the trigger. Keep a diary of what circumstances set off aggressive
behavior, such as too many kids in a crowded space and end-of-the-day

 overload and tiredness. Get behind the eyes of your child to see what
triggers the biting or hitting. Is she tired, bored, hungry, or in a setting
where tempers flare?
Tame the play. If you detect a mean streak developing in your child, model
gentle actions and play, such as hug the bear, pet the kitty, love the doll. A
clue to a developing aggressive streak is seen in the child who consistently
bangs toys and crashes cars together and bashes dolls. While this is normal
play, it is important to balance aggressive play with gentle play. Also, talk
about the difference between bear hugs (good for mom and dad) and bunny
hugs (good for fellow toddlers).
Actively supervise. Keep an eye on biters and hitters in a play situation and
let the other mothers know to be vigilant as well. If your child bites or hurts
another child, immediately separate the children and isolate the biter for
some time-out. Reinforce the isolation with appropriate admonitions, such
as, “Biting hurts and it’s wrong to hurt, and we’re going to sit on the chair
to think about why you should not bite.” If he is verbal and understanding
enough, encourage an “I’m sorry.” Your child needs to connect biting with
an immediate removal from the scene of the crime. This may be his first
lesson that undesirable behavior leads to undesirable consequences.
Remove the spotlight. Biters (and hitters) often become the center of
attraction: “Watch out, he bites!” If you conclude that baby is biting for

 attention, channel baby into more socially acceptable attention-getting
habits. Praise his good behaviors and downgrade the importance of biting.
Model, model, model. A baby who lives with aggression becomes
aggressive. One time I witnessed a toddler hitting his mother, whereupon
she immediately lashed out, “Don’t hit me,” as she slapped his hand. It is
obvious where the child got his hitting habits. Also, don’t bite your child
back. Putting one immature behavior on top of another only aggravates the
problem. But it is important for a child to learn that biting hurts.
Show and tell. If he won’t take your word for it, here is a technique that
parents have used successfully to make the point: Press your child’s forearm
against his upper teeth as if he were biting himself, but not in a punitive,
angry way. Reinforce his self-produced marks on his own arm with “See,
biting hurts!” Administer this self-biting lesson immediately after your child
bites someone, so that he makes the connection that biting hurts.

TIME-OUT
Most two-year-olds respond to this simple consequence of not listening to
your correction. There is no need to be punitive or angry; in fact, that will
interfere with the teaching value of time-out. A child needs to learn that
performing a forbidden action results in a break in the action. Depending on
the age and temperament of your child, a one-to-five-minute time-out
sitting on a chair is all you need. If a child can’t cooperate with the timeout, you can sit with him to supply the control. Some quiet time together
may be what you both need anyway. You may wind up holding him in
place; that’s fine, and maybe you can even get him to verbalize feelings, or
you can verbalize for him.

 Don’t expect a few time-outs to stop an unwanted behavior right away.
It may take a few hundred before a child learns not to do something. Timeouts are more about simply providing a consequence for an unwanted
behavior and a break in the action. The more time-outs a child experiences,
the faster he will learn that breaking the rules isn’t as fun as keeping them.
Hurt relationships. Your little biter may cost you your best friend. The
parents of a biter are disturbed and embarrassed; the parents of the bitee are
naturally upset that their child has been hurt, and you all start fussing at one
another. If your child bites or hits, prepare the other parents in the play
group ahead of time, and ask their help in tempering your child’s behavior.
Chances are they have also gone through this aggressive stage with their
children and would appreciate your candidness and may offer good advice.
This warning also conveys that you care that their children are not hurt.
A note for concerned parents of the bitee: Instead of laying a you-havea-bad-child trip on the biter’s parents (they feel sorry enough already), be
understanding. Offer to help. This not only maintains a friendship but
relieves the other parents of the “bad parent” feeling.
Once your child learns to talk better, he is likely to keep his teeth and his
hands to himself, and this undesirable social behavior will subside.

OceanofPDF.com

 BABY WON’T MIND
Ponder for a moment what the verb “to mind” means. When a baby won’t
mind, whose mind is he not minding? What really bothers you is that he
won’t join his mind-set with yours. When you ask him to turn one way, and
he turns the other, he is minding, but it’s his mind, not yours. Call this
defiance? Not exactly. The child is not saying, “I won’t!”—he is saying, “I
don’t want to.” The stronger the will of the child, the stronger the protest.
The compliant child more easily yields her mind to yours; the strongminded child is less likely to switch minds readily. When her behavior says,
“I don’t want to,” it’s your job either to help her want to or to follow
through with a physical assist (pick her up bodily) and calmly administer
time-out, but only if it’s a situation that really matters (see “Choose your
battles wisely,” here).
It’s three o’clock in the afternoon, you are visiting a friend, and your
two-year-old is engrossed in play. Your mind reminds you it’s time to rush
for an appointment. You nicely but firmly ask your child to put away the
toys and come along. She either puts on the deaf act, or by real or body
language says, “No!” You ask louder; she still doesn’t budge. Then the
shouting and grabbing scene begins as you tote the flailing toddler away.
Toddlers do not easily switch channels at the instant whim of the parent.

 See “Closing Out Play,” here, for a way that causes less wear and tear on
parents and child.

Dr. Bob Notes
With my second child, I discovered the value of recognizing when a
toddler’s personality is self-minded. After months of stern verbal directions,
time-outs, and frustration, I concluded, “Maybe my toddler’s mind just isn’t
flexible enough yet.” I changed my expectations and let my child be himself.
I stopped demanding obedience, unless Alex’s safety was at stake. And,
surprise, everyone was much happier. I enjoyed parenting through this
stage much more, and little Alex matured at his own speed until he was
ready to grow up and listen better.

OceanofPDF.com

 SCREECHING AND WHINING
One day I, Dr. Bill, was counseling a mother about normal toddler behavior.
Her toddler started yelling. By reflex she immediately yelled, “Stop that
yelling!” We both laughed after we realized how ridiculous this sounded.
Yelling and screeching peak at this stage, not as deliberately annoying
behavior, but because baby is trying out his voice for both the decibels he
can reach and the effect his siren has on his audience. And babies seem to
reserve their loudest shrieks for the quietest places.
Here’s how we muted our screamers. Teach your child what language
you will accept. “Give daddy your nice voice…” or model a softer voice to
him by whispering. When Matthew first started screaming, we took him
outside into the yard and jumped up and down and screamed together as a
game. Next time he began screaming in the house we again took him into
the yard and repeated the screaming act. After that, whenever he would start
to scream, we quickly interjected in a soft voice, “Only scream on the
grass.” We’d planted in his mind—at a stage in which babies make mental
matches of what activity goes where—that screaming and grass (outside) go
together, and any other relationship doesn’t fit. The noisy stage soon passed
as Matthew forgot the screaming and the grass.
Early screeches and yells have shock value, causing all those within
earshot to stop and pay attention. Similarly, toddlers whine because it

 works; if that is the only way baby can break through to you, whining is
likely to continue.
Children need to learn that pleasant sounds get pleasant responses.
When your toddler addresses you in his usual and pleasant voice, give a
prompt response so that he learns that this is the best voice for quick action.
Sometimes babies need reminding about which voice gets the best response.
As soon as your child starts to whine, quickly get her to change her
communication channels by interjecting, “[name], you have such a nice
voice. Use your nice voice.” After rehearsing this social drill many times, a
parent can quickly head off a beginning whine by saying, “Nice voice,
please.” Besides learning that whining doesn’t work, your child becomes
more language fluent, and whining will be a sound of the past.

PULLING UP PUT-DOWNS
Kids are sometimes not nice to other kids, and adults are sometimes not
nice to children. While parents need not always protect their child from
life’s little digs, some children are supersensitive to attacks on their selfesteem or are going through a sensitive stage—just at the time when they
may or may not have much self-esteem. In our family if an older child lays
a “That’s dumb!” on a younger sib, we quickly intervene: “That’s a putdown!” Pulling up put-downs is where intuitive parenting gets results.
Sometimes a seemingly harmless correction may be perceived as a putdown by a fragile child. One day in my office, Tommy was pulling on the
scale tray (I had completed his checkup, and he was bored, not part of the
doctor-parent conversation). I respectfully asked Tommy not to pull on the
scale and even offered a face-saving “please.” Tommy obeyed, but just as
he was about to disintegrate from a perceived put-down, his mother offered
a rescuing, “Because you’re so strong!” Tommy perked up, and so did I at
the esteem-preserving insight of a connected mother.

 Even though I thought I handled the situation in a psychologically
suitable manner, I had only book knowledge; the mother had kid
knowledge.

OceanofPDF.com

 THUMB-SUCKING
Some babies are born with a callused thumb. In the privacy of the womb
they sucked it, and no one noticed. Babies have an insatiable need to suck,
and a love affair with the ever-present thumb is normal. In addition to
parental comforting, the ability to self-soothe is a normal part of growing
up. As is the case with the use of pacifiers, thumb-sucking bothers adults
more than it harms children, perhaps because of the unwarranted worry: “Is
my child lacking love and security if he sucks his thumb?” Many a happy,
well-adjusted baby spends a good deal of his early years with his thumb in
his mouth.
Thumb-sucking in the first two years seldom causes orthodontic
problems. Beyond the age of two or three, habitual thumb-sucking can
cause upper teeth to protrude. In our experience, foul-tasting paints on the
thumb, restraints, or mittens seldom work. And if your child is old enough
to harm his teeth by thumb-sucking, he is most likely old enough to
understand that thumb-sucking may harm his teeth. The all-night thumbsuckers are the ones to worry about. As an alternative to the thumb, give
your child a large cuddle toy (for example, a large teddy bear that he can get
his arm around and then cannot have access to his thumb). Check on him
several times a night for a while and remove the sleeping sucker’s thumb.
To redirect the daytime thumb-sucker, keep both his hands busy, and as

 soon as the mouth and thumb are about to connect, channel your child into a
play activity that requires the use of both thumbs. In our office if I wish to
unplug the thumb from the mouth, I entice the child to “give me one five”
and then “give me two fives!” Avoid nagging your child—constant verbal
reminders may actually reinforce the sucking by focusing attention on the
behavior.

SEARS PARENTING LIBRARY ALERT
To learn more about giving your toddlers and school-age children selfdiscipline tools, see these related books in our Parenting Library: The
Discipline Book: Everything You Need to Know to Have a Better-Behaved
Child, From Birth to Age Ten, and The Successful Child: What Parents Can
Do to Help Kids Turn Out Well.
For parents who wish to redirect the thumb and the future orthodontist
payments, consider the following preventive medicine. The only study we
were able to find about lowering the risk of later thumb-sucking was a
comparison between fifty children who were habitual thumb-suckers and
fifty children who were not. Is there a profile of the young thumb-sucker?
The researchers showed that thumb-suckers tended to be bottlefed rather
than breastfed. The thumb chums were more often fed on schedule than on
demand. Ninety-six percent of the thumb-suckers had been left to fall asleep
alone. The non-thumb-suckers had a different profile. The later the child
was weaned, the less likely he was to suck his thumb. And children who did
not suck their thumbs had been nurtured to sleep, often at the mother’s
breast, and not left alone to fall asleep. These researchers postulated that
sleep is a regressive activity during which the infant returns to the more
primitive activities he enjoyed in the womb, such as sucking and hand-to-

 mouth actions. They believed that if an infant was allowed to breastfeed to
sleep, the sucking drive would be satisfied, and the pattern of thumbsucking to sleep would not get started. This fits in with one of our own
observations—a need filled in early infancy disappears; a need that is not
filled does not go away but reappears, sometimes as an undesirable habit. In
our own practice, we have noticed that babies who are breastfed to sleep,
offered unrestricted night feedings, and not weaned before their time are
much less likely to become habitual thumb-suckers. What a natural and
inexpensive braces-saving technique!

OceanofPDF.com

 24

OceanofPDF.com

 Toilet Training

We all long for the day when we have changed the last diaper, but with
mixed feelings. It also means waving bye-bye to the beautiful stage of
babyhood.
Toilet training is a partnership, with proper roles assigned to each
person. You can lead a baby to the bathroom, but you can’t make him go.
And you have not failed Parenting 101 if your baby is the last one on the
block to be dry. As with eating and sleeping, you can’t and shouldn’t force a
baby to be dry or clean, but you can set the conditions that help baby train
himself. The bottom line is helping your baby achieve a healthy toileting
attitude.
To approach toilet training as an exciting interaction rather than a
dreaded task, consider this event an initiation into your role as instructor.
From baby’s viewpoint, toileting is his initiation into “bigness”—a rite of
passage from toddlerhood into preschoolerhood. (This explains why the
desire to stay little makes some procrastinators resist.)

OceanofPDF.com

 FACTS YOU SHOULD KNOW
Toilet training is a complex skill. Before you rush baby to the potty at the
first squat, consider what’s involved in learning toileting skills. First, baby
has to be aware of the pressure sensations of bowel and bladder. Then he
must make the connection between these sensations and what’s happening
inside his body. Next he learns to respond to these urges by hurrying to the
potty, where he must know how to remove his clothes, how to situate
himself comfortably on this new kind of seat, how to hold his urges until all
systems are go. With all these steps, it’s no wonder many babies are still in
diapers well into the third year.
Bladder and bowel muscles. The muscles surrounding the opening of the
bladder and bowel (we call them doughnut muscles when explaining the
elimination process to six-year-old bed wetters) need to be controlled to
open and close at the proper time. Bowel training usually precedes bladder
training, mainly because the doughnut muscles surrounding the bowel are
not as impatient as those around the bladder. When a baby senses the urge
to defecate, he has more time to respond before soiling his diapers. A solid
substance is easier to control than liquid. When the bladder is full, the urge
to go is sudden, strong, and hard to control.

 The usual sequence of gaining bowel and bladder control is (1)
nighttime bowel control; (2) daytime bowel control; (3) daytime bladder
control; (4) nighttime bladder control. However, although bowel control
may come first physiologically, toddlers are usually much more comfortable
putting “pee-pee” in the potty long before going “poop” on the potty.
Changing elimination patterns. Babies naturally experience a sort of selftraining beginning in the early months. The many-stools-a-day pattern of
the first month gradually changes to one or two stools a day by one year and
one a day by two years. The number of daily bowel movements decreases,
but the volume increases (bowel and bladder patterns vary considerably).
By six months to a year many babies no longer have a nighttime bowel
movement. Even the interval between wet diapers naturally increases over
the first two years.
Gender and ease of training. Girls are rumored to be trained earlier than
boys. This observation reflects more the sex of the trainer than the trainee.
Culturally, toilet training has been left to mothers; naturally, women feel
more comfortable training girls, and baby girls are more likely to imitate
their mommies. Picture mommy standing and trying to show baby Bert how
to urinate. By imitation, babies learn that girls sit and boys stand, but in the
beginning boys can sit, avoiding sprays and dribbles on walls and floor.
When your son figures out he can stand just like daddy, he will.

QUICK CHANGES

 Change baby promptly so that he gets used to feeling clean and dry. And
when he can comprehend, point out how nice it feels to be clean and dry. A
baby who is accustomed to the clean, dry feel is less likely to enter the goand-won’t-tell stage.

OceanofPDF.com

 BETTER LATE THAN EARLY
The pressure is off parents to toilet train early. Gone are the days when
toilet training was equated with good mothering. In those days, the earlier
the baby was eating three squares a day, weaned, toilet trained, and
independent, the “better” the mother was. And it’s no wonder. Hand
washing and line drying the laundry were enough reason to push anyone to
potty train their baby as soon as possible.
Diapering is certainly not the hassle it used to be. Diaper pins are going
the way of the clothespin, and even fumbling fathers can manage the new,
easy-to-put-on-and-fasten diapers. Disposables have made travel easier, and
many a modern mother wants to hug the diaper-service delivery person.
Also, we now understand more about how a baby’s elimination system
works. We now know that the nerves and muscles governing defecation and
urination do not mature in most babies until eighteen to twenty-four
months. As an added fact supporting later training, babies who begin toilet
training later achieve control faster than those hurried to the toilet earlier.

OceanofPDF.com

 A STEP-BY-STEP APPROACH TO TOILET
TRAINING
In explaining how this system works, we do not mean to imply that you
lazily leave baby alone until he is old enough to order his own potty-chair.
Some training is necessary on the parents’ part, and some learning is needed
by the baby. The following step-by-step approach will help you achieve this
partnership of toilet training according to the developmental readiness of
your individual baby. And temperament of mother and baby play a role in
readiness, too. A down-to-business baby tends to learn quickly, may even
“train himself,” especially if he has a mother who thinks the same way, but
who is wise enough not to pressure. A laid-back baby with a casual mother
may still be in diapers at three and no one worries. With a laid-back baby
and a down-to-business mother things get more interesting, and it is to this
mother-baby pair that we dedicate the rest of the chapter.

OceanofPDF.com

 Step One: Make Sure Baby Is Ready

As when determining readiness for solid foods, watch your baby, not the
calendar, for the following “I’m ready to learn” signs of developmental
readiness:
• imitates your toileting
• verbally communicates other sensations, such as hunger
• understands simple requests, such as “Go get ball”
• begins to push diapers off when wet or soiled, or comes to tell you he’s
dirty
• climbs onto the potty-chair or toilet
• stays dry longer, at least three hours
• investigates his or her body equipment

Watch Baby for About-to-Go Signals

Observe external signs that he feels the pressure inside: squatting, grabbing
diapers, crossing legs; grunting and grimacing; and retreating to the corner
or behind the couch like a mother cat about to deliver. These signs tell you

 that baby is developmentally mature enough to be aware of what’s going on
inside his body.

Toilet training is baby’s initiation into “bigness.”
In all smoothly acquired developmental skills, mind and body work
together in a timely fashion. Between eighteen months and two years, baby
has language skills to understand and communicate, his desire is to imitate
and please, he strives for independence, and he can run fast to the toilet.
There are also developmental phases when toilet training is untimely. If
your toddler is going through a generally negative mood in which he resists
all interventions and his vocabulary is limited to the two-letter word “no,”

 hold on to your techniques a few more months and catch him at a more
receptive time.

READING BABY’S BODY LANGUAGE
• About to go: retreats to quiet place, stops play, quiets, squats
• Going: grabs diaper, grunts, crosses legs
• Gone: peers at diaper bulge, senses different feel, resumes play or
verbalizes production

Serendipity

Occasionally a baby will be so ready that he will learn quite by chance, or
so it seems. For example, fresh out of diapers, mother says casually, “Oh
well, just put on brother’s pants for now.” Three days later you realize he’s
done it! This does happen, and your mother-in-law would be so impressed.
But don’t hold your breath.

OceanofPDF.com

 Step Two: Make Sure You’re Ready

Are you ready? Choose a time to train when you are not preoccupied with
other commitments: during an older child’s high-need period, work stress, a
week before childbirth (a new baby in the house tends to cause regressions
anyway), and so on. Also, warm-weather training works best—you don’t
have snowsuits to contend with.
“Tools” that you will need include:
• sense of humor
• endless patience
• creative marketing
• potty-chair
• training pants
Here are some other training aids and techniques to consider:
Show-and-tell. Capitalize on a prime developmental interest at this stage—
the desire to imitate. Let baby watch you go potty and explain what you are
doing. Girls naturally do better in the bathroom classroom with mommies,
boys with daddies, but same-sex training is not crucial.
Peer pressure. If baby has a friend in training, arrange for her to watch
what her friend does. If baby is in day care, her teammates may show her a

 trick or two. In fact, some preschools won’t accept children in diapers, so
the pressure is already on to make the grade at such a tender age.
Potty props. Some parents use a doll that wets to model the steps to toilet
training. Baby sees where the “urine” comes from, removes the doll’s
diapers, places the doll on the potty-seat, changes diapers, removes and
empties the potty-chair bowl into the toilet, and flushes the toilet. The
combination of live models (parents and peers) and a doll model makes
toilet training easier.
Book learning. Besides live models and doll models there are clever books
that show pictures and show a child in training. By the time your child has
been exposed to all these models of toilet-trained characters, he should get
the message “If they can do it, so can I.” Try the book You Can Go to the
Potty, by William and Martha Sears and Christie Watts Kelly (Little,
Brown, 2002).

OceanofPDF.com

 Step Three: Teach Baby Where to Go and What to Call It

Once you’ve determined that baby is developmentally ready and you are
ready to invest the time, class begins.

A Place to Go

Teacher’s next decision is whether to get baby’s own potty-chair or an
adapter for the toilet. Pupil’s decision is which one, if any, he prefers. Most
babies prefer their own potty-chair. Child-sized furniture makes the
development of any skill easier. Potty-chairs securely contain babies, and
with a potty-chair baby can plant her feet squarely on the floor, instead of
dangling them in midair from the adult toilet. (Dangling feet tighten rectal
muscles; planted feet relax these muscles.) Also, potty-chairs can be carried
from room to room and even put in the car for travel. Some children prefer
a soft potty-seat that fits over the big toilet, as this makes them feel big like
mommy and daddy.

Picking a Potty

 Toddlers are most likely to use the potty they choose. There are as many
varieties of potty-chairs as there are contours of babies’ bottoms. Choose
one wisely. Baby may prize it, much like his first riding toy. When
purchasing baby’s first potty, consider the following:
Baby’s opinion. Take baby to the store with you for a test sit, as when
picking out a toy or his own table and chair. See how comfortable your fully
clothed baby is using it as a chair before using it as a potty.
Ease of cleaning. Be sure the catch bowl lifts out easily. A catch bowl
removable from the top is easier to clean than one removable from the rear
or side.
Safety. Beware of sharp edges or hinges on the seat that can pinch baby’s
fingers or bottom.
Stability. Be sure the chair doesn’t tip easily when baby squirms. Since you
will be using it on slippery surfaces (such as kitchen or bathroom tiles), it
should have rubber tips on the bottom to keep it from sliding.
Design. Your toddler may enjoy trying one of these new designs:

 • Musical pots. To entice the squirmy toddler to stay put, some first-class
seats even play music while baby sits.
• Multiple-use potty-chairs. These clever designs contain three parts—a
potty-chair for the rookie, an adapter seat that fits on an adult toilet for
the graduate, and a step stool for the veteran ready to go it alone.

Toileting Talk

Teach your toddler words for the body parts and for the actions. Putting a
label on what baby does makes any developmental skill easier.
First, a lesson in naming body parts. Give baby the proper names for
proper parts (penis, testicles, vulva, vagina), but don’t expect him or her to
use them accurately until two and a half or three years of age. Say these
words as comfortably as you would “arm” or “hand,” so baby does not pick
up vibrations that you are uneasy about these mysterious parts.
Now that the action is ready to begin, give baby easy words and phrases
such as “go potty,” and later get more specific—for example, “go pee-pee”
or “poo-poo.” Avoid words that imply shame: “stinky,” or “Did you dirty
your diapers?” Use terms that you are comfortable with and baby can say
and understand. “Urination” and “defecation” are beyond toddlers.

OceanofPDF.com

 Step Four: Teach Baby the Connection Between Feeling and
Going

The next step is to help your baby make the connection between what he
feels and what he has to do. In a nutshell, toilet training is teaching baby to
make a series of connections between the urge to go and going to the potty,
and between sitting on the potty and going in the potty. Let’s go through
this process.

Feeling and Going

The first training goal is to help baby make the connection between what he
feels and what he needs to do. When baby shows about-to-go signs (for
example, squatting, quietly retreating), interject a reminding “Go potty” as
you usher the willing baby to the potty. Once you plant the connection feel
pressure—go potty in baby’s mind, in time he will go potty without your
triggering his memory.
Many toddlers achieve nighttime dryness during the second year of life.
Morning is a good time to suggest using the potty. The bladder is full. The
child will learn what a full bladder feels like and associate a full bladder

 with using the potty. This easy morning routine will make the rest of the day
of potty training easier.

DRESS FOR THE OCCASION
Dress baby for a quick change, making it easy for baby. If he has to struggle
to remove complicated clothing en route from urge to potty, he is likely to
let go before getting unhooked, unbuckled, unbuttoned, and so on, and you
have a double mess, a soiled baby and soiled clothing. Elastic waistbands
and quick-release Velcro fasteners are a must. In warm weather, very loose
training pants are all baby needs around home. Use easily pulled-down
pants or shorts when in public.

Feeling and Telling

Tell baby what to tell you. As soon as you notice the about-to-go signs,
query, “Go poo-poo? Tell mommy!” (or “Tell daddy!”) You are planting
another mental connection: When he feels the urge, he says the words.
Once baby masters these two connections—urge to go with running to
the potty and urge to go with asking for help by saying, “Go potty”—the
rookie trainee is ready to advance. Notice the proper role-playing: You set
the game plan, but it’s up to baby whether or not he chooses to play. If after
many rehearsals baby isn’t getting the message, wait and try again.

Potty Times

 The next connection to teach your trainee is that when you sit him on the
potty, he goes. This is called a conditioned reflex. But it won’t work unless
baby is nearly ready to go. The key is to catch him at the time or times
when he is about to go, and sit him on the potty before he makes the deposit
in his diapers. He will then associate sitting on a potty with having a bowel
movement and, eventually, with urinating.
Short of shadowing your baby all day long to catch him in the act, here’s
how to get some elimination-time clues. Make a potty time chart. For a
week or two, record the time or times of the day when your baby has a
bowel movement. If you detect a pattern, say after breakfast, put him on the
potty each day at that time. Provide baby with an attention-holding book
and let him exert his squatter’s rights to sit until he goes. If you do not see a
pattern, put baby on the potty every two hours, or as often and as long as
your time and patience permit.
A physiologic aid for bowel training, called the gastrocolic reflex, may
help predict when your baby will have a BM. A full stomach stimulates the
colon to empty around twenty to thirty minutes after a meal. Try potty
sitting after each meal until baby’s patience runs out. Best odds for a
predictable daily BM are after breakfast. Another value of this daily routine
is that it teaches baby to listen to his bodily urges. It’s a physiologic fact
that bowel signals not promptly attended to will subside, and this can lead
to constipation.
Understand that a child (like an adult) does not push out a bowel
movement unless the colon is contracting. The colon has a natural rhythm
that causes it to contract for several minutes a few times a day. It is this

 contracting that causes the urge to go to the bathroom. Therefore, it will not
work to sit your child on the potty and tell him to push until he has a bowel
movement unless the colon is naturally contracting at the time.
Even when you and baby and potty misconnect, and baby goes in his
diapers, take baby into the potty-chair room and empty the contents into
baby’s toilet. At least this will teach him where his productions go.
Typically, you are first catching your baby in the act in order to train him to
eventually catch himself in the act.

Bare-Bottom Drills—An Undress Rehearsal

Covering up the evidence delays toilet training. Diapers keep baby from
making the connection between the urge to release and what he needs to do
about it, and they do for baby what baby needs to learn to do for himself.
Outdoor training. For warm-weather training, bare bottoms make training
easier. Remove your toddler’s diaper and let him run around the yard bare
bottomed, covered mostly by a long T-shirt if you wish (T-shirts from an
older child make good cover-ups). When the urge to go hits, he stops,
maybe squats, because he suddenly realizes what’s going on. Amazed by
this revelation, baby may talk about what he’s doing, “Go pee-pee” or “Go
poo-poo,” or look toward you for “What do I do now, coach?” guidance, or
let go puppylike with his puddle or load.

 Now it’s your move. Watch how baby handles this uncovered
elimination. He may look confused, proud, or even upset, especially if he
soiled his legs. Praise his productions and clean up matter-of-factly. (If he
protests bare-bottom drills, wait awhile and try again.)
Have the potty-chair available so you can put the BM in there, to show
him where it goes. Then next time if you catch him squatting, show him
how to sit on the potty instead. Don’t resign as toileting coach if your baby
plays with what he produces. Avoid showing disgust, as this only plants
counterproductive connections that something is wrong with what comes
out of him, so he’d better not let go anymore.
Indoor training. After trying outdoor drills for a week or so, you are ready
to venture back indoors. Remember what you learned from the yard scene.
Bare bottoms promote quick learning. The early days of indoor bare-bottom
training should be spent, as much as possible, on a noncarpeted floor—
easier to detect and easier to clean. You may need a few days of catching
baby in the act and offering the reminder “Go potty” as baby enjoys his new
diaper freedom.

OceanofPDF.com

 Step Five: Graduate Baby from Diapers to Training Pants

After baby has been daytime dry for a couple of weeks, he’s ready to
graduate from diapers to “pull-ups.” Pull-ups are there to catch accidents,
not to be used as diapers. As long as baby is still going frequently in
diapers, use diapers. Progress to pull-ups when the accidents are fewer, and
then graduate to training pants when the accidents seldom occur.

Training Pants

Training pants look like superabsorbent padded underwear and are used in
transition from diapers to pants. You can make your own or get extra
absorbency by sewing a piece of cloth diaper into oversized underwear or
into regular training pants. Be enthusiastic about this step up, but be careful
what you call them. “Big boy” or “big girl” pants is a loaded term,
especially if your toddler is not sure he or she wants to be big. This
dilemma occurs with hurrying the older child into pants to make room on
the changing table for a new baby. When the older child sees all the
attention the diapered baby gets, he may not want to be a big boy. We prefer
to call them special pants. Buy around six pairs, and be sure they are loose
fitting for quick slip down by impatient hands.

 When Accidents Happen

Expect soiled and wet pants when baby gets his signals crossed. This is
normal when learning a new skill. Prepare for accidents during intense play
when babies are so preoccupied that they miss their bladder or bowel
signals. Babies become so engrossed in what is going on outside that they
forget what’s occurring inside. Trainees in these big-league pants may need
an occasional bare-bottom reminder to keep their mind on their body.

OceanofPDF.com

 Step Six: Teach Your Child to Wipe, Flush, Dress, and Wash
Hands

As a final class, teach your baby how to wipe, flush, dress, and wash hands.
Teach little girls to wipe from front to back (keeping germs that may cause
a urinary infection away from the urethra). Don’t be too quick to expect
your child to wipe himself. A two-year-old seldom has the manual dexterity
to adequately wipe, and some children may not be ready to do this until age
four or five. This extra pressure after finally succeeding at being potty
trained may cause the reluctant toddler to regress. Wait until potty training
is consistently under way before teaching your child how to wipe.
Moistened flushable wipes are more comfortable on the bottom than toilet
paper.
Flushing is a matter of preference for the child. Some children fear the
loud swoosh of the flush as their production disappears into a swirling hole.
Others consider flushing part of the whole package and insist on doing the
honors. Be prepared for an increase in your water bill from the frequent
flusher who likes the sound-and-water show at the pull of the handle. Invest
in a seat latch to be sure only the right stuff gets flushed.

OceanofPDF.com

 Praise Success, Overlook “Failure,” Relax

There is no place for punishment in toilet training, just as you wouldn’t
scold the beginning walker for tripping. Serious long-term emotional
problems can result from angry scolding or punitive attitudes toward
accidents or resistance. If you are struggling with your child over toileting
and recognize negative feelings toward your child, get some help from
trusted advisers or even a counselor. Your goal is for your child to emerge
from toilet training with a healthy self-image. Then he or she can tackle the
next phase of development, sexual identity, feeling good about himself or
herself. Try to relax—what’s one more year in diapers?

GAMES LITTLE BOYS PLAY
Remember, a sense of humor is tops on your list of tools for successful
toilet training. Little boys like to
“write” in the snow or dirt
play crisscross pee with dad or an older brother
sink floating pieces of toilet paper
hit floating paper targets—these can be purchased as incentive gadgets
Beginning squirters do need a few lessons in target practice to improve
their aim. Little boys are like that.

OceanofPDF.com

 THE CHILD WHO WON’T GO
There are babies who refuse to announce their productions, hold on to what
they have, and resist any attempt to toilet them. If you’re still using a diaper
service and the potty-chair remains unused, read on.
Late toilet training, like late walking, may be your child’s normal
developmental pattern and one shared by mom or dad when they were in
training. The nerves and muscles involved in toileting may not yet be
mature. Suspect this cause if your child has been on the late end of normal
in other developmental milestones. Most children are well on their way to
daytime bowel and bladder training by three years. Some of our own kids
wouldn’t give up diapers until three and a half years of age. If by that time
you and your child have made no progress, consult your baby’s doctor.

OceanofPDF.com

 Not Willing to Move out of Diapers

If your child is over age three and you know he has achieved control, but he
still refuses to go on the potty, try the “running out of diapers” approach.
Show him the stack of diapers getting smaller every day: “Look, there are
only ten diapers left.” Count them down as you use them. When there is
only one left, let him know that this is the last diaper and that you are not
going to the store (if he asks). Time it so the last diaper is the first one of the
day. When this last one is used up, you have the rest of the day to try the
bare-bottom drills described above. Expect some protesting, and if it’s
extreme, you can “find” a small pile of diapers to use. Then try again in a
few weeks.

OceanofPDF.com

 Change the Motivating Factor

If the idea of the toilet continues to turn your child off, stop mentioning it
for a month or two and just let him be. Then buy some underwear together
while you are shopping. Let him pick them out. Talk about how he can wear
them, but don’t mention the potty. Make it all about wearing underwear like
mommy and daddy (and older siblings). Place the underwear on a low shelf
in his bedroom so he can see them and think about them. While getting him
dressed in the morning, ask if he wants to put them on. Don’t even mention
the diapers. But don’t make a big deal out of wearing them. A low-key
approach, as if his wearing the underwear isn’t that big of a deal to you,
may help your child overcome any hesitation. Once your child is eager to
wear them and runs around the house proudly, you can mention the potty.
Every hour or so, tell your child it’s time to put pee-pee in the potty. If you
catch him in the right mood, he will likely comply because wearing
underwear has, we hope, put him in a more open mind-set concerning the
toilet. Again, keep it low-key. Don’t praise him. Pretend it’s not a big deal
to you. Let him feel proud about using the potty and express his
achievement in his own terms. Once he’s excited, you can be, too. As the
days go by, you can begin waiting longer to say it’s potty time (every ninety
minutes, then every two hours). Your child may even begin to announce
when he has to go before you mention it.

 Expect a few accidents, and treat them as if they are no big deal. Don’t
scold. Just change your child’s clothes and have him put on a fresh pair of
underwear. This should resolve if he is motivated. However, if he repeatedly
wets or soils the underwear, or refuses to go sit on the potty in the first
place, then it’s back to diapers. Don’t show disappointment, and continue to
put on an “it doesn’t matter to me” face. Simply explain that pee-pee and
poop don’t go in underwear; they go in the potty or in the diaper. You have
to give your child the impression that either choice is just fine with you. The
motivation to use the potty has to come from within him. Once he’s ready,
he will likely train in a single day, since he’s old enough to physically
control his bowels and bladder. He just needs the right mind-set.

OceanofPDF.com

 Medical Reasons

A child won’t perform any bodily function that hurts. Constipation is
painful, often causing tiny tears in the rectum while the child is straining,
which further makes the child hold on, and a painful cycle continues.
Suspect this if your child squats, grunts, and painfully grimaces but
produces nothing. (See causes and treatment of constipation, here.)
Bottom burns from food allergies are another culprit. Look for the
telltale allergic ring and raw area around the anus. High-acid foods, such as
citrus fruits, and tomato products, and lactic-acid-producing foods, such as
dairy products, are the usual offenders. Diarrhea stools during the flu or
after taking antibiotics may also temporarily hinder bowel control.

OceanofPDF.com

 Are You Pushing Too Hard?

Class may have begun too early, during a negative stage, or teacher and
pupil may be clashing. Consider backing off awhile and take inventory of
the following emotional slumps that may slow training. Ask yourself what
could be happening, or not happening, in your baby’s life that makes him
reluctant.
• Is baby going through a negative phase in which he is not receptive to
anything new?
• Is there a disturbing situation in the family: a new baby, a major move,
family stress, long working hours, a return to work, or an illness?
• Is your child angry? Anger shuts down proper functioning of all
physiologic systems, especially toileting.
Take inventory of your parent-child attachment. Normally, children want
to please, progress, and learn control of their bodies. We are suspicious of
the “Well, it’s just a normal stubborn phase” defense. The problem may be
deeper than the diaper.
This may be your child’s way of maintaining control over one area of his
life that you can’t control. If you hold the reins tightly in other areas (choice
of clothing, tidiness, choice of pastimes, and so on) don’t be surprised if he
becomes a holdout in this area. It may also be the only way he knows to
stay little longer. This may be time to close the lid on the potty for a few

 weeks or months, tune in to your child, have some fun, build his selfesteem, and strengthen the bond. If your child is already emotionally upset
and has shaky self-esteem, be careful not to give the message that your
child’s value depends upon performance. This number-one no-no in
parenting is a sure strikeout, whether in toilet training or in Little League.

OceanofPDF.com

 TOILET

TRAINING

QUICKLY:

THE

WEEKEND-TRAINING-CAMP METHOD
Most parents prefer gradually training their babies over several weeks or
months and progressing at baby’s own rate. But some would rather plunge
right into an intensive course during a weekend off or during vacation time.
A crash course in toilet training does work for certain parent-child pairs, but
we don’t advise this method for all babies. Some babies resist being pushed
out of diapers too quickly, but others welcome help to master their body.
The steps are the same as the more gradual method, just more concentrated.

OceanofPDF.com

 Preliminaries

Select the right candidate. Only babies who are verbal, in a positive and
receptive stage, and have a want-to-please attitude toward their trainers are
suitable for this fast track.
Concentrate on the game. Approach this as a weekend of intensely
relating with your baby, not as a contest, but as a game. You will be with
your baby constantly during the waking hours, watching every clue of body
language that hints of bowel or bladder signals. Shelve all other
commitments. This is a special training session not open to the public.
Select the right season. Just as you don’t schedule baseball games in
midwinter, don’t set P day when baby is in a negative stage. Choose goodmood weather, and you can always call the game if a bad mood prevails.
Schedule the game ahead of time. The day before, announce to baby that
tomorrow is a special day: “We are going to play a special game,” and
repeat “special game” over and over during that day. (You will notice that
we use the word “special” in most of our marketing tools. It works, perhaps
because it has a special ring to it.)

 Hold a pregame warm-up. Continue to emphasize that this is a special day
and that you are going to do something special today: “We are going to play
the game of no-more-diapers and use the toilet like mommy and daddy do.”
Throw in “like brother Jim” as an added incentive. Let baby catch your
excitement. Babies get excited about what we get excited about.
Select the right uniform. Best is baby’s birthday suit, weather permitting.
Otherwise a long, loose shirt. No diapers, please. Show baby the training
pants, his special pants. Show him how to put on the special pants, how to
push them down and pull them up. Publicize this event. Take pictures,
preferably Polaroid, and show them to your baby. Demonstrate the pushdown and pull-up maneuver in front of a mirror. All the while keep a
gamelike atmosphere. And if baby periodically loses interest or protests,
take time out for a snack break.
Hand out the equipment. Bring out “special prizes.” Like handing out
party prizes, one by one unveil the tools of the trade: potty-chair (that you
and baby picked out together at the store and kept in a box until P day), doll
that wets and other props (see here), training pants, and reward stickers or
other prizes.

TRAVELING WHILE IN TRAINING
Sometimes toilet training is easier while on vacation. You have more time
and patience, baby is often a bare-bottomed beach bum, and you are not so
concerned about messes. One of our children trained during a week-long
beach vacation during which going without diapers was appropriate
beachwear. Or baby may relapse; if so, put any attempts to change his

 habits on hold until you return to your known environment. If driving, take
along P. Chair. It’s handy for frequent pit stops for little bladders. We have
precious pictures of our trainee sitting on his throne in the back of the
family van doing his thing. A folding plastic adapter ring that fits adult toilet
seats is useful for going in strange restrooms. Also, remember that a change
in diet during family vacations is likely to bring about a change in bowel
habits, either constipation or diarrhea, and a corresponding slump in
training progress.
A message for young and old: Don’t forget to leave home with an empty
bladder.

OceanofPDF.com

 Practice Drills and Training Aids

The sitting drill. Practice sitting on the potty-chair “just like mommy and
daddy.” Put the potty-chair next to yours and sit together awhile and chat.
Instruction manuals. As you’re sitting on your respective potty-chairs,
read a picture book about potty training.
Get your signals straight. Give baby phrases such as “go potty,” “go peepee,” “go poo-poo.”
Getting-on-potty-chair-and-what-to-do-there drill. Let him watch you
(for real or just pretending)—an enthusiastic grunting sound can give him
the idea.
A practice dummy. Go through a drill with a doll that wets, explaining
each step of having the doll wet: removing pants, changing the doll, and
emptying the potty-chair bowl into the toilet.

OceanofPDF.com

 Play Begins

Meanwhile you have already scouted your star player and you know his
moves. Squatting tells you it’s BM time; clutching the front of the diaper (or
where the diaper used to be) or looking down there is the about-to-wet
signal. Watch for the player’s signal. At the first squat interject a “Go potty”
as you direct him toward the potty-chair, which is either on the kitchen floor
or in the bathroom next to your toilet. Shadow baby all day issuing
reminders of “Go potty” at each about-to-go signal. Keep his friend P. Chair
in a central location. By repetition of the association between baby’s aboutto-go signs and your “Go potty” cues, baby makes the connection: “When I
get the urge, I go to the potty.”

Rewards

If baby consistently makes the right moves during the first day, chalk this
up as beginner’s luck. Also expect many false starts as baby learns that he
can get mommy or daddy to come running at every squat. When you make
the right call and take baby to the potty or, even better, he runs to the potty
before he has to go and does his thing, reward each hit with a surprise. One

 mother who used this quick training successfully put reward stickers on the
back of the potty-chair for each go.

Call the Game at Night

Don’t expect nights free of diapering until several weeks after daytime
training has been successful. And you’re still in the right ballpark if your
child needs nighttime diapers for many months or even years after day
training is achieved.
If this instructive course isn’t working, don’t feel a failure as a teacher or
demote the pupil. You may have a casual kid who needs a casual approach.
The need for diapers does pass.

OceanofPDF.com

 Keeping Your Baby Safe and Healthy
During the first two years you will earn your honorary medical degree. In
this part of the book we will help you set up your own home health
maintenance organization: designing a child-safe environment, showing
you preventive measures to keep your child healthy, and pointing out ways
to detect early signs of illness. Sick little people bring out the doctor or
nurse in everyone. Our main goal in this section is to help you as parents
form a medical partnership with your baby’s doctor. For continued updates
on new treatments and medicines visit AskDrSears.com.

OceanofPDF.com

 25

OceanofPDF.com

 Babyproofing Your Home

Suppose you had access to a medicine that would prevent one-third of
childhood deaths? Well, parents have such a “medicine”—and it’s free. It’s
called babyproofing the home. One in three childhood deaths is caused by
an accident, and most of these are preventable.
The goal of this chapter is for you to learn how to babyproof your home,
not your child. A toddler’s curiosity will push him to explore his limits, get
into cabinets, climb onto furniture, open containers, and try to get his little
hands on anything and everything—including those things he isn’t
supposed to touch. This is normal toddler behavior. It enhances his
development and should not be restricted too much. A toddler who is
limited and restrained from exploring his environment can become more
withdrawn and fearful of the world around him. This can also dampen his
self-confidence. The toddler who, on the other hand, is allowed to safely
roam around the house and explore and learn from his environment is likely
to blossom into a curious, outgoing, self-assured child who feels safe in the
world.
A general rule about babyproofing is that whatever is at the toddler’s
level should be fair game to him. Expecting the curious toddler to keep his

 hands off the crystal vase that is sitting on a low coffee table is unrealistic.
Of course, there will be many things that you can’t raise out of baby’s
reach, such as lamp cords and electric outlets. This is where appropriate
discipline comes into play. Teach baby there are “yes touches” and “no
touches” throughout the home.

OceanofPDF.com

 PROFILE OF AN ACCIDENT-PRONE CHILD
All babies are accident-prone, but some more than others. A baby’s
developmental pattern gives a clue to accident-proneness. An infant who
progresses slowly but steadily through developmental milestones, such as
crawling to standing to walking, is less likely to be accident-prone. This
baby doesn’t risk trying an advanced step until he has securely mastered the
step before. The impulsive baby, on the contrary, often speeds through
developmental milestones more by trial and error than by calculated steps.
The less cautious speeder rushes headlong toward a desired toy and is
willing to accept a few stumbles in the relentless pursuit of his goal. This
child is more likely to be known by name to your local emergency room
staff.
Safety items mentioned in this chapter can be purchased at infant furniture
stores or from the resources listed here.
“Mouthers” are also accident-prone. Some babies have such discerning
tastes that anything plastic or metal meets a quick oral rejection. Other
babies don’t feel they really know an object unless they mouth it awhile.
Watching how babies play gives you a clue as to who is a mouther and who
isn’t. The “researcher” picks up a small toy and studies it a bit before
adding the oral test, whereas the mouther’s first impulse is to go directly

 oral with the toy. This baby is more likely to have swallowing or choking
accidents.
Finally, watch the “darter,” who zips away from parents’ watchful eyes
and runs the stop sign of separation anxiety as if this stage doesn’t exist.
This baby is more accident-prone than the more dependent baby who
frequently checks in at parental home base for “It’s okay” signals before
venturing into uncharted territory.

OceanofPDF.com

 THE ACCIDENT-PRONE HOME
Not only are some babies more accident-prone, but certain life situations
add another risk factor. Be especially vigilant about toddler accidents when
you are
• running late for an appointment
• moving into a new home
• visiting relatives
• vacationing
• changing day-care centers
• changing caregivers
• experiencing the absence of a spouse
• going through marital stress or divorce
• bringing home a new baby
• caring for baby’s ill sibling

SPECIAL SAFETY NOTE: Name the indispensable household utility
that indirectly contributes to many childhood accidents around the home.
Answer—the telephone. Many tragedies occur while a caregiver leaves
baby unattended “just for a minute” to answer the phone. A cordless

 telephone is a wise investment, to keep yourself mobile so you can talk on
the phone and keep up with your baby.

OceanofPDF.com

 HOME BABYPROOFING CHECKLISTS
Get down on your hands and knees and crawl from room to room looking at
things from your baby’s viewpoint and for things within a toddler’s reach. If
you have older children, let them join you on your safety tour, as it teaches
them to be safety conscious for their younger siblings.

OceanofPDF.com

 Keeping a Safe Medicine Cabinet

Do you keep the cabinet latched?
Do you keep safety caps on medicine packages, especially while using
them around your baby?
Do you keep medicines out of reach of your baby?
Do you dispose of out-of-date medicines?
Are scissors, razor blades, pins, and so on out of reach?

OceanofPDF.com

 Keeping a Safe Bathroom

Do you have nonskid mats on the bottom of the tub and shower?
Are tub faucets padded?
Do bathroom rugs have slipproof backing?
Are electrical appliances away from water?
Are toiletries and cosmetics, especially nail polish and remover and
aerosol sprays, out of baby’s reach?
Is your bathroom door kept closed? (To prevent a toddler from locking
himself inside the bathroom, disengage the inside door lock, or place a
hook lock high on the outside of the door to keep baby out or high on the
inside for privacy.)
Is the toilet seat down and latched? (Babies can drown head down in the
toilet.)
Do you have plastic cups and soap dishes—not glass?
Do you drain water from the tub as soon as you are finished using it?
And, of course, never leave baby unattended in the bathtub. Besides being
burned by turning on the tempting hot water knobs, an infant can drown in
an inch of water.

MOST COMMON ACCIDENTS ACCORDING TO
DEVELOPMENTAL STAGE
Birth to Six Months (Rolling and Reaching)

 crib accidents
falling off changing tables or out of infant seats
burns: cups of coffee, tea, or hot water
auto accidents, improper or no use of car seats
Six to Twelve Months (Crawling and Walking)

toy accidents: sharp edges, strings, mouthable parts
high-chair accidents
falls against sharp table corners, stair edges
cigarette burns
grabbing accidents: burns from grabbing hot coffee, cuts from
breakables
walker and stroller accidents
auto accidents
One to Two Years (Walking and Exploring)

climbing accidents
ingestion of poison
exploring accidents: storage cupboards, medicine cabinets
unguarded water hazards: pools, ponds, bathtubs, toilets, fountains
cuts
auto accidents, airbag injuries

OceanofPDF.com

 Keeping a Safe Purse or Diaper Bag

Purses and diaper bags are a common source of infant poisonings and
injuries. Curious infants and toddlers love to explore these tempting items.
It is likely that at some point your unattended baby will find his way into
your purse.
Do you make sure there is no mace or pepper spray in your purse?
If you have an air horn, do you leave it out of your purse? (It can
damage baby’s ears).
Do you keep hairspray or other aerosols out of your purse?
Do you keep your prenatal vitamins out of your purse?
Do you make sure any medications you need to carry are in a
babyproofed container?
Do you keep a sharp comb, nail clippers, scissors, or any other sharp
item out of your purse?
Do you leave chokable items, like coins or buttons, out of your purse?

OceanofPDF.com

 Keeping a Safe Kitchen

Are glasses and plates used by baby unbreakable?
Do you routinely cook on back burners if your toddler is nearby, and
keep pot handles turned toward the rear of the stove? Have you installed
stove knob covers?
Is there a fire extinguisher handy? (Choose a multipurpose extinguisher.)
Are knives out of reach?
If baby climbed onto the counter, would all potentially dangerous or
poisonous items be out of reach?
Are items that can break or cause choking on pantry shelves, out of
baby’s reach?
Do you avoid using slippery rugs on a tile floor?
Do you keep small appliances (blenders, toasters) unplugged?
Do you have a special play cabinet and drawer set aside for your child?
Do you have safety latches on cabinet and appliance doors? (These are
easy to install.) Are cleansers, solvents, bleaches, and detergents behind
a latched cabinet door, out of a toddler’s reach?
Do you make sure appliance cords and tablecloths are not left dangling
over countertops?
Do you keep chairs pushed in so your child can’t climb onto the table?
Remember, “out of toddler’s reach” may be higher than you think. Babies
extend their reach by using chairs or boxes to climb up onto counters and
tables.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Encouraging Safe Meals

Do you keep toddlers from running around with food in their mouths?
(Running with food risks choking.)
Do you prepare foods safely? Whole hot dogs are unsafe because bittenoff chunks may lodge in a baby’s windpipe. Slice lengthwise instead.
Get into the habit of preparing sliced foods, which are less likely to
cause choking than round or square chunks. Peel and slice apples and
grapes, and mash or grind seeds and nuts. (See “Chokable Foods,” here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Babyproofing the Nursery or Bedroom

Is your baby’s sleeping environment safe? (See the discussion of crib
safety, here, and safe co-sleeping, here.)
Do you use a safety strap on the changing table? (Never leave baby
unattended lying on the changing table even with the safety strap.)
Are baby-care items kept out of baby’s grabbing distance when he’s on
the changing table?

OceanofPDF.com

 Keeping a Fireproof and Burnproof House

  Are smoke alarms appropriately placed around your house? (Suggested
places for installing include the ceiling in the entrance hall, the hallway
outside bedrooms, the ceiling on each floor, the attic, the garage, and the
basement. Do not place smoke detectors near air vents. To check
operation, button test the detector quarterly. Replace batteries at least
once a year on a preassigned day, such as a birthday or the day of fall
time change, or when the detector emits its low-power warning.) You
can install a child locator and smoke detector that attaches to the
bedroom window; it emits a sound and flashes red to alert firemen to a
child’s room.
Do you have “tot finder” stickers—available from your local fire
department—on children’s bedroom doors? Place the stickers on the
outside lower corner of the door (firemen search the house on their
knees). Don’t place them on a window, where they might advertise the
location of the child’s bedroom to undesirables.
Do you remember not to leave cigarette lighters or matchboxes within a
toddler’s grabbing distance?
Do you avoid smoking in bed or while lying on a couch and make sure
not to leave lit cigarettes around?
Do you make sure the fire is out or a screen is in place before leaving the
fireplace unattended or going to bed?
Is your electric portable space heater safe? Is it UL approved?
If using an extension cord, does it have a high-enough power rating? Ask
at the appliance store.
Do you know the location and operation of the main disconnect switch
on your electrical switch box?
Do you disconnect extension cords from the wall socket rather than
leaving them plugged in? (Your baby could suffer an electrical burn by
biting the cord or poking the extension-cord socket.)
Is the temperature gauge on your water heater set below 120°F (49°C) to
avoid scalding from tap water?
Do you set down hot beverages out of a child’s reach?
Do you avoid heating baby bottles in a microwave? (This can cause hot
spots.)

 Have you practiced your fire drill lately? (Teach children which exit
routes to use; not to go back into a burning house after a toy; to stay low
PUTTING OUT A FIRE
because smoke rises, crawling on hands and knees to a door or a
window;
not to
to do
open
with if
hot
doorknobs—there
be flames on
Teach
children
thedoors
following
their
clothing catchesmay
on fire:
the other side—but to escape through the window instead.)
1. Stop! (Running fans the flame.)
2. Drop! (Fall to the ground immediately.)
3. Roll! (Roll or rock to smother the flames.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Taking a Safety Walk Around the House

  Do you make sure your floor is clear of items that can cause choking or
are dangerous, such as plastic bags, coins, plastic wrap, balloons,
scissors, sewing tools, guns?
Have you considered storing your coffee table for a few years to avoid
stitches on your active baby’s forehead?
Do you keep plastic garment and grocery bags safely out of baby’s
reach?
Do you check and reposition dangling strings, such as drapery cords,
clotheslines, lamp cords? (Shorten drapery cords to adult-reach height;
install shorteners on lamp cords.)
Are your tablecloth corners folded under the tabletop so they don’t
dangle within baby’s easy grabbing distance? (Placemats are safer.)
Are you in the habit of pushing dangerous or breakable items toward the
center of the table?
Are area rugs removed from the path of a tripple toddler?
Are the edges on your furniture (table corners, coffee-table corners,
fireplace bricks) covered with rubber protectors? (Adhesive-backed
weather stripping is useful for covering brick corners.)
Have you replaced your electrical-outlet covers with baby-safe ones?
Plastic dummy plies can also be used.
Do you routinely check electrical cords to make sure they aren’t frayed?
Are you aware of and have you removed toxic plants?
Are firearms locked out of sight?
Do you keep sliding glass doors closed? Or, when open, are the screens
locked?
Are glass doors marked with decals at toddler eye level to prevent run,
bump, and break?
Are windows properly locked and the screens behind them secure?
Do you have metal screen guards in back of second-story or higher
sliding glass windows? (Screen guards catch the screen and the child, in
case your child pushes it open. If you have a screened-in porch, keep
baby from leaning on the screens.)
Are openings in balconies or porch railings safely enclosed with netting

 so baby can’t squeeze through?
Now let’s take a crawl or walk up the stairs:
Are your stairs well lit, not slippery, and equipped with safe handrails?
When your child learns to crawl, teach him to use the stairs safely. Sit
below him as he explores and figures out how to crawl up and down.
This way, when he manages to sneak around the guard gates, he will be
less likely to fall.
Are the stairs’ edges protected with rubber stripping or carpet?
Is clutter that can cause trips cleaned up?
Is the carpet tacked down securely?
Do you use a safety gate? (See discussion of safety gates, here.)
Now let’s stroll out to the garage and down to the basement and laundry
areas:
Are power tools and sharp tools out of reach?
Are paints, solvents, insecticides, detergents, bleach, and other
chemicals out of reach?
Are the washer and dryer doors kept closed?
Is the switch or remote control for the automatic garage door opener out
of baby’s reach?

OceanofPDF.com

 Keeping a Safe Yard

Is your playground equipment sturdy and free of sharp corners and
splinters?
Are your swings and climbing equipment safe? (They should be
installed at least 6 feet/2 meters from obstructions such as fences or
walls; the surface under them should be soft, to absorb the force of a fall.
A swing set should be anchored firmly to the ground, and any exposed
bolts or screws should be covered with plastic caps or taped over—try
duct tape for a good all-around rough-edge cover. Swings with chair,
sling, or saddle seats are the safest because they discourage children
from standing up and help them to hold their bodies on the swing. Place
swings at different heights for children of different ages. Keep the swing
height as close to the ground as possible without catching baby’s
swinging feet. Remind the toddler and other children not to walk behind
someone who’s swinging. Avoid equipment with S-type hooks, sharp
edges, or rings between 5 and 10 inches/12 and 25 centimeters in
diameter, which can entrap the child’s head.)
Do you keep ropes or other items for climbing away from your children?
These items are extremely dangerous and are responsible for a number
of accidental child deaths each year when children use them to climb on
a play set.
Are garden hoses safely stored, not exposed in the hot sunshine? (The
water in the hose may become hot enough to scald a curious child.)
Do you avoid mowing the lawn with a power mower while baby is
playing in the yard?
Is your yard climbproof? Do you have safe climbing toys such as rubber
tires?

 OceanofPDF.com

 Keeping a Safe Pool

Is there an approved fence around your Jacuzzi or pool?
Was your pool built by a professional according to city guidelines? New
pools must now meet a large number of strict safety guidelines,
including appropriate locks and alarms on all doors leading to the
backyard and pool area.
Do you use a firm, solid pool cover that will safely hold a child’s
weight? Soft, pliable covers are extremely dangerous, as a child or
animal can get stuck and sink into the pool or be trapped under the
cover.
Are your children old enough and responsible enough for you to have a
pool? If you are thinking of putting in a pool, consider waiting until your
children are at least five years or older and you are not planning to have
any more children. Older infants and toddlers account for most
drownings.
Is your Jacuzzi safe? Children can also drown in small Jacuzzis. Make
sure there is a fence around it and an appropriate cover.
Is your backyard secure from toddlers and young children entering
unsupervised? Make sure any side yard gates, garage back doors, and
sliding glass doors are appropriately locked. Many times a neighborhood
child has drowned in someone else’s pool.
Always supervise your children as they play in the pool or Jacuzzi. Use
this time as a good excuse to relax in a lounge chair while you keep your
watchful eyes on the young swimmers, instead of trying to get things
done inside while periodically glancing out the window.
Do you have a motion sensor alarm in your pool to alert you if anyone
falls in?

 OceanofPDF.com

 CHOOSING

AND

USING

SAFE

BABY

EQUIPMENT
When selecting a toy or any piece of baby equipment, develop a safety
mind-set. Think through how you (and baby) will use it before buying it.

OceanofPDF.com

 Safe Toys

  • Before buying or giving a baby a toy, check to make sure it has no small
parts that could cause baby to choke—for example, doll shoes, buttons,
beads, squeaker buttons in squeak toys, toys stuffed with small pellets.
(Testing tubes for checking toy size are available at toy stores. If the part
can fit through the tube, it can enter baby’s airway. Blocks, balls, and
other small toys should be no less than 1½ inches/4 centimeters in
diameter.)
• Make sure toys have no sharp edges or splinters and inspect them
frequently for loose parts. Perfectly safe new toys may become unsafe
through wear and tear.
• Avoid toys with dangling strings longer than 8 inches (20 centimeters), or
remove the strings.
• Make sure unsafe toys are out of reach, such as balloons, beads, Legos,
or pellet-like objects less than 1½ inches in diameter.
• Be sure to tell older children not to use loud toys such as cap guns around
the baby; they may damage baby’s hearing.
• Make sure toys fit baby’s stage of development and temperament. If your
baby is a thrower, get soft cloth or foam toys. Missile-type toys, such as
darts and arrows, can cause eye injuries.
• Be careful of crib toys that are fastened between two side rails and hang
over the crib. Older babies might use these as leverage to climb out.
These toys are recommended only from birth to five months and should
be removed when baby is old enough to push up on hands and knees.
• Be careful of plastic toys that are thin, brittle, and likely to break easily,
leaving sharp or jagged edges—airplane wings, for example. Before
buying a toy, bend it a bit to see how breakable the plastic is.
• Be careful when balloons pop, especially at parties. Quickly gather up
the pieces, and keep them away from babies who like to mouth objects
and could possibly choke on the remnants of the popped balloon. Avoid
letting babies play with uninflated balloons, as these can also cause
choking. Always supervise play with an inflated balloon.
• Throw away plastic wrapping as quickly as possible when unpacking
toys. Babies love to play with this type of wrapping, as well as with
plastic garment bags, and may suffocate.
f

 • Store toys properly. Avoid toy chests with attached lids that can fall on a
child and cause injury and strangulation. Hinged lids should stay open by
HIGH-CHAIR
themselves, without
propping. Instead ofSAFETY
toy boxes, toy shelves are much
safer and teach the developing child a sense of order.
• Don’t
let baby
a walker.
Although
these
convenient
“baby-sitters”
Position
chairuse
away
from hazards
such
as stoves,
windows,
dangling
may
be
tempting,
a
walker
(a
movable
play
chair
with
wheels
that
baby
drapery cords, and shelves.
sitsBe
in sure
and can
usethe
hissafety
legs to
move
the house)
dangerous.
to use
belt
that around
is attached
to the is
chair.
Do not
Many
pediatricians
are
lobbying
the
government
to
ban
them.
Not
only
depend on the tray to restrain the baby.
areBe
walkers
responsible
for many
accidental
each
year tend
when
sure the
tray is properly
latched
on bothdeaths
sides, as
babies
to
babies
fall
down
stairs
or
wander
into
areas
that
are
not
babyproofed,
but
push against the tray when seated.
they
significantly
motor development of the legs and
Doalso
not interfere
allow baby
to stand inwith
the chair.
feet.
exersaucers
arebase
a good
alternative.
See here
for topple
more
BeNonmobile
sure the chair
has a wide
for stability,
otherwise
it may
information.
over when baby tries to climb into it. (Allow climbing only with
supervision.)
Periodically check for splinters, loose screws, and a wobbly base.

OceanofPDF.com

 STROLLER SAFETY

Choose a stroller with a wide base and rear wheels well behind the
weight of the baby, so it will not tip when baby leans over to the side
or rocks backward.
If the stroller adjusts to a reclining position, be sure it will not tip
backward when baby is lying down.
Place shopping bags or baskets directly in front of the rear axle to
prevent tipping.
Test the brakes. Brakes on two wheels are safer than on one.
Be sure that latching devices fasten securely. Latches can be
accidentally tripped, causing a stroller to collapse. Strollers with two
latching devices are safer than those with only one.
When collapsing or opening a stroller, be careful of fingers—yours and
baby’s.
Periodically do a loose nuts and bolts check and look for sharp edges
and unsafe wheels.

OceanofPDF.com

 PLAYPEN SAFETY

If using a wooden playpen, make sure the bars are not so widely
spaced that baby’s head could get stuck. The same slat safety applies to
playpens as to cribs (bars no more than 2 inches/6 centimeters apart).
If using a mesh playpen, check that the netting is small enough that it
cannot catch the buttons on a child’s clothing. Avoid mesh with large
openings, which make easy toeholds for climbing.
Never leave a child in a mesh playpen with the side down. Baby can
become trapped and can strangle in the pocket of mesh between the
floor of the playpen and the lowered side.
Avoid dangling strings from the sides of the playpen.
Remove large toys or boxes or blocks that can be used as steps for
climbing out.
Cover exposed nuts and bolts.
Secure latching mechanisms that may act like a scissors and pinch
baby’s fingers.

OceanofPDF.com

 SAFETY INFORMATION
The Juvenile Products Manufacturers Association (JPMA) has safetycertification information on cribs, high chairs, walkers, strollers, and many
other types of baby equipment. Send a self-addressed, stamped envelope to
JPMA, 17000 Commerce Parkway, Suite C, Mt. Laurel, NJ 08054, tel.
(856) 638–0420, fax (856) 439–0525, or visit their website, jpma.org. For
additional information on toy safety and other infant products, visit the U.S.
Consumer Product Safety Commission’s website, cpsc.gov.

OceanofPDF.com

 Crib Safety

Crib accidents are high on the list of injuries to infants. Here are tips for
selecting a safe crib.

  • Look for a Consumer Product Safety Commission label stating that the
crib conforms to commission standards.
• Make sure the crib is painted with lead-free paint. Those manufactured
prior to 1974, when lead paint became illegal for cribs, may have been
repainted several times with lead-containing paint.
• If baby is a chewer, cover the guardrails with nontoxic plastic chew
guards.
• Check the drop sides. To prevent baby from releasing the drop sides,
each one should be secured with two locking devices. Baby should not be
able to release the drop sides from inside the crib.
• Check the space between the bars of the crib rail. The bars should be no
more than 2 inches (6 centimeters) apart, so that babies cannot get their
heads caught between them. The bars of cribs made prior to 1979 may
have wider spacing that does not conform to these standards.
• Rub your hands over all the wood surfaces, checking for cracks and
splinters.
• Avoid cribs with ornate posts that have large crevices. Infants have
strangled in the concave space between the post and the crib. Shun cribs
with decorative cutouts and knobs. A baby’s clothes can get caught on
these projections, causing strangulation. You can saw off the knobs and
posts and sand the tops smooth.
• Check crib hardware for sharp points or edges, holes, or cracks where
your baby’s fingers could get pinched or stuck.
• Frequently check the mattress support system by rattling the metal
hangers and by pushing the mattress on the top and then from the bottom.
If the hanger support dislodges, it needs to be fixed or replaced. Be sure
the four metal hangers supporting the mattress and support board are
secured into their notches by safety clips.
• Resist hand-me-down or secondhand mattresses that may not fit your crib
exactly. To check the fit of a crib mattress, push it into one corner. There
should be no more than a 1½-inch (4-centimeter) gap between the
mattress and the side or end of the crib. If you can fit more than two
fingers between the mattress and the crib, the mattress is too small.
• Remember, the firmer the mattress, the safer.

 • Do not use crib bumper pads. They can be used as leverage for climbing
and can cause strangulation.
Request pamphlets on crib safety by e-mailing the U.S. Consumer Product
• Check crib toys, mobiles, pacifiers, and clothing worn in the crib to make
Safety
Commission
at publications@cpsc.gov
their website,
sure they
have no strings
longer than 8 inches or
(20 visit
centimeters).
Once
baby is old enough to reach a mobile, take it down.
cpsc.gov.
• For the allergic infant or babies prone to a stuffy nose, avoid fuzzy
animals and toys that can collect allergy-producing dust.
OceanofPDF.com
• Place the crib in a safe area in the room. It should not be against a
window, near any dangling cords from blinds or draperies, or close to any
furniture that the infant can use to climb out of the crib. When the baby
gets older, give some thought to what could happen if your baby did
climb out. The crib should be placed so that your baby will not fall
against any sharp object or become entrapped or possibly strangled
between the crib and an adjacent wall or piece of furniture.
• If your baby’s crib is not in your bedroom or within hearing distance of
every room in the house, buy a portable baby monitor—a valuable safety
device.

 SAFE AND SANE CAR TRAVEL
How appropriate the bumper sticker is that reads, “If a mother’s place is in
the home, why am I always in the car?” Here are ways to make car travel
safe and pleasant.

OceanofPDF.com

 Rules for the Road

 • Always wear a seat belt yourself and insist that all other passengers do
so.
• Do not use an infant carrier or an infant seat in a car as a substitute for a
car seat.
• Do not use an ordinary travel bed in a car as a substitute for a car seat.
• Do not strap two children or a parent and a child into one seat belt.
• Never let your baby ride in your arms while the car is moving. Avoid the
temptation to not place baby in a car seat “because we’re only traveling a
few blocks.”
• Do not leave the rear door of a hatchback or station wagon open. This
lets in exhaust fumes, and dangerous objects may come through the open
door in a crash.
• Do not allow children to play with sharp objects such as pencils or metal
toys while the car is moving. These objects become projectiles if a car
stops suddenly.
• Watch those little fingers. Finger injuries often occur when parents close
the door without paying attention to where the child’s hand is. Children
commonly grab the vertical doorframe in between the front and rear
doors as they climb out of the car, often at the same time as the driver is
closing his or her own front door. Get in the habit of pausing before you
close any car door and checking where everyone’s little hands are.
• Do not put groceries or loose potential projectiles next to baby in the car
or even loose in the car. Put them in the trunk.
• Pregnant mothers should also use seat belts. Until your child is born, you
are his or her “car seat.” You are protecting two lives. Keep the lap belt
below your uterus, across the pelvic bone, to avoid injury to your baby
from the seat belt.

LOOK BEHIND YOUR CAR
In your haste to make an appointment, you rush into your car, jam it into
reverse, and speed out the driveway, not realizing what or who could be
lurking behind the car. Children love to play around cars. As a precaution,

 get into the habit of walking behind your car before entering; better yet, do
a full-circle walkaround. As an added precaution, you can install an
extended rearview mirror that increases your field of vision behind the car.

OceanofPDF.com

 Air Bag Safety

Before air bags became standard, children were allowed to sit in the front
seat, although the rear seat was considered safer. Now, however, air bags are
standard in almost all new cars. Children under age thirteen should never sit
in the front seat if there is an air bag because of the risk of facial burns and
severe or fatal neck injuries. Infants in car seats should never sit in the front
seat with an air bag, even if in a rear-facing car seat. Some cars come with
the option to deactivate the air bag. However, current safety guidelines now
recommend that children under thirteen should not sit in the front seat at all,
even if the air bag can be turned off. Research has shown that fewer injuries
and fatalities occur when children under thirteen are in the backseat.

OceanofPDF.com

 Choosing and Using a Car Seat

  • Make baby’s first ride a safe ride by purchasing and properly installing a
car seat before taking baby home from the hospital.
• Decide where in the car to put your baby. The center of the rear seat is
the safest place for baby. It is unsafe to have a child of any age in the
front seat if there is an air bag. Even if there is no air bag in the front, the
middle backseat is still the safest place for baby. Practically speaking,
parents traveling alone with a child frequently take their eyes off the road
or turn around to check that their child in the backseat is all right. Attach
a mirror to the visor to easily view baby in the backseat. You may be
tempted to put a rear-facing infant in the front seat, so you can better
keep an eye on him. This is not recommended.
For children using a booster seat the safest place is the backseat
restrained by a shoulder strap, even if this means sitting by a door. Many
parents think that sitting in the middle backseat with a lap belt only is
safer than sitting by a door with a shoulder belt. This is not true. Laponly seat belts can be dangerous. A child restrained by a lap belt in the
middle backseat is more likely to be injured during an accident than a
child restrained by a shoulder belt beside a door.
• Use a car seat only in a seat that faces forward.
• Read the instructional manual for anchoring and attaching the seat belt
correctly. Be sure your car seat can be used with the particular seat belts
in your car. Pull the seat belt tight, then test its security by grasping the
car seat where the seat belt goes through it and rocking it front to back
and side to side; the seat shouldn’t move more than one inch in any
direction. Use the locking clip (provided with newer car seats) if your
car’s shoulder/lap belt latch plate slides freely; otherwise the seat will not
be anchored securely. Automatic seat belts will not safely anchor a car
seat. Regularly inspect seat belts and connections for wear and tear. Also
be sure the car seat fits in your car. The seats of some cars have such an
unusual contour or slope that some car seats will not safely fit.
• Position the car seat at the correct angle: 45 degrees is ideal. If the
position is too upright, baby’s head may plop forward; too far back and
the car-seat back may not contain baby in the event of a crash. Some car
seats come with a correct-position indicator.
• Support baby’s wobbly head, especially in the first few months. You can

 pp
y
y
, p
y
use rolled-up towels, diapers, or commercially made car-seat inserts. A
folded baby sling makes an ideal horseshoe-shaped head support for a
tiny infant in a car seat.
• To avoid burning little skin, cover plastic or metal parts if the car has
been sitting in the hot sun. Car-seat covers protect your infant’s skin
against hot or cold surfaces as well as cushioning baby.
• For cold weather, if you do not have a fitted car-seat cover, drape a
blanket over the seat and cut holes in it for the harness strap and buckle
to come through.
SETTLING TRAVELING TUMMIES
• Do not wear your baby in a cloth carrier in your car. Keep him in the car
seat at all times. If baby is crying and hysterical, it is safer to pull off the
Motion sickness results from the brain receiving confusing messages from
road, stop, and comfort your baby rather than remove baby from the car
the senses. For example, when your baby is buried in the backseat, his eyes
seat while the car is in motion.
see only the stationary seat back, but the motion sensors of the inner ear tell
• Bebrain
sure the
are The
flat and
not twisted.
the
the seat
bodybelt
is straps
moving.
equilibrium
center in the inner ear is
•
Position
harness
straps
correctly.
You
should
bestomach
able tosettlers.
only fit two
more sensitive in some babies than others. Try these
fingers or fewer between the straps and baby. The chest clip that connects
thePlan
two shoulder
straps
should
be at armpit
level.
your route
to use
straight
freeways:
avoid going through busy
and starts
and straps
winding
upset
tiny tummies.
• Be towns.
sure toFrequent
adjust thestops
car seat
shoulder
to aroads
higher
position
as your
Travel
at taller,
nap time.
Sleep settles
queasy insides. guidelines.
The best time to depart
baby
grows
according
to the manufacturer’s
is just before
a nap,
so you(with
can hope
to over
arriveeach
at your
destination
with
• Five-point
harness
restraints
straps
shoulder,
around
thea
and well-rested
baby.the legs) are safer than three-point
lapcomfortable
on both sides,
and between
Tank up
baby,
butonly
not over
a full
tank.
Give and
babybetween
a lightthe
meal
before
harnesses
(with
straps
each
shoulder
legs).
departure (nonfatty and nondairy foods—cereal, pasta, fruit), and take
• Never use a lap-only seat belt. These significantly increase the chance of
along stomach-friendly snacks: fruit, crackers, a cool drink in a carton
injury. Whatever stage your child is at, whether she is in a car seat or a
with a straw.
booster seat or using a seat belt only, always use shoulder restraints.
Tank up the car beforehand. Babies are sensitive to exhaust and fumes
• If your
seat is involved in a significant crash, buy a new one, even if
at gascar
stations.
theProvide
seat appears
be undamaged.
a seattowith
a view—babies get carsick if they can’t see out a
• Trywindow—but
before you buy.
Becompromise
sure the car seat
you
chosen can be properly
don’t
safety
forhave
a view.
installed
in yourthat
car. keep baby focused on objects far away. Billboards,
Play games
• Thebuildings,
National and
Highway
Traffic
Administration
estimates
that
80
mountains
are Safety
much more
tummy friendly
during
travel
percent
of car seats
are installed
than close-up
coloring
books. or used incorrectly. This means that four
outFresh
of five
reading
this may
have
theirOpen
kids improperly
airpeople
is a tummy
rumble’s
best
friend.
a window onrestrained.
each side
Any
police
fireventilation.
station willLeave
provide
a free
seat inspection.
of local
the car
for or
cross
your
air car
pollutants
(cigarette
Visit one today.

 perfumes)model
at home.
• Letsmoke,
older children
“buckling up” for the toddler. Be sure they
Medications
for motion sickness
are the
not car
recommended
under
of
understand
the nonnegotiable
rule that
does not start
untila year
all the
age, are
but snapped.
they may be used safely thereafter. Check first with your
buckles
doctor planning
in case to
there
reasons
yourbechild
not to
• If you’re
use are
the medical
car seat for
plane for
travel,
sure your
seattake
is
these.
Dramamine
is
a
safe
and
effective
over-the-counter
medication
certified for use in aircraft (it will say so on the label).
to quell the nausea, vomiting, and dizziness associated with motion
• If you are borrowing or buying a used car seat, check the label to be sure
sickness. The dosage for an infant from one to two years is ½
that it conforms to government safety standards.
teaspoon, given one-half to one hour before travel; for the child two to
three years the dosage is 1 teaspoon (5 milliliters). It should not be
given more frequently than once every six hours. Seasickness patches
(Scopolamine) should not be used on infants.

OceanofPDF.com

 Guidelines for Various Ages

Car seat positions change with your child’s age, weight, and height. Infants
should spend the first two years of life in a rear-facing position, then turned
forward when they turn two, then graduated to a booster seat according to
their height and weight (see below).

Infants from Birth to Two Years

Current safety guidelines state that infants from birth to age two years
should use the car seat in the rear-facing position. With this design, most of
the forward force of a collision is transferred to the seat belt holding the
seat. The rear-facing, semiupright position allows the remaining force to be
distributed throughout the baby’s back to bones and muscles. Resist the
temptation to turn baby forward-facing prior to two years (unless his height
or weight exceed the car seat’s limit). Although this may make your baby
happier with more room to stretch out during those long car rides, the
research is very clear that toddlers will be much safer in a rear-facing
position during a car accident. Forward-facing toddlers suffer more neck
and spine injuries from the force of their large and heavy heads flying
forward during a crash. Be sure to secure baby snugly in the seat with the

 safety harness. There are two types of starter car seats: infant seats and
convertible seats.
Infant seats. These are tublike seats for infants weighing less than 20
pounds (9 kilograms); some have the added advantage of doubling as a
carrier to transport a sleeping baby outside the car, and can be used as an
infant seat inside the house. Infant car seats are designed only to be used in
the rear-facing position.
One word of caution when using car seats with a detachable base:
Infants can easily fall out of these when being carried if the handle is not
locked in place. Several manufacturers have had to recall this type of car
seat because of failures of the handle’s locking mechanism. If you use this
type of car seat/carrier, be sure to register your purchase with the
manufacturer so you can be notified in the event of a recall. Another safety
hazard to consider is that they can easily be knocked off of tables with baby
inside. It’s so tempting to bring a sleeping baby and seat into a restaurant or
other public place and set them on a table. Resist this temptation. Babies are
much safer in a baby sling, snuggled against you. If you do use the portable
car seat, make sure to set it down in a secure and safe place.
Convertible car seats. Heavier, taller, and more expensive than the infant
seat, convertible seats can be used from birth up to 40 pounds (18
kilograms) or according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. They can be used
in the rear-facing position for the first two years, then faced forward until
age four. Although they are more expensive than the infant seats, in the long

 run you save money because you have to buy only one car seat. The weight
and design of convertible seats make their use as an out-of-car transport seat
impractical. A baby sling would come in handy in this instance.
There are several different options for convertible car seats:
• five-point harness—safer, but more buckles to buckle up
• T-shield—more convenient (one buckle only) but only three points
• overhead shield—again, more convenient, and some come with a fivepoint harness.
One drawback of T-shields and overhead shields is that if baby is playing
with a toy during a collision, the toy can injure baby’s face as the force of
the impact moves his head forward and down. Using these types of seats
may mean sacrificing safety for convenience.
Be sure you are familiar with the height specifications for your car seat.
If the top of your infant’s head extends higher than the back of the car seat,
it may be time to buy a larger one. Tall babies may outgrow their infant seat
before they are one year or 20 pounds. Read your manual carefully, as this
information will be different for every car seat.

Children Two Years and Older

When baby reaches two years of age, it is time to change to a forwardfacing position. If you have a large, convertible car seat that baby still fits
in, continue to use this. If you need a new seat, pay attention to the type of

 restraint system described above and decide which system is best for you.
Keep in mind, five-point restraints are considered safer than the more
convenient three-point restraints. Children should remain in a car seat and
use the seat’s harness system until they surpass the manufacturer’s safety
limit for that specific car seat, regardless of the child’s age. Typically this
won’t occur until a child is at least four years old and 40 pounds; some car
seats and harnesses will hold a child until six years or even older.

Children Who Have Outgrown the Car Seat Harness (Approximately
Four to Six Years of Age)

Once a child’s weight or height exceeds the manufacturer’s safety limit
(usually four years old or 40 pounds) for use of the harness straps, remove
the straps and secure the child in the seat using the seat belt instead.
Depending on the seat (read your car seat manual), you may be able to
continue to use your current seat, or you may need to buy a new booster
seat. Booster seats come in two forms: a “bottom-only” seat and a complete
booster seat with a back. The car’s shoulder and lap belt is used to restrain
the child in the seat. You will keep your child in the booster seat until he
reaches 4 feet, 9 inches in height, typically between eight and twelve years
of age. Prior to this height, without a booster seat the seat belt may rest
across a child’s neck, which can cause serious injury during a crash. Upon
reaching this height, it’s time to say good-bye to the booster seat and only
use the shoulder-and-lap seat belt.

 State Laws Versus National Safety Guidelines

Car seat laws vary from state to state, and they usually lag behind the safety
guidelines established by the federal government, as described in this
section. For example, some states only require infants to remain rear-facing
until one year of age, and some base their transition from a car seat and
harness to a booster seat based on a child’s weight and age instead of
height. However, virtually every state eventually changes its laws to match
the national guidelines. We strongly advise you to follow the national safety
guidelines, instead of your state laws, to maximize your child’s car safety.

LATCH System for Car Seats

“LATCH” stands for Lower Anchors and Tethers for Children. New tether
straps connect from the top and sides of the car seat to metal hooks
anchored to the car behind and next to the car seat. Most cars built after
2001 are equipped with a top anchor, and most 2003 models have two sets
of lower anchors in the back seat. Car seats made after 2001 come with
tether straps that connect to both the top and lower anchor hooks, and some
older car seats have a top tether strap. The new LATCH system secures the
car seat instead of using seat belts. Follow the manufacturer’s instructions
carefully to make sure you are using this new system correctly.

SUMMARY OF CAR SEAT GUIDELINES

 Rear-facing infant seat
• birth to age two (may turn forward if height or weight limit for specific car
seat is reached prior to turning two)
Forward-facing car seat
• age two until height or weight limit for specific car seat is reached
Booster seat with seat belt
• use until child is 4 feet, 9 inches tall
Seat belts (in backseat)
• use once a child is 4 feet, 9 inches tall

OceanofPDF.com

 When Baby Protests the Car Seat

Develop a mind-set that car travel and a safety seat go together. This is
nonnegotiable and without exception. If baby protests using the car seat, try
the following tips.

  • Some toddlers start to throw a fit as soon as they even approach the car.
Give your toddler a snack to hold before you get to the car. He may
concentrate on this, and before he even knows it, you’ll have him
buckled in and ready to go.
• For the toddler who screams hysterically no matter what you do, try to
stay calm. Reassure him in a quiet voice as you gently secure him in the
car seat. Give him the message that there really is no choice. Never let
him think that fussing will make you change your mind about the car
ride. He should come around soon.
• Make sure your toddler understands he should never undo the buckles of
his car seat.
• If possible, time your car travel for when baby travels easiest. Some
babies settle best early in the morning. Others do better traveling during
nap time.
• Bring along a bag of soft toys such as a stuffed animal or toys that attach
to the car seat. Cloth books are a winner.
• To solve the crying-baby-in-the-car-seat dilemma, travel with two adults
in the car as often as possible. One adult sits in the back next to baby, the
other adult drives.
• Avoid the urge to take baby out of the car seat and comfort him by
feeding “just for a moment” while the car is moving.
• Have an older sibling sit next to baby in the backseat and entertain the
car-seated baby during the trip.
• Sing songs to your baby and point out interesting sights that you pass by.
We made up jingles that celebrated the safety issue (“buckle up for
safety”). The unhappy child knew we understood her feelings, at least.
And we’d usually get her to laugh.
• Play favorite music and have a few surprise songs set aside for use in a
pinch.
• Toddlers often get upset by not being able to see out the window. If this
is the case, choose a car seat that props baby up high enough to learn
from the outside moving world.
• Don’t discount the value of a parent’s voice chatting with the little
traveler in the little seat. If you ignore the passenger, he has time to get

 bored and disgruntled.

SAFETY GUIDELINES
These are the current safety guidelines at the time this book was published.
For more information or updates on child-restraint safety guidelines,
including car seat recalls, visit the NHTSA (National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration) website, nhtsa.gov, or call (888) 327–4236. For a list
of child passenger safety seat inspection locations near you, go to
seatcheck.org or call (866) 732–8243.

OceanofPDF.com

 Keeping Travel Pleasant

• Feed and toilet your toddler before the trip. A baby with dry pants and a
full tummy is a more pleasant passenger.
• Treat travel like infant feeding: short, frequent trips rather than lengthy
ones. When driving long distances, make frequent pit stops.
• Take along music, old favorites and new surprises. Start the music right
after buckling baby in and starting the car.
• Nonchokable nibbles, for example, rice cakes, may settle the hungry
traveler. Do not allow the little rider to suck on anything with a stick, like
a lollipop or Popsicle. A swerve or an accident could jam the stick into
baby’s throat.
Some young babies scream for the entire car ride, no matter what you do.
The reason for this is unclear, but it is likely that the motion of the car,
coupled with the feeling of being restrained, overwhelms baby’s sensory
system and sets him off. It may be a form of infant car sickness. If possible,
limit your car rides to only those that are mandatory, save errands until one
parent can stay home with baby, and allow more time for car trips so you
can pull over every ten or fifteen minutes to give baby a break. Be patient.
Most infants come to accept their fate, and the fussing subsides between six
and nine months of age.

OceanofPDF.com

 CYCLING WITH INFANTS
Although cycling with an infant secured in a rear-mounted bike seat or
towed in a child trailer is acceptable, serious injuries can occur. Ridesharing with an infant increases the bike’s weight and instability and should
be done only by experienced adult riders. Here are some guidelines from
the American Academy of Pediatrics that can lower the risks:
• Ride in parks, on bike paths, and on quiet streets.
• Infants younger than twelve months are too young to safely sit upright
and maintain head stability with a helmet in a rear-mounted bike seat.
• A child trailer should not be used until baby is old enough to sit
unsupported and hold his head up easily with a helmet on, beginning
around nine months or older. However, he may not be ready until twelve
months or older.
• Rear-mounted bike seats must be properly secured over the rear wheel,
with spoke guards to protect baby’s hands and feet, and have a high back,
lap belt, and shoulder harness that will support baby upright, even when
asleep.
• Baby should wear a small, lightweight Styrofoam helmet at all times.
Teach children that helmets and wheels belong safely together.
Whenever cycling with an infant in a carrier seat, pulling baby in a cart
behind your bike, or even with your child’s first sidewalk ventures on his
tricycle, always use an approved safety helmet. If you teach your child the

 value of using a safety helmet at an early age, the head-protecting mind-set
will grow up with him, making it a natural part of his life on wheels later
on.

OceanofPDF.com

 PLANTPROOFING YOUR HOME
You walk into your plant-adorned living room and see your toddler sucking
on a leaf. Is it poisonous? Suddenly, you realize you don’t know. Fearing
the worst, you rush the baby to your local emergency room. The admitting
nurse asks you why you came. You answer, “He ate a leaf.” “What kind of
leaf?” the nurse inquires. Embarrassed, you realize that in your haste you
left the plant at home. You backtrack and now rush the plant to the
emergency room. “What is it?” the nurse further inquires. Red-faced, you
admit, “I don’t know.” The plant without a name is hurriedly circled around
the emergency room staff, each person offering an “I thinks it’s a…,” but no
one is sure.

OceanofPDF.com

 Know Your Plants

Understand what is meant by the term “poisonous plant.” Many plants are
poisonous, but some are more poisonous than others. Many plants are
labeled “poisonous” when the only problems they cause are a sore mouth,
an upset stomach, and vomiting with no lasting harm. Others may be fatal.
Fortunately, the leaves of many toxic plants have such a bitter taste that
babies seldom ingest a mouthful. When purchasing a plant, be sure the
name tag is attached and leave it attached. Ask a knowledgeable person
whether or not the plant is poisonous and, if so, how poisonous. If the plant
has no name and no information on toxicity, don’t buy it. If given or giving
a plant, leave the identification tag attached. If you’re the recipient, ask
where the plant was purchased. Check out your leafy friend before
admission to the family. If the plant has no tag, take a sample cutting to a
nursery for identification.

SAFETY TIP: Some plants are so toxic that they should not be allowed in
the house or yard—oleander, for example. Others may be only mildly
harmful and may be safely kept out of reach. Be aware, however, that “out
of reach” implies that children can’t climb up to the top shelf, which they
can, and that leaves don’t fall to the toddler at floor level, which they do.

 RECOMMENDED SHOPPING LIST FOR CHILD
SAFETY PRODUCTS
Car seat
Safety latches for drawers and cabinets
Cordless phone
Safety plugs for electrical outlets or child-proof outlet covers
Edge cushions for table corners, fireplace hearths
Small-object testing tube
Nonskid rugs
Doorknob covers
Cushioned covers for tub spout
Stove knob covers
Stairway gates
Lid lock for toilet seats
Guardrail that fits under adult mattress
Intercom or baby monitor
Netting for railings and balconies
Tot-finder decals
Screen guards
Rubber stripping for stairs
Fire extinguisher
Smoke detectors

OceanofPDF.com

 RESOURCES FOR BABYPROOFING YOUR
HOME
The Perfectly Safe Catalog
5701 Mayfair Road
North Canton, OH 44720
(800) 837-5437; perfectlysafe.com
Car Safety Seats: A Guide for Families. A helpful brochure listing all of
the approved car seats. Available from the American Academy of Pediatrics
at AAP.org.

OceanofPDF.com

 RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION ABOUT
CHILDHOOD POISONINGS

Baby-Safe Houseplants and Cut Flowers, by John I. and Delores M. Alber
(Genus Books, 1993).
AMA Handbook of Poisonous and Injurious Plants, by Lewis S. Nelson,
Richard D. Shih, and Michael J. Balick (Springer, 2006).
Regional poison control centers. Contact your local hospital or emergency
medical system for the telephone number. Or call the nationwide poison
control phone number, (800) 222–1222, to be connected to a center near
you.

OceanofPDF.com

 Teach Your Child Not to Eat House and Garden Plants

While you can make your own home plant safe, homes you visit may not be
so child centered. For example, grandmother may now adorn her house with
all the plants she loves but couldn’t have when you were a child because
they aren’t safe. By two years of age children can comprehend the meaning
of such precautions as “hot,” “hurt,” “owie,” “make sick.” But don’t rely on
baby to remember your mouth-off-plants policy. Supervision is still the only
prevention.

OceanofPDF.com

 If Your Baby Eats a Plant

Even if your baby eats only a leaf, follow these steps.
Check baby. Check baby’s hands and mouth for plant pieces—clues to
whether or not baby ate a piece of plant. Oftentimes the bitter taste of the
leaves prompts baby to immediately spit out the leaf without ingesting any.
Check the hands, eyes, and lips for redness or blistering. Check the tongue
and inside the mouth for cuts, redness, blistering, or swelling.
Check the plant. If uncertain which plant in the house baby sampled, ask
your child to show you his “favorite” and, after you get his confidence,
“which one you ate.” Don’t act scared or tentative, or baby will clam up. If
still uncertain, examine the most reachable plants; look for broken leaves,
spilled dirt, or any signs of child tampering.
Call poison control at (800) 222-1222. If the plant is suspicious or
poisonous, call your poison control center. When calling, give the full
botanical name of the plant from the tag, or as much as you know. Take the
plant or a sample cutting with you to the phone to offer a description. The
poison control center will advise you on what to do.

 Take your child and the plant to the emergency room. When still
uncertain but suspicious, take your child and plant to the emergency room.
If you aren’t sure what the plant is, it is best, if possible, to have someone
take a plant cutting to a nearby nursery for identification while you go to the
hospital. Have your associate phone the emergency room with the plant
information while you’re en route, if you are not already there. Except for
causing a sore throat, nausea, vomiting, and a sore stomach, plants rarely
are seriously toxic within minutes. The safest place, however, to be when in
doubt is at your hospital emergency room.
Poisonous plants resource: See AskDrSears.com for a list of worry and
no-worry plants.

OceanofPDF.com

 ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTANTS: GETTING
THE LEAD OUT
Lead poisoning from eating lead-based paint chips resulted in a government
ban on lead-based paint in 1978. Painted homes built after 1980 are
required by law to use lead-free paint. So the problem should be over. Not
so. While the signs of lead poisoning have long been recognized, recent
research has shown that even small levels of lead in a child’s blood may
cause subtle developmental delays and behavioral problems or even brain
damage. Lead is now dubbed “the silent hazard.”

OceanofPDF.com

 What Lead Does

This toxic material enters the bloodstream, and the body, mistaking it for
calcium, welcomes it into vital cells such as those in bone marrow, the
kidneys, and the brain, where it interferes with the enzymes necessary for
these organs to function normally. Lead poisoning shows these features:
• colicky abdominal pain
• constipation, diminished appetite
• hyperirritability
• paleness from anemia
• growth delay
• developmental delay
• poor attention span
• convulsions

OceanofPDF.com

 How Lead Gets In

Children do not get lead poisoning from chewing on pencils. Pencil paint is
non-leaded, and the “lead” is harmless graphite. The lead that poisons
children comes from old paint, gasoline emissions, contaminated soil,
contaminated water, and lead pottery. Candy, toys, and infant formula
imported from third-world countries may contain lead.

OceanofPDF.com

 Getting the Lead Out

Look for the following high-risk sources of lead in your child’s
environment, and follow our suggestions to reduce the risk. Note, too, that
children with nutritional deficiencies of iron, calcium, and zinc are more
susceptible to lead poisoning, another example of how good nutrition is
preventive medicine.
Old paint chips. Even though houses and apartments painted after 1980
should, by law, have lead-free paint, older homes and renovated homes may
have new paint over old. Paint chips containing some of the old paint are
inviting to the child who likes to mouth tiny pieces of anything. Even more
toxic is the lead dust created from friction on paint chippings in areas of
wear like windowsills, door frames, and baseboards. A lead-based paint
chip the size of a postage stamp may contain ten thousand times the safe
level of lead if eaten by a child. Exploring little hands wipe along the
window ledge and suck the toxic lead dust off their fingertips. And
ingesting only a few specks of this dust or a chip a day all during infancy
can cause lead poisoning. To remove old paint dust from windowsills and
other areas of wear, wipe with a high-phosphate detergent.

 Renovation projects. If you are having an old home renovated, be sure the
contractor knows how to thoroughly remove all the old paint residue. Also,
keep your child out of the house during paint-stripping time. Following
renovation, rent a HEPAvac (high-efficiency particulate-air-filtered
vacuum) to remove leaded paint dust from the renovated area. Pay
particular attention to old porches, which are notorious for providing
millions of tiny flakes and paint dust for sticky little fingers.
Contaminated water. If you drink water from a well or live in an older
home where pipes may have been soldered with lead, have your tap water
tested by an EPA-certified laboratory or your local water department if it
provides such a service, or buy an at-time testing kit. For information on
how to get your water tested for lead, call the EPA safe drinking water
hotline, (800) 426–4791, or visit water.epa.gov/drink/info.

COMMON NONHARMFUL OR MILDLY
HARMFUL HOUSEHOLD SUBSTANCES
Accidental ingestion of the following does not usually require treatment.
Caution: This list is meant only as a guide. Consult your physician or
poison control center for more information.
antacids
antibiotics (if only a few tablets or teaspoons)
baby shampoo and lotion
bath oil
bath soap
blush
bubble bath
calamine lotion

 candles
caps (for toy pistols)
chalk
cigarettes1
cologne
cosmetics2
crayons3
dehumidifier packet
deodorant
deodorizers
detergent4
Elmer’s glue
eye makeup
fabric softener
fishbowl additives
glue and paste
hand lotion and cream
incense
ink (markers and pens)
kitty litter
laxatives
lipstick
Lysol disinfectant (not toilet bowl cleaner)
makeup
matches
modeling clay
mouthwash5
oral contraceptives
pencil lead
petroleum jelly (Vaseline)
Play-Doh
putty and Silly Putty
shampoo
shaving cream

 suntan preparations
sweetening agents
thyroid tablets
vitamins with or without fluoride6
zinc oxide
If your tap water is high in lead, in addition to replacing the plumbing, if
that is a possibility, use cold water for cooking (hot water removes more of
the lead from the pipes), use bottled water for drinking and cooking, and
obtain a water filter that is proven to remove lead.
Water drawn from the tap first thing in the morning has the greatest lead
concentration. This is important to know since many parents prepare a daily
supply of formula in the morning. If your pipes are suspicious or your water
has been proven to contain lead, run the cold water for at least two minutes
to flush out the pipes before using the tap water to prepare formula.
Polluted air. If you live downwind from highways or major intersections,
test your child’s lead level at least once a year if moving is not an option.
Contaminated soil. Discourage your child from mouthing soil, especially if
you live in renovated areas where old buildings have been torn down.
Other sources and precautions. Newsprint used to contain lead, but newer
inks are lead-free and considered nontoxic, so parents don’t have to worry
about baby mouthing newspapers and magazines. Avoid storing food or
liquid in lead crystal or imported ceramics. And don’t forget old toys and
furniture that may be family heirlooms. As a final point, pregnant women

 and breastfeeding women should be especially vigilant to avoid exposure to
lead. Pregnancy is not the time to strip the old paint from baby’s future
nursery, as the lead could pass from mother’s bloodstream into the fetus.
Before buying a home or renting an apartment, have the paint and water
checked for lead content.

OceanofPDF.com

 Testing Your Child for Lead

If your child has any of the above exposure risks, mention them to your
doctor, who may order a blood lead test. In high-risk areas baby should be
routinely tested at twelve and twenty-four months. Because of the recent
finding that even low levels of lead can cause subtle developmental delay,
the blood level at which a child may be at risk for damage was recently
lowered.

OceanofPDF.com

 The Treatment of Lead Poisoning

Treatment of lead poisoning (injecting medicines into the child’s
bloodstream to remove the lead) is expensive, painful, and cannot remove
all of the lead. Some effects are irreversible. Prevention is the answer.
Though environmentalists give much attention to preserving the wildlife in
our forests, perhaps the most endangered species is the children in our
cities.

OceanofPDF.com

 26

OceanofPDF.com

 Keeping Your Baby Healthy

Two facts of parenting life are that babies get sick and parents worry. How
frequently and severely a baby gets ill depends primarily upon the baby’s
susceptibility to illness, not on your parenting. But there are basic things
you can do to lessen your baby’s chances of getting sick and to speed
recovery when your baby does become ill. Here’s how to begin your
medical partnership with your doctor.

OceanofPDF.com

 HEALTH MAINTENANCE BEGINS AT HOME
Learning to read your well baby helps you more intuitively recognize and
help your sick baby. The attachment style of parenting really helps you
shine in detecting and treating a sick child. A sensitive response to your
baby’s cries, and the hours of holding and nursing, all increase your ability
to read your baby. You develop a feel for your baby when she is well so that
you are instinctively alerted at the first sign of illness: “She’s acting
different,” or “Her cries are different, I know she hurts somewhere.” It’s not
as important to know what’s wrong as it is to know something’s wrong.

OceanofPDF.com

 Becoming Dr. Mom and Dr. Dad

One of the most intuitive parents in our practice was a totally blind mother,
Nancy. Because she could not see her baby, she went completely by sound
and feel. Her baby got various skin rashes that caused her to frequent my
office. Early in our rash-diagnosing challenge, Nancy brought baby Eric in
for a rash I, Dr. Bill, couldn’t see. But mother said, “I feel it.” Sure enough,
the next day I could see it. Another intuitive mother told me that she could
detect when her baby’s throat was hurting because “I can feel she sucks
differently.” And another attachment mother once told me how she could
tell her baby was beginning an ear infection because her baby did not want
to put her head down and breast-feed on that side. This deep sensitivity to
their babies earn these mothers an honorary degree of Dr. Mom.
Attached mothers and trusting babies help the doctor, too. Over the years
of examining well and sick babies we have noticed that babies who are the
product of responsive parenting radiate an attitude of trust, especially when
they are ill. They are so used to getting their needs met that when they are
ill, they trust that the doctor will make them well. They protest less during
examinations, resulting in less wear and tear on the doctor and the baby. It
seems that these babies operate from some inner trust that tells them that the
doctor who puts a stick in their mouth, pokes their tummy, and shines the
light in their ear is really on their side. And baby’s cooperative trust helps

 the doctor make a more accurate diagnosis. For example, a screaming baby
can cause a reddened eardrum and a confusing ear exam.
A close parent-infant attachment makes it easier for parents to care for
the sick child. Many illnesses in infancy fall into the category of “I don’t
know what’s wrong with your baby, so let’s wait a day or two and see what
changes occur.” Take for example the baby who has a fever of unknown
origin—FUO. (Or, as one professor of pediatrics used to chide, “failure to
uncover the obvious.”) In this case we tell the parents that we suspect that
this is just a harmless virus and their baby will get better in a few days, but
“call us if the symptoms change.” That last admonition is loaded. We are, in
effect, releasing the sick baby to Dr. Mom and Dr. Dad and trusting that
they will report back if their baby’s condition worsens. But what are the
credentials of these home doctors? They are sensitive to their baby, they can
read their baby’s cues, and they have such an intuitive feel for their baby
that they almost hurt where their baby hurts. This sick baby is in good
hands.

OceanofPDF.com

 Practice the Pills-Skills Approach to Your Baby’s Health Care

Picture your infant as a patient in our pediatric practice. Your first “sick
visit” appointment may begin something like this: “We want to show you
how to be your child’s ‘home doctor.’ ” We call this the pills-skills
approach. With this model of medical care, when you come into our office
and ask the doctor, “What can we take?” also ask, “What can we do?” With
this healthier model of medical care, you are likely to leave the doctor’s
office with not only a prescription, if needed, but a list of home-health skills
to practice, such as feeding your children foods that boost the immune
system. We call those the five S’s: salmon, salads, smoothies, spices (such
as turmeric and black pepper), and supplements (such as fruit and vegetable
extracts and fish oil). Other skills include the “nose hose” and “steam
clean” for keeping your baby’s nasal passages clean (see here). This is not
only better for your baby but also helps parents be partners in health care
with their doctor. For more on this approach, and an A–Z reference for
every childhood illness and emergency, read our home-health care guide
The Portable Pediatrician (Little, Brown, 2011).

OceanofPDF.com

 Good Food Promotes Good Health

Putting the right food into your baby can help keep the wrong germs out.
The relation between good food and good health has received much press
for adults, but it’s even more important for babies. Most noteworthy of
these nutritional advances is the return to breastfeeding, especially
breastfeeding well into the toddler years, when babies contract the most
illnesses. Breast milk is good medicine primarily in two ways: It lessens
allergies, and it reduces infections. For example, when a breastfed baby gets
a diarrhea illness, or intestinal infection, inflamed intestines may not
tolerate formula but welcome breast milk. Breastfed babies suffer fewer
diarrhea illnesses, especially the more severe illnesses requiring
hospitalization, than their formula-fed friends. Breastfeeding has kept many
babies out of hospitals. When a formula-fed baby has a severe diarrhea
illness, it is usually necessary to stop or dilute the formula for a few days.
This plus the fact that some babies refuse to take a bottle when sick requires
that some babies be hospitalized for dehydration from the diarrhea. Seldom
so the breastfed baby who usually continues to feed avidly when sick. It is
rarely necessary or advisable to stop breastfeeding during a diarrhea
episode.

SMOKING AND BABIES DON’T MIX

 What happens to babies when they are exposed to cigarette smoke? Here
are some shocking figures that should help you kick the habit forever.
Babies and children who are exposed to cigarette smoke have a much
higher incidence of pneumonia, asthma, ear infections, bronchitis, sinus
infections, eye irritation, and croup. If that is not enough to help convince
you to take your last puff, try this tragic statistic: Babies of smoking
mothers and fathers have a seven times greater chance of dying from
sudden infant death syndrome. If you still feel you can afford to smoke, try
this statistic: Children of smoking parents have two to three times more
visits to the doctor, usually from respiratory infections or allergy-related
illnesses. Also, if you want to raise a healthy heart, children who are
exposed to passive smoke in the home have lower blood levels of HDL, the
good cholesterol that helps protect against coronary artery disease. Consider
as well some long-term effects. Children of smoking parents are more likely
to become smokers themselves. And recent studies have found that growing
up in a home in which parents smoke raises the child’s risk of various
cancers later in life.
Not only does breast milk help keep babies healthy, it keeps them
comfortable. The comforting effects of baby’s favorite pacifier are welcome
when he is sick or hurting. And the mothering hormones stimulated by
sucking help Dr. Mom give added tender loving care.

OceanofPDF.com

 Separate Babies and Germs

Within reason and practicality, don’t let germs and babies play together.
While no baby can grow up in a germ-free bubble, you can avoid
unnecessary exposure to germ-carrying kids. Infectious diarrhea and colds
are the two most commonly shared illnesses. If your baby’s playmates have
these contagious illnesses, your home should be off limits to them until they
are no longer contagious. Require your baby’s place of day care to enforce
strict rules about potentially contagious children playing with healthy
children. Ditto other places where bunches of babies play together, such as
church nurseries.

OceanofPDF.com

 Clear the Air

Contaminated air (pollutants and cigarette smoke) irritates baby’s sensitive
breathing passages, which rebel by secreting mucus. Germs love to bathe in
the secretions in the nose, sinuses, and airways. Also, avoid household
pollutants (perfumes, hair sprays, exhaust fumes, dust from remodeling) if
your baby is sensitive to nasal irritants.

OceanofPDF.com

 WELL-BABY CHECKUPS
Besides attachment parenting, good nutrition, healthy playmates, and clean
air, another way to improve your baby’s health is to follow your doctor’s
schedule for well-baby exams. Here’s the schedule we use in our office,
similar to the one advised by the American Academy of Pediatrics:
• monthly for the first six months for firstborn babies; every other month
for the first six months for subsequent babies
• at nine, twelve, fifteen, eighteen, and twenty-four months
• yearly thereafter
Well-baby exams are good for baby and for parents. During these exams
expect to discuss:
• growth and development at each stage
• good nutrition
• preventive medicine and accident prevention
And to have:

 • immunizations
• a thorough exam to detect normal or abnormal development
• height, weight, head measurements
• periodic lab tests: hemoglobin for anemia and urinalysis
• hearing and vision evaluations (when necessary)
• questions answered about parenting
• help with specific medical problems
During these checkups, besides helping you and your baby, your doctor
grows in his or her knowledge of your well child—a useful reference point
for when your child is sick. The current system of well-baby care is the best
medical bargain around. Consider what your family gets for around a
thousand dollars the first year (at this writing the average well-baby cost for
a year, excluding laboratory tests and shots): access to your doctor twentyfour hours a day year-round, telephone consultation when needed, a handson feel for your baby’s growth and development, and early detection of
illnesses or abnormalities that, if undetected, may have lifelong
consequences. Well-baby checkups are a wise investment in family health.

TELEPHONE COMMUNICATION TIPS

 • Respect your doctor’s time with his or her own family by limiting afterhours calls to especially worrisome situations that you feel cannot wait
until your doctor’s office reopens.
• Have your pharmacy’s phone number ready.
• Be prepared to communicate accurately your child’s illness: when and
how it began; if it has gotten better, worse, or is the same; what
treatments you have tried and the response; how worried you are; and,
above all, how sick your child seems. Your doctor must offer a medical
opinion based only on your description.
• If you feel your doctor is not appreciating the seriousness of your
concerns, repeat your concerns. We find the most direct approach is best:
“Doctor, my child seems very sick, I’m very worried, and I would like
him examined.”
• Be sure you understand your doctor’s phone advice and write it down.
• Don’t hesitate to call back if your child gets seriously worse.

OceanofPDF.com

 Getting the Most out of Your Doctor’s Appointment

To get the maximum benefit from your time with the doctor, both parents
should plan to attend. Many doctors offer extended hours to accommodate
employed parents.
Before you go, make a list of the questions and problems you wish to
discuss. It’s a good idea to memorize the list, as you may accidentally leave
it at home. If you have an especially worrisome or complicated concern,
such as a behavioral problem, request an “extended visit” when making an
appointment. Respect the fact that your doctor allots the usual amount of
time for each scheduled checkup in order to be on time for the other
patients.
There is in every intuitive mother an inner warning light that flashes, “I
know something is wrong with my baby and I’m going to keep after the
doctor until the cause is found.” With vague signs and symptoms (for
example, colicky behavior, unexplained fevers, tiredness, poor weight gain)
your doctor may not be able to pinpoint the exact cause of the problem,
especially on the first office visit. Be sure to convey your degree of concern
to the doctor, who is trying to decide how extensively to investigate your
child’s illness. You are a valuable part of the medical team. The intensity of
your worry is often just what is needed to help the doctor make a judgment
to further investigate your child.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Making Checkups Easier on Everybody

Trying to examine a screaming child is wearing on baby, parents, and doctor
and makes a precise exam next to impossible. Here’s how to help.
Remember, you mirror the state of the world to your baby. If you are
apprehensive, baby is likely to share your anxiety. Avoid worry-producing
statements such as “The doctor won’t hurt you” or “The shot will only hurt
a little.” The child may only perceive the word “hurt” and the very thought
relates hurting with the doctor—an association that mushrooms into an allout scene even before you sign in. Make a good first impression. Greet the
doctor cheerfully. Carry on a “We’re glad to be here” conversation before
the exam begins. According to child’s logic, if doctor is okay to you, he or
she is okay to the child. If your child clings to you like Velcro at the first
sight of the doctor, immediately put on your happy face. Rather than
reinforcing the cling by holding your child even tighter (this tells the child
there really is something to be afraid of but mommy will rescue her), loosen
your grip so the child will loosen hers. Finally, request (if this is not already
your doctor’s custom) that your baby remain on your lap, at least during the
initial part of the exam. We have found that this yields a more thorough
exam and creates less wear and tear on everybody.

SEARS PARENTING LIBRARY ALERT

 A detailed guide to every well-child checkup is beyond the scope of this
book. In The Portable Pediatrician, we have included a comprehensive
section that guides parents and caregivers from a child’s infancy through
adolescence. This companion to The Baby Book is a valuable tool for your
child’s health.

OceanofPDF.com

 IMMUNIZATIONS: WHY, WHAT, AND WHEN
Next on our keep-healthy list is one of the most important public health
benefits—immunizations, or “baby shots.” First, we wish to clear up the
confusion that the media have “injected” into vulnerable parents who wish
to do the best for their baby and yet receive conflicting advice about
immunizations. Parents face the dilemma of wanting to vaccinate their
babies for fear of baby getting the disease, but are afraid baby may have a
bad reaction to the shot. Here is a general overview of vaccines and the
illnesses they prevent, as well as a discussion of side effects and other
concerns about vaccinations.
How do vaccines work? A vaccine is made from parts of the disease’s
germ itself or a changed germ, and it stimulates the body to produce
antibodies to the germ without causing the disease. If the real germ enters
the body, baby then already has antibodies against the germ and doesn’t get
the illness, or he may get only a mild form of the disease. Sometimes the
effects of the vaccine wear off, requiring a booster shot to restimulate the
body to keep the antibodies coming.

OceanofPDF.com

 Vaccine Reactions

Many infants will not have any observable side effects from vaccinations.
Some, however, will experience an adverse reaction. In most cases reactions
are mild.
Common Vaccine Reactions. Here are the most commonly seen side
effects that may occur after any of the shots. There is generally no need to
call your doctor for these mild reactions.
• Fever. It is not uncommon to have a fever of around 101°F (38.3°C) for a
day or two after a vaccination. It is also not unusual to have a fever as
high as 103°F (39.5°C). This is generally not a cause for concern.
• Redness and swelling at the injection site. Some infants will have slight
redness or mild swelling where the injection was given. Some will have a
larger area of redness and swelling the size of one or two silver dollars.
This too is okay.
• Fussiness or sleepiness. Infants may show one of either extreme for one
or two days. This is not a cause for concern as long as your infant is
consolable and arousable periodically.
• Lump at injection site. It is common to feel a marble-size, firm lump for
up to several months. This is a small calcified bruise within the muscle,
and it is harmless.

 More Serious Vaccine Reactions. Rarely, an infant experiences a more
severe reaction to a vaccine. Here is how to recognize a reaction that should
be reported to your doctor right away.

RECOMMENDED CHILDHOOD
IMMUNIZATIONS
The following is a list of the 2013 immunizations recommended by the
Centers for Disease Control and the American Academy of Pediatrics, with
brief explanations of corresponding illnesses.

  Chicken
(Varicella)

Pox A virus that causes fever and blister spots. It is fatal in
only about 1 in 70,000 cases. Since the vaccine’s
introduction in the early 1990s, reported cases have
decreased about 75 percent.
DTaP
Diphtheria, a severe respiratory illness that is extremely
rare in the United States but not uncommon in thirdworld countries.
Tetanus, a disease that causes paralysis when a deep,
dirty wound is allowed to fester.
Pertussis, or whooping cough, a respiratory illness that
causes severe coughing fits, lasting several weeks. In
young infants it can be life-threatening. The little “a” in
DTaP stands for acellular, a newer form of the vaccine
that is less reactive than the older DTP vaccine.
Hepatitis A (Hep A very different disease from Hepatitis B. Hepatitis A is
A)
a virus that can cause mild flu symptoms, mild
inflammation of the liver, and yellow skin in infants and
children with virtually no long-term effects. It can be
more severe in teenagers and adults. It is transmitted
through contaminated food or water.
Hepatitis B (Hep A virus that causes severe and potentially lifelong liver
B)
damage and occasionally liver cancer. Transmitted by
sexual contact, prolonged intimate contact, and exposure
to infected blood through needles. It is very rare in
infants and children, but it can be passed by an infected
mom to her newborn during delivery.
Hib
Hemophilus Influenza B, which causes meningitis and
blood infections. This infection is now extremely rare
due to the vaccination.
Human
A sexually transmitted infection that causes genital warts
Papillomavirus and cervical cancer. This three-dose series is given at age
(HPV)
11.
Influenza (Flu) The virus that causes the flu. Although most serious in
the elderly, it does cause some childhood fatalities. It is
given every year at the start of flu season

 given every year at the start of flu season.
Meningococcal A bacterium that causes meningitis and severe
(MCV4)
bloodstream infection. It is uncommon.
• High fever of 105°F (40.6°C).
MMR
Measles, a rarely fatal virus that causes a rash, fever, and
• Extreme, inconsolable,
high-pitched
continuous
for three
or more
severe cough.
It is now
rare incrying
the United
States
and
hours.
other developed countries.
• Lethargy. This means
thata your
difficult
to arouse
and isswollen
barely
Mumps,
virusinfant
that is
causes
fever,
tonsillitis,
responsive to stimulation.
cheek glands, and a rash. In older children and adults it
• Convulsions. These
are extremely
rare very
but warrant
immediate
can cause
sterility and,
rarely, can
be fatal. medical
It is no
attention.
longer common in the United States.
Rubella, or German measles, a virus that causes fever
and a rash. Virtually
harmless to infants
children. It
IMMUNIZATION
SCHEDULE
FORand2013
can, however, cause birth defects if a nonimmune
pregnant woman
is exposed
to it. It is now
extremely
This is the 2013 immunization
schedule
recommended
by the
Centersrare
for
in
the
United
States.
Disease Control and the American Academy of Pediatrics. Since these
Pneumococcus
A bacterium
that causes
pneumonia,
and
schedules
may change
and new vaccines
may meningitis,
be added, consult
your doctor
(PCV)
blood infections.
It most
is responsible
for hundreds to
or
our website, AskDrSears.com,
for the
up-to-date information.
deaths inwith
the United
States checkups.
each year. This
Immunizationsthousands
usually ofcoincide
well-baby
The
is
a
new
vaccine,
and
since
its
release
in
2000
the
recommended schedule calls for up to six injections at one time. Some
number
reported
pneumococcus
continues
to
doctors may give only
two of
shots
at a time
and have you cases
come back
between
decline.
checkups for “shot
only” visits to catch up. Combination vaccines
(combined
Polio (IPV)DTaP, AIPV,
virusand
thatHib,
can sometimes
for example)
cause
decrease
paralysis.
the There
number
have
of
injections. If yourbeen
childnomisses
naturally
a shot
occurring
in a series,
casesthere
in the
is United
no needStates
to begin
for
the series all over,more
even than
if several
thirtyyears
years,
haveand
passed.
mostAny
other
of the
developed
vaccines
may be given simultaneously.
countries are also polio-free. Polio still occurs in parts of
Africa and Central Asia. Note that the older form of this
vaccine is no longer used in the United States because it
can very rarely cause polio. The injected form does not
cause polio.
Rotavirus (RV) The most common cause of vomiting and diarrhea in
infants and young children. Infants can become
dehydrated enough to necessitate hospitalization.
Tdap
This is a version of the DTaP vaccine given as a booster
at 12 years of age.

 Age Immunization
Birth Hep B
1 month Hep B
2 months DTaP, Hib, IPV, PCV, RV
4 months DTaP, Hib, IPV, PCV, RV
6 months DTaP, Hib, PCV, RV, Hep B, Flu (2 doses)
12 months MMR, Varicella, Hep A
15 months Hib, PCV
18 months DTaP, IPV, Hep A
2 years Flu (given every year hereafter at the start of flu season)
5 years MMR, DTaP, IPV, Varicella
12 years Tdap, MCV4, HPV (3 doses)
16 years MCV4
This schedule is not set in stone. Your doctor may use a variation of this
schedule. Most shots do not have to be given at the exact age or time
interval above. The shots may be spread out over a longer period of time at
the parent’s and doctor’s discretion. The Hep B shot, for example, may be
delayed until two months, then repeated at four months and nine months.
The schedule may be altered somewhat, especially with the new combo
vaccines.
Any of these four reactions can indicate that the vaccine has caused a
condition called encephalitis, or inflammation of the brain. This is not an
infection (like meningitis), is not treatable, and usually resolves without any
long-term effects. If such a reaction occurs, your doctor will discuss with
you whether the suspected vaccine should be repeated in the future.

TAKING THE STING OUT OF SHOTS
To lessen shot fears, hold baby securely on your lap or against your chest;
offer a momentary massage to relax baby’s leg or arm (relaxed muscles hurt
less during an injection). Don’t act anxious yourself. Shot fears are

 contagious, especially from mother to baby. Applying an ice pack just
before the shot can numb the site. Breastfeeding during the injection can
also reduce baby’s perception of the pain. After the injection is given,
immediately distract baby with a toy or a cheerful gesture and words, such
as “Bye-bye, doctor!”

OceanofPDF.com

 Vaccine-specific Reactions

There are a few reactions that occur only after a specific vaccine.
• MMR. One to two weeks following vaccination, approximately 5 percent
of infants experience a rash, fever, or swollen glands that may last a few
days. Less commonly, joint pain and stiffness may occur for a few days.
The child is not contagious during these harmless reactions, and they
resolve within several days.
• Varicella (chicken pox). Some children experience flu-like symptoms for
several days after vaccination. This can occur right away or may take
several weeks to appear. Only rarely, a child may get a mild case of
minimally contagious chicken pox following the shot.

OceanofPDF.com

 Treating Vaccine Reactions

If your infant or child has a reaction, try the following to ease the
discomfort:
• Give acetaminophen or ibuprofen for pain or fever (see here for dosage).
Ibuprofen is generally more effective for vaccine reactions and can be
given starting at three months of age. You can safely give these
medications for a few days if needed. Some doctors recommend giving a
dose before a shot to minimize the reactions. Others feel you should just
wait and see if your infant reacts, then give the medicine if necessary.
Since most infants do not have severe reactions, it may be better to wait
and see how your child does. If your child does tend to get a fever after a
vaccination, then you can routinely pretreat for subsequent shots.
• Use other fever-reducing methods (see here).
• Apply an ice pack to the swollen, red injection site.

OceanofPDF.com

 Vaccine Myths and Controversies

Wise parents take the time to do research over the Internet and read the
literature on vaccines to educate themselves. Unfortunately, there is a lot of
misinformation circulated about the dangers of vaccines, such as that
vaccines don’t work, vaccines cause brain damage, a child can actually get
the disease from the vaccine, vaccines cause autism—the list goes on. Here
is a brief explanation of some of these myths and misconceptions:
A child can get paralytic polio from the polio vaccine.
This is one myth that actually used to be true. The old oral polio vaccine
that is no longer routinely used in the United States caused paralysis in
around nine American infants each year. For this reason, doctors switched
to using only the injectable polio vaccine in the late 1990s, which does not
cause this side effect. With the oral form, it was also possible, though rare,
for another person to catch polio from a vaccinated infant’s stools. The
injectable polio does not have this risk either.
The pertussis part of the DTP vaccine can cause brain damage.
There is a great deal of misinformation in the general public regarding the
safety of the pertussis component of this vaccine. All this bad press is due to

 the older “whole cell” pertussis vaccine that is no longer being used in the
United States. This older vaccine caused more severe reactions in a higher
percentage of kids than most other vaccines do. With the older vaccine there
were reports of encephalitis (see above, under “More Serious Vaccine
Reactions”) occurring after this vaccine, as well as seizures and shock. A
small number of children were severely disabled after such events. It has
never been proven that the vaccine was responsible for these reactions, but
the medical community was suspicious enough that in the mid 1990s
doctors in the United States stopped using this vaccine. Instead, the newer
acellular form of the pertussis DTaP vaccine is now being used everywhere
in the United States. Many components of the cell of the pertussis
bacterium that were most reactive have been removed from the vaccine.
Severe reactions to this safer vaccine are now extremely rare, and most
infants experience no side effects at all.
Do vaccines cause autism?
This controversy mainly involves the MMR vaccine. A researcher in
England found that many children with autism had the measles virus
present in the lining of their intestines. He speculated that this may have
come from the vaccine and that this could have been a contributing factor to
the autism. In addition, there has been an increasing number of children
with autism in recent decades, coinciding with the introduction of some
vaccines. Medical investigators who have studied the research surrounding
this issue have not been able to find evidence that the measles vaccine

 causes autism. It is known that many factors, including heredity,
environmental contaminants, and nutrition, among others, contribute to
autism. The American Academy of Pediatrics, the U.S. Advisory Committee
on Immunization Practices, and the FDA continue to review all available
research and conduct detailed studies, and to date they have found no
evidence that the MMR vaccine causes autism.
The presence of mercury in vaccines until 2002 is another factor in this
controversy. Most research done to date does not support a link between the
mercury in vaccines and autism. Mercury was removed from all vaccines
except for flu vaccines. Some flu shots are made mercury-free, and we
recommend that you ask your doctor for one.
Although most research shows there is no link, the vaccine-autism
debate isn’t completely over yet. The majority of research has focused only
on MMR and mercury; very little has been done on vaccines as a whole.
Also, there haven’t been any large studies that include unvaccinated
children as a control group. The government is organizing long-term
research with the goal of finding a more conclusive answer. In our office,
we continue to vaccinate because we feel the benefits outweigh the risks.
Vaccines don’t always work.
This is actually true. However, no one has ever claimed that vaccines are
effective 100 percent of the time. Most vaccines provide between 80
percent and 95 percent protection. This means that if one hundred
vaccinated people are exposed to a disease, between five and twenty of

 them will catch it. This is much better than all the people catching the
illness. This high level of protection ensures that these diseases will not run
rampant through our population. Also, if a vaccinated child does get the
illness, it is likely to be much less severe than if the child had not been
vaccinated.

OceanofPDF.com

 Risks and Benefits of Vaccines

Every vaccine—for that matter every foreign substance (even a new food)
that is put into the body—carries both risks and benefits. When evaluating
any medicine or vaccine, we need to weigh the benefits against the risks.
Nearly all vaccines have a low risk-to-benefit ratio, meaning that the
risk is small compared with the benefits. There are several vaccines that are
no longer used because the benefits no longer outweigh the risks now that
there are safer alternatives, such as the oral polio and the whole cell
pertussis vaccines. Another example is the smallpox vaccine. This was
discontinued in the 1970s because smallpox was virtually eradicated, and
the vaccine itself was causing some very serious illnesses.
The present vaccine schedule carries very little risk. The benefits of
preventing these diseases, all of which are potentially fatal, far outweigh the
tiny risk of the vaccines. It is easy to forget about a disease when we don’t
live with it anymore. Nearly every grand-parent who grew up in the
prevaccine era can remember some child lying in an iron lung, suffering
from polio. As an intern in pediatrics, I, Dr. Bill, often encountered the seallike sounds and barking coughs of very ill babies in the whooping cough
ward. Vivid in my memory are the babies with brain damage from measles
encephalitis before the measles vaccine. And let’s not forget the babies with
birth defects from their mothers’ exposure to German measles during

 pregnancy. We don’t have many of these villains with us anymore, thanks to
vaccines.

Contraindications to Vaccination

While immunizations are safe for most infants and children, there are
certain circumstances in which the risk of a vaccine is greater than the risk
of catching the illness itself.
Here are situations in which your child should absolutely not receive a
particular vaccine.
• If your child had encephalopathy following a previous vaccination. This
is a more severe form of encephalitis (described above), in which the
person is in a comalike state, completely unresponsive, and may have
continuous seizures. This can last for hours or even days. This has
occurred only rarely in children around the time of a vaccination, and a
causal relationship with the vaccine has not been found. Yet it’s still wise
to avoid the vaccine in the future.
• If your child had a severe allergic reaction (moderate to severe hives,
wheezing, or difficulty breathing) following a vaccination.
• If your child is known to be allergic to one of the vaccine ingredients.
Here are some situations in which you and your doctor should discuss
whether or not to give a particular vaccine. You must weigh the risk of the
disease for your child’s age against the risk of a repeated reaction and
strongly consider not repeating the vaccine if any of the following occurred.

 • Encephalitis following a previous vaccination.
• Convulsions following a previous vaccination. This used to be
considered an absolute contraindication, but it is not anymore.
• Your child has a particular immune deficiency.
• Any other reaction that you or your doctor consider to be severe.
Here are some conditions that used to be contraindications, but are now
considered safe for vaccination:
• Stable seizure disorder.
• Egg allergy. You can now give the MMR vaccine safely even if your
child is allergic to eggs.

OceanofPDF.com

 Vaccinating Under Special Circumstances

If Baby Has a Cold

If your baby is scheduled to receive a vaccine but has a mild cold without a
fever and is not sick, he may safely get a vaccine. Deferring vaccines
because of minor illnesses and catching up later is unnecessary and unwise.
Some babies have colds so frequently during the first two years that they
never catch up on their shots if they are postponed. If, on the other hand,
your baby has a bad cough, green mucus from the nose, recent vomiting,
moderate to severe diarrhea, and especially a fever, and is generally acting
sick, wait until he recovers before he gets the shot.

Vaccines for Foreign Travel

Vaccines for foreign travel include those for cholera, typhoid, yellow fever,
Japanese encephalitis, and hepatitis A, and medication to prevent malaria.

 Because requirements change frequently, contact the Centers for Disease
Control website, cdc.gov/travel, for up-to-date information.

SEARS PARENTING LIBRARY ALERT: THE
VACCINE BOOK
Today’s parents want to be more educated about their baby’s health care,
and vaccines are a prime topic that warrants extra attention. A complete
discussion about vaccines is beyond the scope of this book. In The Vaccine
Book (Little, Brown, 2011), Robert Sears, MD, tackles this confusing and
complicated issue. He discusses the risks of each disease and the
importance of each vaccine. He also provides details on how the vaccines
are made, their ingredients, and the possible side effects, a comprehensive
look at the pros and cons of each shot, and extensive guidance for parents
who want to follow an alternative vaccine schedule.

OceanofPDF.com

 TREATING LITTLE PEOPLE
Infants, like adults, need help when hurt. But unlike adults, they often can’t
tell you where it hurts or what they need. The bump on the arm may need
only the kiss-and-make-better treatment, but an infant who acts sick needs
more. Sick children naturally become clingy, turning to the person they
trust. They also expect you to know and fix what’s wrong. Be prepared for a
child’s behavior to deteriorate when she is sick. Don’t take it personally if
the child hits the arm that holds her. Sick little people need big patience.

OceanofPDF.com

 Sick Signs to Know

While preverbal children cannot tell you where they hurt, babies’ bodies are
honest mirrors reflecting their illness. They act sick when they are sick.
Here are some signs that will help you determine how sick your baby may
be.
Fever. As a general but not foolproof guide, a baby who doesn’t have a
fever probably does not have a serious illness. On the other hand, just
because baby does have a fever does not necessarily mean she has a serious
bacterial infection. Fever is only a sign that your child is fighting an illness;
it does not always reflect the severity or the cause of the illness. Some
harmless, and untreatable, viruses can cause a fever as high as 105°F
(40.6°C), whereas some bacterial infections may cause a fever of only
101°F (38°C). Fever is defined as a temperature over 101°F (38°C). See
here for a complete discussion of fevers.
Peakedness. This is mother lingo for a sick-looking kid: droopy, puffy
eyes; sad expression; pale skin; and a loss of that happy sparkle in the face
that you love to see.
Listlessness. Most babies don’t move around much when they are sick.
They act sluggish, as if redirecting their energy into healing. They spend a

 lot of time in your arms or lying quietly on the couch. They remain quiet,
periodically drifting off to sleep, then awakening for a brief period when
they may seem a little better. This listless behavior is typical of many
nonserious illnesses.
Lethargy. Parents need to understand the difference between true lethargy
and listlessness, as described above. Many worried parents tell their doctor
that their child is “lethargic,” when in reality the behavior they are
discussing is only listlessness. Listless symptoms are usually an indication
that things are not too serious. True lethargy, on the other hand, is a sign
that something may be seriously wrong with the child. A lethargic child
doesn’t make eye contact, doesn’t really acknowledge that the parent is
there, may open his eyes only briefly, and does not perk up and respond to
verbal or physical stimulation. Instead, he lies limp and unmoving,
seemingly unaware of what is going on around him. When communicating
to your doctor, try to use these two different terms accurately. This will help
your doctor decide the best course of action.
Behavior changes. Babies usually act either listless or fussy during an
illness, especially when there is a fever. This is expected and shouldn’t
necessarily be viewed as a sign that the child is seriously ill. If baby perks
up and seems to feel somewhat better when the fever is down, a serious
illness is less likely. If, however, baby is truly lethargic, as described above,
notify your doctor. In addition, if baby is continuously irritable and
inconsolable, as described below, you should notify your doctor.

 Lower your standards for behavior during an illness. A baby who doesn’t
feel good doesn’t act good. Get a reading on your baby’s pain tolerance.
Some babies loudly protest a tiny owie; others don’t broadcast their hurts.
Irritability. This term refers to a baby who cries continuously for many
hours and is virtually inconsolable, no matter what you do. While all babies
have inconsolable periods associated with colic or teething, these episodes
generally do not last for more than a few hours. Babies are also fussy on
and off during any illness. Normal fussiness, however, can be periodically
consoled. True irritability can be a sign that your baby has a serious illness.
Your doctor should be notified right away.
Poor appetite. This is expected during almost any illness. Do not worry if
your infant doesn’t eat well for a few days. Babies generally do take in
enough fluid to sustain themselves. An infant can go for several days
without eating at all during an illness, as long as there is enough fluid
intake.
Dehydration. Many parents get worried that their infant will become
dehydrated during an illness. While babies may become mildly dry during
any sickness, decreased fluid intake for several days during a normal cough,
cold, and fever rarely is significant enough to worry about. True
dehydration occurs only when an infant or child has persistent vomiting
and/or severe, frequent diarrhea. For more on dehydration, see here.

 Rash. Rashes are very common during a variety of illnesses. They usually
indicate that the illness is a nontreatable virus, although occasionally they
can signify a bacterial infection. They are rarely a reason to panic and page
the doctor after hours or to rush to the emergency room. See here for a
discussion of rashes.
The body speeds up. When baby is sick, especially with a fever, he will
breathe fast, and you may feel a fast, pounding heartbeat (too fast to count
easily). These are baby’s natural resources for healing and releasing excess
heat. But normally these fast signs slow when the fever comes down. A fast
heartbeat and fast breathing that continue even after the fever breaks
suggest a more serious illness.

FEEDING A BABY BEFORE ANESTHESIA
Until recently it has been customary not to allow babies to be fed for eight
hours prior to anesthesia, for fear they might aspirate stomach contents into
the lungs. New studies, however, show that starving before anesthesia is not
necessary and may even be detrimental. Pediatric anesthesiologists now
recommend feeding baby juice, formula, or breast milk up to four hours
prior to anesthesia. Because breast milk is cleared rapidly from the stomach,
breastfeeding up to four hours (some anesthesiologists permit two hours)
before anesthesia is both safe and comforting to baby.
Intestinal protest. Diarrhea accompanies many viral infections. Vomiting
accompanies many throat, chest, kidney, and ear infections. And baby may
show a double-end response of vomiting and diarrhea with an intestinal
infection. Except for wanting to breastfeed more often, most babies do not
eat much when sick. While periodic vomiting is normal when ill, persistent

 vomiting (especially with increasing lethargy) is a worrisome sign and
merits reporting to your doctor.

OceanofPDF.com

 TLC—Helping Your Baby Feel Better

The following are proven home remedies. Most are treated in more detail in
the next chapter.
Rest. The wisdom of the body says rest when sick, as if to divert energy
into healing. Social and economic pressures often prevent adults from
listening to their body’s counsel, but babies are freer and wiser; they rest
when sick, without any prompting on your part. Achy heads, sore tummies,
and congested chests don’t like being jostled. Engage in quiet nesting
interaction, a massage or back rub, a quiet story, songs, or a video for two
with baby nestled in the arms or lap of his favorite nurse.
Outside help. Babies don’t have to stay indoors when sick. Fresh air is
good for the baby and keeps the housebound parent-nurse from going stircrazy. Dry, stuffy air aggravates congested breathing passages, so ventilate
the room well. Drafts don’t cause colds. Fresh air and sunshine are good for
the patient—and the nurse. Take baby out in a sling or stroller and enjoy the
mental and physical lift that nature provides.
Drink, drink, drink! Babies need more fluids when sick. Fever, sweating,
panting, vomiting, diarrhea, sneezing, coughing, tearing, and a diminished
desire to eat or drink can lead to dehydration (excessive loss of body fluid).

 This condition itself makes an already sick baby sicker. Try these drinking
tips:
• The sips-and-chips method: Small, frequent sips are best. Too much fluid
taken too fast is likely to come right back up. Popsicles (homemade juice
or nutritious fruit bars) and ice chips are proven winners.
• Clear soups: Medical research has validated grandmother’s wisdom—
chicken soup is good for colds (researchers feel that the steam to clear
the nose and the fluid to prevent dehydration are the active ingredients in
this magical potion). However, highly salted or bouillon-based soups can
aggravate dehydration. Lightly salted canned soups are all right;
homemade is best.

Feeding an illness. Babies may not eat when sick, but they need extra
fluids to prevent dehydration and extra calories to fuel the increased energy
demands. The answer is liquid food. Try these sick-child feeding tips:
• Offer small, more-frequent feedings—half as much twice as often.
• Smoothies can be made with fruit juice, a little sorbet, protein powder,
yogurt, pureed fresh or frozen fruit, and a spoonful of honey for a child
over one year. Encourage sipping slowly through a straw. This cold fruit
drink is a welcome friend to a sore throat.
• Homemade vegetable and chicken soup and freshly cooked soft
vegetables may easily slither past a sore throat.

Healthy sugars. The last thing you want is frequent blood-sugar swings in
an already irritable and miserable child. Encourage fruit sugars and pasta as
good sources of slow-release sugars. And it is okay to temporarily relax

 your no-sugar standards if all that a sick child will eat or drink are the sweet
Popsicles, gelatin desserts, or ice cream that you normally forbid.

OceanofPDF.com

 GIVING MEDICINES
Every profession has its drawbacks, and in the otherwise joyful aspects of
baby care, giving medicine ranks near the bottom of parents’ job
satisfaction list. Of course, medicine won’t work unless it’s administered
correctly, and it won’t work if given to the floor or your blouse.

OceanofPDF.com

 Know Your Medicine

The following items are what every home pharmacist should ask or know
about baby’s medications:
• Ask your doctor to explain prescription medicines or any recommended
over-the-counter medicines. What is the nature of the medicine? Is it an
antibiotic, decongestant, cough syrup? Understand why you are giving it
to your baby.
• Find out the medicine’s adverse effects, if any. Ask your doctor what
signs to look for. For example, a hivelike rash means baby is allergic to
the medicine. Vomiting and diarrhea or a tummy ache doesn’t imply an
allergy but may require a different preparation or dosage, or even a
different medicine. Report any reactions to your doctor.
• For future reference, record any adverse reactions, keeping a record of
what medicines your baby can’t tolerate or won’t accept. Mention these
to the prescribing doctor who may not have easy access to your baby’s
chart.
• If your baby has a chronic condition and is taking medicines regularly,
remind the doctor what medicines baby is currently taking. Ask if it is
safe to take these medicines together. Most commonly prescribed
medicines for babies may be taken together. Over-the-counter medicine
may be given along with antibiotics.
• Understand how the medicine should be stored. Most over-the-counter
medicines can be stored on the shelf, yet many antibiotics must be
refrigerated. Ask the pharmacist. Also, know which medicines keep for
what period of time, and be sure to check the expiration date on the label.
Discard expired medicines.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Giving Medicines Correctly

Observe the following tips when giving your baby medicines:

  • Be sure you understand the dosage schedule: how much, how often, how
long to give, and before, with, or after meals. Most medicines are best
given just before a meal. Giving medicines with or after a meal risks
losing both the medicine and the meal.
• Most prescription medicines are given three or four times a day, but
rarely should you awaken a sleeping baby at night to give medicine.
Theoretically medicines work best when spaced around the clock.
Practically, unless advised otherwise by your doctor, they can be spaced
during waking hours.
• If the instructions on the bottle differ from what you recall your doctor or
pharmacist said, call to confirm.
• Measure carefully. Be as precise as possible when measuring the
medicine. Most medicines for children are prescribed by the teaspoon. It
is best to use a measuring spoon or a calibrated medicine dropper rather
than a household teaspoon when measuring medicine for children. One
teaspoon equals 5 cubic centimeters (cc) or 5 milliliters (ml). There are a
variety of medicine spoons, cups, and calibrated dropperlike devices
available for giving liquid medicine to children. Your pharmacist can
help you select one.
• Keep a medicine reminder chart on your calendar or kitchen counter or a
timer to go off every four to six hours. Forgetting doses is the most
common error and a reason for baby’s not responding to the medicine. If
you are a forgetful parent (and we all are) ask your doctor if the same or
a similar medication could be given once or twice a day instead of three
or four times a day. Some medicines come in more concentrated form so
you can give a smaller volume.
• Most medicines, especially those labeled “suspension,” need vigorous
shaking before using.
• Give the whole course of treatment. Avoid the temptation to stop the
medicine because your baby feels better. Antibiotics, for example, often
relieve symptoms within a day or two, but it takes the full course of
treatment to eradicate the bacteria and keep the illness from recurring.
• Understand what you can safely mix withmedicine. While nearly all
children’s medicines mix safely with a spoonful of jam or a sweet treat,
some do not. For example, the efficacy of penicillin medications may be

 some do not. For example, the efficacy of penicillin medications may be
lessened if taken with a highly acidic juice, such as orange juice. Check
withSTOCKING
your friendly neighborhood
pharmacist
about AID
which KIT
drinks can
YOUR HOME
FIRST
safely be used as a chaser. Resist the temptation to add medicine to a
bottle of juice or formula, since baby may not consume the entire bottle.
Most
medicines mix
with an reducer,
ounce orliquid
so of formula
or breast milk,
Acetaminophen
painsafely
reliever/fever
and suppositories
but the taste won’t be entirely masked and you’ll just have that much
Ibuprofen liquid pain reliever/fever reducer
more of the stuff to coax down.
Adhesive tape
Alcohol swabs
Antibiotic ointment
Antiseptic solution (Hibiclens, Betadine)
Band-Aids, Activ-Flex
Cotton balls
Cotton-tip applicators (Q Tips)
Flashlight
Gauze: 4-inch (10-centimeter) individual squares, nonstick pads, and a
roll of gauze
Hydrogen peroxide
Instant ice packs
Measuring cups and measuring spoons or calibrated dropper
Nasal aspirator
Nose drops (saline) or saline nasal spray
Scissors (blunt ends)
Steri-strips (butterfly adhesive bandages)
Thermometer (glass or digital)
Tongue depressors
Tweezers

OceanofPDF.com

 Easing Medicine Down

As Mary Poppins sings, “A spoonful of sugar helps the medicine go down.”
Add a large measure of creative marketing as the finishing touch. Try these
tricks.
Match the medicine to the mouth. The same medication may come in a
variety of flavors and forms. Stick to your baby’s preferences. Generic
brands may have a harsher taste.
Numb the tongue. Letting your child suck on a Popsicle for a few minutes
can numb the taste buds.
Try magic paste. Most babies prefer liquid, but if your baby is a spitter or a
sprayer, ask your doctor if the medication comes in a chewable tablet form.
Crush the tablet between two spoons and add a drop or two of water to
make a thick paste. Apply a little bit (a fingertipful) of the paste at a time to
the inside of your baby’s cheek, and it will be swallowed without a struggle.
The flavor of chewable tablets is usually more pleasant. This is even true of
acetaminophen.
Make a cheek pocket. This is our family secret for giving medicine to
veteran spitters (be sure you have the medicine within reach and ready to go

 before you start this procedure): Cradle baby’s head in the crook of your
arm. With the same hand, encircle baby’s cheek and use your middle or
index finger to pull out the corner of his mouth, making a pocket in his
cheek. With the other hand drop the medicine into this cheek pocket a little
at a time. This hold keeps baby’s mouth open and his head still. Best of all,
the traction on baby’s cheek with your finger keeps him from spitting the
medicine back out. Maintain the traction until all the medicine has gone
down. Necessity is the mother of invention, or in this case the father. I, Dr.
Bill, discovered this technique when Martha, the queen medicine giver in
our family, left me alone at medicine time with eighteen-month-old
Stephen.

The “cheek pocket” technique helps prevent baby’s spitting out medicine.

 Use the art of camouflage. You can bury a crushed pill in a sandwich—
jam it into the jam, place the paste under the peanut butter—or chase it with
a small amount of milk, formula, or juice. Make the medicine as palatable
as possible without fibbing that the medication is “candy.” We’ve even
stuck chewable pills into an ice cream sandwich for our kids.
Try spoons, droppers, and other medicine helpers. A shallow plastic
medicine teaspoon (calibrated and available at pharmacies) is easier to use
than a teaspoon. To wipe the remaining medicine from the spoon, use the
upper lip sweep, sweeping the bowl against the inside of your baby’s lip as
you pull the spoon from your baby’s mouth. A calibrated medicine dropper
inserted into the side of baby’s mouth, between cheek and gum, is a proven
medicine-giving aid. Squirt in a few drops at a time in between swallows.
Some babies accept medicines best from a tiny plastic cup, which can also
be used to catch and recycle the dribbles.
Aim wisely. Try to avoid sensitive areas in the mouth. The taste buds are
concentrated toward the front and center of baby’s tongue. The roof of the
mouth and the back of the tongue are gag-sensitive areas. Best is the side
pocket between gum and cheek, to the rear of the mouth.
Sit on your child. At first glance, this may sound a little harsh. But if your
goal is to get the medicine down, this will work. Lay your child down on
her back and sit on the floor with the child’s head between your legs, and
the child’s arms restrained under your thighs. If your child kicks, you can

 use your legs to keep her legs still. The child’s head will be secure, and you
will have both hands free to administer the medication. For the child who
refuses to swallow and tries to spit the medicine back out, you can gently
plug her nose. This will prompt her to swallow.

Dr. Bob notes: Be sure to speak to your child in a calm, soothing voice so
she knows you aren’t angry or punishing her by using this method. Again, if
this sounds too harsh to you, then don’t do it. But sometimes there is no
other alternative—the medicine has to go in.

OceanofPDF.com

 What If Baby Spits Up the Medicine?

Most medications are absorbed by the intestines within a half hour to fortyfive minutes. If your baby has retained the medicine that long, it is usually
unnecessary to make up the dose. If baby spits up the medicine
immediately, repeat the dosage—unless precise dosing is necessary, as is
the case with some heart and asthma medicines. If the child spits up an
antibiotic within ten minutes after administration, repeat the dose.
Sometimes you are in a bind when a baby is too sick to retain oral
medicine and spits up every dose. This is common with oral fever
medications, such as acetaminophen. In this case use the fever-lowering
medicine in suppository form.
If your baby becomes so sick that he can’t keep an antibiotic down (too
lethargic to take, too much vomiting to retain), this is a sign that the medical
condition may have worsened and a call to your doctor is warranted.
Oftentimes an injection of an antibiotic may get the child well enough to
take the medicine orally. Some antibiotics, available only by injection, work
terrifically fast.

OceanofPDF.com

 27

OceanofPDF.com

 The Most Common Medical Problems:
Self-help Home Care

We have chosen from our gallery of infant illnesses the most frequent
medical problems that babies are likely to have during the first two years.
Besides helping you get a working knowledge of what bothers your baby
the most, we will give you tools to make home treatment easier on your
child, your doctor, and yourself.

OceanofPDF.com

 PARENTING THE BABY WITH FEVER
During your baby’s first two years you may spend more time treating and
worrying about fever than any other concern. Babies get hot, and parents
get worried. Here’s how to treat both.

OceanofPDF.com

 Fever Facts

What is a fever? Babies’ normal body temperatures vary from 97° to 100°F
(36° to 37.8°C). The average oral temperature in babies is 98.6°F (37°C).
The axillary (armpit) temperature may be one-half to one degree lower than
oral, and the rectal temperature may be one-half to one degree higher than
oral, but there is nothing magical about these figures. Every baby has his or
her own normal body temperature. Daily temperatures can regularly
fluctuate one to one and a half degrees above and below the normal. A well
baby can have a temperature of 97°F upon awakening in the early morning
and a temperature of 100°F in late afternoon or after a tantrum or strenuous
exercise. Here is how we rate fevers:
• low-grade fever—temperature between 99°F and 100.9°F (37.2°C to
38.3°C)
• moderate fever—temperature between 101°F and 102.9°F (38.4°F to
39.4°C)
• high fever—temperature higher than 103°F (39.5°C)
It is best to know your baby’s normal temperature. When baby is well,
take and record his temperature upon his awakening. Do this again in late
afternoon when he is quiet. These are your baby’s average temperatures.
Any temperature greater than these indicates a fever.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Why Fever?

Fever is a symptom of an underlying illness, not an illness itself. Fever is the
normal and healthy response of the body to an infection. But we all have a
fever phobia. Fever worry accounts for 50 percent of phone calls to doctors
and 20 percent of emergency room visits. And many parents mistakenly
believe that fever will harm their baby.
Fever usually means there is a fight going on within your baby’s body.
When germs and germ-fighting white blood cells clash, these cells produce
substances called pyrogens, which cause the following effects in the body:
First, they stimulate the body’s defenses to fight germs. Then they travel to
the hypothalamus, a tiny organ in the brain that acts as the body’s
thermostat to maintain a reasonably constant body temperature. These
pyrogens stimulate the hypothalamus to raise its set point, allowing the
body to operate at a higher temperature. The body responds by using its
available resources to get rid of the excess heat produced: The blood vessels
dilate, increasing heat loss through the skin and resulting in flushed cheeks.
The heart beats faster to pump more blood to the skin. Baby breathes faster
to release warm air, similar to the way a dog pants to cool off during warm
summer months, and the baby sweats to cool by evaporation, although
sweating is more common in the older child. So if fever helps fight
infection, why fight fever?

 Fever is both friend and foe. The pyrogens released during fever slow
the multiplication of viruses and bacteria, increase production of antibodies
to these germs, and increase the number of white blood cells to fight the
infection. But fever also bothers babies, making them upset and irritable on
top of the discomfort from their illness. Also, rapidly rising temperatures
may cause convulsions or fever fits. (More about these problems later.)

SPECIAL NOTE: Because of discoveries showing that fever-producing
substances in the body help fight infection, parents became reluctant to
lower their baby’s fever for fear of lessening the body’s natural defenses.
Newer research, however, has shown that fever-lowering medicines work
directly on the body’s thermostat to lower temperature but do not interfere
with the body’s infection-fighting defenses, which carry on their biological
work even when fever-lowering medicines are given.

EAR THERMOMETERS
Anyone who has tried to take the underarm (or worse, rectal) temperature of
a squirming, screaming toddler will tell you it is next to impossible. When
ear thermometers came along, they were thought to be the answer to every
parent’s prayers. Unfortunately, they have not lived up to expectations. Ear
thermometers are notorious for giving erroneous readings, measuring a
temperature of 95°F when you know your baby has a slight fever, or scaring
you with a reading of 105°F when in reality the fever is only 102°F. We
utilize this convenient tool in our office because it is a quick and easy way
to tell if someone has a fever; but if we want to know accurately just how
high the fever is, we use a regular glass underarm thermometer.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Taking Temperatures

Temperature-taking technology is changing as fast as quick-and-easy
diapering, so perhaps the glass thermometer will someday take its place in
the

baby-antiques

museum

next

to

diaper

pins.

Digital-display

thermometers are quick, easy, accurate, and inexpensive. Temperature strips
are easy but less accurate. Ear thermometers are a fast and easy way to take
a temperature, but they sacrifice accuracy for convenience at high
temperatures. Temporal artery thermometers are the latest high-tech method
and are fairly accurate. The glass thermometer that grandmother used may
still be the most reliable. Here’s how to select a thermometer and use it.

Choosing a Thermometer

The two types of glass thermometers are rectal and oral. The only difference
is the business end. Rectal thermometers have a short, stubby end for safe
and easy insertion; an oral thermometer has a long, thin end for greater
surface area to be in contact with the tongue and is marked “oral.” Either
type may be used to take underarm temperatures, but only the rectal type is
safe to be inserted into the rectum. Since a rectal thermometer may be used
for both underarm and rectal temperature taking, there is no need to buy an

 oral thermometer for babies. The oral thermometer is impractical in the
squirming toddler, and seldom do children under the age of four cooperate
with having a thermometer in their mouth. Rectal or underarm temperature
taking is the safest; rectal is the most accurate. Test read a thermometer
before purchasing it, as some are easier to read than others. Glass
thermometers without mercury are now available.

TEMPERATURE-TAKING TIP: For normal, everyday temperature
taking, start with the underarm method, instead of the more traumatic rectal
method. An underarm temperature will give you an accurate enough
reading of your infant’s status. The only time a rectal temperature is most
useful is during the first two months of life, when you really need to know
exactly how high the fever is. Even during this early age, however, start
with an underarm reading. If it is normal, then you can stop there. If it
registers a fever, then you should confirm this with a rectal temperature
before calling your doctor.

The Rectal Method

Some toddlers are very upset by the rectal method because of the
discomfort. Respect this reluctance and never force a child to submit to the

 rectal method.

THE KISS-AND-GUESS METHOD
Fever can play tricks on skin. Usually when body temperature goes up,
blood vessels in the skin dilate and the skin gets flushed and feels hot to the
touch or kiss. But sometimes skin may feel only slightly warm despite hot
insides. Hot spots that register fever to touch are baby’s forehead and upper
abdomen. Studies have shown that parents are right 75 percent of the time
when they conclude their child has a fever by feeling the forehead. (A better
percentage than with forehead tapes.) Get used to baby’s “normal” feel.
Besides the “hotness” of baby’s skin, watch for other signs of fever: flushed
cheeks, fast heartbeat, breathing faster with hot breath, and sweating.
Getting baby settled. Trying to insert a thermometer into a wiggly baby’s
bottom may raise both your temperatures. Also, a screaming baby is likely
to be a hotter baby. Giving baby a breast, a pacifier, or a reassuring song
before and during T time often works.
Getting the thermometer settled. Hold the thermometer at the top and,
using a wrist-snapping action, shake down the liquid column below 96°F
(35.6°C). A mess-saving tip: Slippery thermometers fly out of anxious
hands. Shake it over a bed or rug. And stock a spare thermometer in your
medicine cabinet just in case of an accident. Generously coat the bulb end
with a lubricant.
Positioning baby. Drape baby bottom up with her tummy on your lap and
her legs dangling gently to relax the buttocks. Or lay baby on the floor or
changing table in the diaper-changing position, grasping both ankles and

 flexing the legs toward the abdomen. The target will appear right in front of
you. The tummy-over-lap position allows easier restraint, while the backlying position allows face-to-face interaction and better insertion.
Taking the temperature. Spread the buttocks apart with one hand while
gently inserting the thermometer bulb about 1 inch (2½ centimeters) into
the rectum with the other hand. Hold the thermometer between your index
and middle fingers, cigarettelike, with the palm of your hand and your
fingers grasping your baby’s buttocks. This hold keeps the thermometer in
place and keeps your baby from squirming. Never leave a baby alone with
the thermometer in place.

Taking rectal temperatures: two approaches.

 Timing. Try to keep the glass thermometer in place for three minutes. If
your baby is protesting, a one-minute reading will be within a degree of the
true rectal temperature. Some digital thermometers give an accurate reading
in less than thirty seconds.

The Underarm Method

While not as accurate as a rectal reading, taking your baby’s temperature in
the armpit is easier and gives you a ballpark reading of the true temperature
—which, in most cases, is all that is necessary. Underarm temperatures can
be as much as two degrees lower than a true rectal temperature. Follow
these steps.
Positioning baby. Sit your child on your lap, on the corner of the couch, or
on a bed and hold her firmly with one arm around her shoulder. If baby is
upset, you can easily place the thermometer after putting her to the breast in
the cradle hold or when she is asleep.
Preparing the thermometer. Shake down the thermometer as described for
the rectal method above.
Taking the temperature. Wipe her armpit dry. Lift her arm and gently
place the bulb of the thermometer into the fold of the armpit. Hold your
child’s arm flat against the chest, closing the armpit.

 Timing. Allow at least three minutes to get an accurate underarm
temperature.

OceanofPDF.com

 When to Worry and When Not To

Here are some guidelines to help you decide when a fever may be cause for
concern.
How high the fever goes. A higher fever does not always mean a sicker
child. In fact, some minor viral illnesses produce the highest fevers (104–
105°F/40–40.6°C). And each baby reacts individually to fever-producing
illnesses. Some infants spike high fevers with slight infections, other babies
get only slightly warm even with a serious illness. Unless it reaches 107°F
(41.7°C), high fever does not harm babies. It does not fry brains. Your
degree of worry should be related less to the degrees of fever and more to
how sick your child acts.
How the fever begins. (“She seemed so well an hour ago, and now she is
burning up.”) Sudden-onset fevers tend to be viral illnesses, especially if
baby does not appear very ill. A gradually rising fever, plus a steadily
worsening baby, is of more concern.

CHARTING THE FEVER
Make a temperature chart listing the following information: time,
temperature (rectal or axillary), treatment, and response to treatment. For
example:

 Time Temperature
4 102° (rectal)
P.M.

Treatment
1 dropperful
acetaminophen

Response
Temperature went down to 100°
and baby was less irritable

How the fever behaves. If a mother tells me, “No matter what I do I can’t
get the fever down, and he seems just as sick before and after medication,”
this is more worrisome than the observation, “this fever goes up and down
by itself, with or without treatment.” But don’t rely on the response of the
fever to temperature-lowering medications as the only worry sign. Studies
have shown that response to fever-lowering medications is an inconsistent
predictor of the seriousness of the illness.
How the baby behaves. How your baby acts is more important than how
high his temperature is. “He has a temperature of a hundred and four but is
still happily playing” is not such a worrisome situation, but a baby who just
wants to lie around though his temperature is only 102° is a worry. How
your baby’s illness behaves along with the fever is also a guide. “He seems
just as sick even when the fever comes down a bit” is a worry sign. “He
seems sick when the fever is high but well when it comes down” means you
can worry less, but this sign is still no guarantee that your baby does not
have a serious illness.
How your intuition reacts. The degree of your worry is more important to
your doctor than the degree of fever. Be sure to convey to your doctor your
inner sense that a serious illness may be brewing in your baby. Your alarm

 may be just what the doctor needs to help him or her make a decision about
how quickly and extensively to respond to your child’s fever.

SPECIAL NOTE: The younger the baby, the more the worry. Fever in a
three-month-old is much more worrisome than in a three-year-old. Tiny
babies have tiny defenses against germs. Any fever in a baby under three
months should be reported to your doctor. (See “Sick Signs to Know,” here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 When to Call Your Doctor About Fever

Your observational assessment of the health of your baby is more important
to your doctor than the degree of fever. Unless baby is obviously very ill,
there is seldom a reason to call your doctor after hours at the first feel of a
hot forehead. If baby’s fever comes down with treatment (even if not all the
way to normal) and his behavior perks up a bit, then you can probably wait
until your doctor’s office next opens (except as noted below). Before calling
your doctor, try the fever-reducing methods listed on the next few pages,
and make a fever chart as suggested on the previous page, because the
doctor will want to know what you have already done and how your child
responded to your treatment. After taking, recording, and treating your
baby’s fever, call your doctor in the following circumstances:

 • Any rectal temperature of 100.4°F or higher in an infant less than three
months of age that persists more than eight hours should be reported to
your doctor. At this age if baby seems sick (lethargic, vomiting
persistently, drowsy, not eating, pale), you should contact your doctor
immediately, regardless of the hour of the day or night. If, however, baby
does not seem that ill and the fever comes down easily by simply
increasing fluids and unbundling baby, it is safe to wait a few hours,
monitor the course of the temperature and the illness, and then report it to
your doctor. Remember to take fever in a baby under three months
seriously.
• If your baby is becoming increasingly drowsy, pale, and lethargic and
does not respond to fever-lowering methods, call your doctor.
• If your baby has obvious signs of a bacterial infection such as ear pain,
severe cough, sore throat, or painful urination associated with the fever,
call your doctor.
• Before paging your doctor, confirm the fever with a glass thermometer.
Don’t page the doctor with only an ear thermometer reading, as it is not
accurate enough.

WORRYING ABOUT FEVER
When to Worry Less

• Baby not acting worse.
• Active, playing, responds normally to interaction.
• No difference in skin color other than flushed cheeks at height of fever.
• Smiling, alert, interested in surroundings, eyes wide open.
• Baby “back to normal self” when fever breaks.
• Cries vigorously but can be consoled.

 When to Worry More

• Baby acting sicker by the hour or day.
• Increasingly lethargic, drowsy, less responsive.
• Pale or ashen skin color.
• Dull, anxious facial expressions.
• Baby seems no better when fever subsides.
• Cries inconsolably or moans and cry becoming weaker.

REMEMBER: Determine whether or not to call your doctor according to
the severity of your baby’s illness, not the degree of temperature.

Reporting Your Baby’s Fever to Your Doctor

When communicating with your doctor by phone or in his or her office,
have the following fever information ready:

 • How the fever began: Did it shoot up very fast in a previously well baby,
or did it begin very gradually and increase slightly each day as your baby
became sicker?
• What the fever’s pattern has been: Show or tell your doctor about your
fever chart.
• How the illness has progressed: Does your baby seem to be getting more
sick, less sick, or is she staying the same?
• What the other symptoms are: Does your baby have any other symptoms:
painful crying, diarrhea, sore throat, vomiting, snotty nose, cough?
• How worried you are.

FALSE-ALARM FEVERS
Before calling your doctor, take the extra clothing or blankets off baby.
Overwrapping babies is a common cause of false-alarm fever.

The Doctor’s Approach

The combination of a feverish baby, a worried parent, and a concerned
physician occurs many times a day in the life of a busy doctor. Get behind
your doctor’s stethoscope and see fever from his or her viewpoint. Fever is
only the symptom that brought you to the doctor’s office. It is the cause of
the fever that counts.
First, your doctor tries to make a general decision: worry or no worry. Is
this a minor illness, such as a virus (for example, roseola, see here), that
will go away within a few days with only fever-lowering treatments and a

 tincture of time? Or is this a bacterial infection that will need antibiotics?
And another decision: If it’s a bacterial infection, is it serious or not?
Next, while laying hands on your hot baby, your doctor listens to your
history and looks at your fever chart—which you brought along, didn’t
you? Then the doctor checks your baby for any clues to the cause of the
fever. Sometimes the diagnosis is obvious by your history or the physical
findings. At other times, it’s a toughie, needing more time and tests for the
diagnosis. If your doctor doesn’t suspect more than a virus, he or she may
go over fever control with you and send you and your baby home with the
following admonition: “Be sure to report in if your baby gets worse.”
Sometimes the diagnosis is not apparent on the first exam, but baby will
reveal more clues each day as the illness progresses, such as telltale spots in
the throat or an illness-specific rash. In general, a viral illness is not treated
with antibiotics, but in some cases there may be a reason to use an antibiotic
to prevent a secondary bacterial infection from developing.
Your doctor will come to one of three conclusions:

 • Your doctor will identify a specific bacterial infection (such as in the ear,
throat, lungs, sinuses, intestines, or skin) and treat it appropriately.
• Your doctor won’t find any specific cause for the fever, and after
determining that the symptoms do not appear to be serious will conclude
that the illness is probably an untreatable virus (such as a cold, flu, or
other viral syndrome) and recommend a period of observation.
• Your doctor won’t find any specific cause for the fever but will determine
that the child seems unusually ill and be concerned that there may be an
internal bacterial infection (such as a bladder or kidney infection, a blood
infection, meningitis, a bone infection, or a pneumonia that is
undetectable with a stethoscope). Such signs that may lead the doctor to
this conclusion include rapid pulse, labored breathing, extreme
irritability, severe lethargy, and a variety of other signs.
If your doctor suspects a serious bacterial infection, but it is not evident
on examination where the infection is, he or she may order some laboratory
tests, such as a culture (material to grow the germ from the throat, blood, or
urine), blood tests, a chest X ray, or a urinalysis. How the white blood cells
behave, determined by doing a blood count, often gives a clue to the type
and seriousness of the infection.

Dr. Jim advises: Remember, treat the child, not the fever. You do not
necessarily have to treat the fever if your child is acting fine or seems only
minimally bothered by the fever. If your child has a fever of 102°F but is
sitting quietly, resting, and not complaining, then you don’t have to give any
medication.

 OceanofPDF.com

 A Step-by-Step Approach to Lowering Your Baby’s Fever

Reducing temperature in your baby is similar to cooling a house. Suppose
your home is too hot. First, you open the windows to let out the excess heat.
This is also how you cool your baby’s body, by removing clothing and
putting baby in a lukewarm bath. Next, if needed, you reset the thermostat
to a lower temperature so that the furnace doesn’t click on so quickly (or
you turn down the furnace). This is how fever-lowering medicines such as
ibuprofen and acetaminophen work. They lower temperature production by
resetting the body’s thermostat. And you keep attending to these heatreducing and heat-releasing procedures until your home, or your child, is
comfortable.

Step One: Let the Heat Out

Before jumping right to medication, let the excess heat out. Here’s how.
Dress for the temperature. Neither underclothe nor overclothe baby.
Underdressing encourages shivering, while overdressing retains heat. In the
summer it is best to let baby run around and sleep in diapers only, or at most
in lightweight, loose-fitting cotton clothing. This allows excess heat to

 escape from your baby’s body into the cooler air. One day we heard a
mother and grandmother arguing in the waiting room about whether to
bundle or undress a feverish baby. Grandmother was admonishing the new
mother, “Wrap him up with more clothes or he’ll catch cold.” The mother
snapped back, “He already has a cold. The heat needs to get out.”
This is one of the few instances where mother’s wisdom prevailed over
grandmother’s. Overbundling keeps heat in, like putting a blanket over a hot
house. We have seen babies with fevers come into our office bundled up
like little Alaskans or baby burritos.
Keep cool. This applies to your environment, your baby, and yourself. Open
a window in baby’s room or use an air conditioner or fan. Cool air helps
remove the heat that is radiating from your baby’s hot body. A draft will not
bother baby. Also, it is all right for a feverish child to go outside. The fresh
air is good for her.
Give extra fluids. Fever makes the body thirsty. Sweating and rapid
breathing cause the body to lose fluids that need replacing. Let your baby
suck on nutritious Popsicles and sip cool, clear liquids all day.
Breastfeeding is a good source of fluids and comfort.
Feed the fever. When hot, the body works faster to remove the extra heat
and burns up fuel that needs replacing in the form of nutritious calories.
Babies often do not want to eat when they are sick and feverish, but they
must drink. Your baby may protest heavy, fatty foods. They are difficult to

 digest because intestinal activity seems to slow down during fever. Nibbling
and sipping throughout the day is a healthy eating pattern for the feverish
child. Calorie-filled smoothies combine the need for food and fluids—and
they are cool.
A cool dip. If baby’s temperature is 104°F (40°C) or higher, or if baby
seems bothered by the fever, put her in waist-high lukewarm water. Adjust
the water temperature so that it is just warm enough to be comfortable for
baby. Hot babies usually protest cold water, and it can make them shiver,
increasing the body’s temperature. Allowing water to remain on baby’s hot
body promotes cooling by evaporation. During the bath, rub baby’s skin
with a washcloth to stimulate circulation to the skin and increase heat loss.
Prolong this sponging ritual as long as baby will tolerate it. It usually
requires at least twenty minutes to bring the temperature down two degrees.
After the bath, pat your baby’s skin but leave a little bit of dampness to
evaporate for an added cooling effect. If an hour or so after the bath your
baby’s temperature zooms back up, it’s back into the tub for the bathing and
sponging ritual.

GETTING FEVER DOWN
• Give appropriate doses of medication every four waking hours.
• Push fluids.
• Keep the environment cool.
• Do not overclothe baby.
• Place the infant in a lukewarm bath if her temperature is 104°F (40°C) or
higher.

 Here are some other bath tips:
• For high fevers, be sure to give your child fever-lowering medication
before putting her in the bath. If she gets out of a cooling bath and starts
to shiver, her temperature will go back up. Medications lessen this
reaction.
• Putting a screaming baby into the tub only raises her temperature.
Instead, try sitting in the tub with her, amusing baby with her favorite
floating toys.
• Try standing with baby in a lukewarm shower—this may work even
better than a bath.
• Do not use alcohol baths to lower fever. Alcohol may be absorbed
through baby’s skin or its vapors inhaled into the lungs, both possibly
harming baby. Also, alcohol constricts the blood vessels in the skin,
reducing heat loss and aggravating fever.

Step Two: Give Fever-Lowering Medicine

Acetaminophen and ibuprofen are fever-lowering medications of choice for
infants and children. Aspirin is rarely used in children due to its possible
link to Reye’s syndrome (see here), its irritating effect on the intestines, and
its narrow dosage range between efficacy and toxicity—pharmacy talk
meaning the dose that does any good is very close to the dose that does
harm.
Acetaminophen and ibuprofen can begin to lower the temperature within
one-half hour and exert the maximum effect of bringing a high temperature

 down an average of 3°F (1.7°C) by around two to four hours after
administration. But seldom does acetaminophen or ibuprofen bring a high
temperature down to normal. Here are other things you should know about
these medicines:
• Fever-reducing medicines for babies are available in liquid (drops and
syrup), chewable tablets, and suppository forms. Drops are usually easier
for infants under a year, syrups for children one to three years, and
chewable tablets for children over three years. Suppositories are useful
for vomiting babies who are unable to keep down oral medicine, but their
fever-lowering effects are more variable than with the other forms.
• Pay careful attention to which form you are using. For example, some
infant drops have different concentrations than the children’s syrup. If
you were to use the dropper (which is designed specifically for
administering only drops) to give the syrup, you would be giving your
baby too little; if you were to use a teaspoon to administer infant drops,
you would be giving your baby too much.
• Acetaminophen or ibuprofen overdosage is unlikely in children, since it
takes ten to fifteen times the recommended onetime dose to make baby
sick. Studies have shown that many parents underestimate the correct
dose of fever-lowering medicines for their baby.
• It is safe to give baby an initial onetime double dose of acetaminophen if
baby is in severe pain or is uncomfortable from a high fever.
• A double dose of ibuprofen is not recommended.
• If you have given your infant one fever-reducing medicine (say,
acetaminophen) and it doesn’t work within an hour or two, you may
safely give the other medicine (ibuprofen) without waiting for the first
medicine to clear the baby’s system.

“VIRAL SYNDROME”

 You take your child to the doctor to evaluate a fever. After examining your
child, the doctor says your child probably just has a virus. It is not treatable
with antibiotics and should get better within a few days. The doctor leaves,
and you are left not really knowing exactly what is wrong with your child.
“Viral syndrome” is a diagnosis we give when we can’t find a visible
bacterial cause for a fever and the child does not appear very ill. There are
dozens of viruses out there. Some of these we can identify because they fit a
specific pattern and rash (such as chicken pox, roseola, and measles). Other
viruses cause fever with or without a rash and do not fit a distinguishing
pattern. We can determine that a child has a virus, but we can’t always
diagnose which virus it is. Not to worry, these viruses resolve within several
days without any complications.
Which is better, acetaminophen or ibuprofen? Most parents have heard
that ibuprofen works better than acetaminophen. While this may be true for
some children, it is not true for others. Try each medication and see which
one works better for your child. Here is a comparison of the two:

ACETAMINOPHEN DOSAGE
When treating fever or pain, we like to use a strong but safe dose so your
child will feel better sooner. We have designed this chart with narrow
weight ranges so you can give the best dose. The usual dose is
approximately 7 milligrams per pound, or 15 milligrams per kilogram, of
body weight. For example, a 23-pound infant would get 160 milligrams
(7×23). An 11-kilogram infant would get 160 milligrams (15×11). Pay
careful attention to which form you are using. Doses can be given every
four to six hours. The maximum number of doses per day is five.

  Dosage in Children’s Children’s Junior Suppositories
milligrams liquid 160 soft chews strength
80 mg, 120
mg / 5 ml 80 mg each caps or
mg, 325 mg
chews 160
Weight
mg each
9–10 lb
60 mg
tsp (1.8
N/A
N/A
80 mg
4–5 kg
ml)
11–16
80 mg
½ tsp (2.5
N/A
N/A
80 mg
lb 5–7.5
ml)
kg
17–21
120 mg ¾ tsp (3.75
N/A
N/A
120 mg
lb 7.5–
ml)
10 kg
22–26
160 mg 1 tsp (5 ml) 2 tablets
1 tablet
120 mg
lb 10–
12 kg
27–32
200 mg 1¼ tsp (6.25 2½ tablets 1 tablet
120 mg
lb 12–
ml)
15 kg
33–37
240 mg 1½ tsp (7.5 3 tablets 1½ tablets 240 mg (2
lb 15–
ml)
supp.)
17 kg
38–42
280 mg 1¾ tsp (8.75 3½ tablets 1½ tablets 240 mg (2
lb 17–
ml)
supp.)
20 kg
43–53
320 mg
2 tsp (10
4 tablets
2 tablets
325 mg
lb 20–
ml)
25 kg
54–64
400 mg 2½ tsp (12.5 5 tablets 2½ tablets
325 mg
lb 25–
ml)
30 kg
65–75
480 mg
3 tsp (15
6 tablets
3 tablets
325 mg
lb 30–
ml)
35 kg

 76–86
560 mg 3½ tsp (17.5 7 tablets 3½ tablets
325 mg
lb 35–
ml)
40 kg
DOSAGE
87–95
640 mg IBUPROFEN
4 tsp (20
8 tablets
4 tablets
650 mg (2
lb 40–
ml)
supp.)
45 kg dropper sizes: Some infants’ ibuprofen brands come with a 1.25
Different
>95 lbs
Give adult dose
ml dropper, and some brands come with a 1.875 ml syringe for dosing. The
>45 kg
amount you are giving is the same; you are just giving it in a different-size
dropper. The children’s liquid is dosed in teaspoons. The usual dose of
ibuprofen is approximately 5 milligrams per pound (or 10 milligrams per
kilogram) of body weight. For example, a 22-pound (10-kilogram) infant
would get 100 milligrams. Doses can be given every six hours. The
maximum number of doses per day is four.

  Dosage in Infant Children’s
milligrams drops 50 liquid 100
mg / 1.25 mg / 5 ml
ml
Weight
9–10 lb >3
months4–
5 kg
11–16 lb
5–7.5 kg
17–21 lb
7.5–10 kg

25 mg

½ dropper
(0.625 ml)

50 mg

1 dropper ½ tsp (2.5
N/A
(1.25 ml)
ml)
1½
¾ tsp (3.75
N/A
droppers
ml)
(1.25 ml +
0.625 ml)
2 droppers 1 tsp (5 ml)
2 tablets
(2×1.25
ml)
2½
1¼ tsp (6.25 2½ tablets
droppers
ml)
(2×1.25
ml +
0.625 ml)
3 droppers 1½ tsp (7.5
3 tablets
(3×1.25
ml)
ml)
3½
1¾ tsp (8.75 3½ tablets
droppers
ml)
(3×1.25
ml +
0.625 ml)
4 droppers 2 tsp (10 ml) 4 tablets
(4×1.25
ml)
Use liquid 2½ tsp (12.5 5 tablets
t bl t
l)

75 mg

22–26 lb
10–12 kg

100 mg

27–32 lb
12–15 kg

125 mg

33–37 lb
15–17 kg

150 mg

38–42 lb
17–20 kg

175 mg

43–53 lb
20–25 kg

200 mg

54–64 lb
25 30 kg

250 mg

N/A

Children’s
Junior
chewable
strength
tablets 50
caps or
mg each chews 100
mg each
N/A
N/A

N/A
N/A

1 tablet

1 tablet

1½ tablets

1½ tablets

2 tablets

2½ tablets

 25–30 kg
or tablets
ml)
65–75 lb
300 mg
3 tsp (15 ml) 6 tablets
3 tablets
30–35 kg
76–86 lb
350 mg
3½ tsp (17.5 7 tablets
3½ tablets
Acetaminophen
35–40 kg
ml)
87–95 lb
400 mg
4 tsp (20 ml) 8 tablets
4 tablets
40–45 kg
>95 lbs
Give adult dose
>45 kg
• has been around longer, and therefore has a longer safety record
• is approved for use in newborns
• is milder on the stomach, and therefore may be easier for little tummies
to keep down
• lasts only three to four hours
• is processed by the liver

Ibuprofen

• may work faster
• may work better for higher fevers
• lasts longer, up to six to eight hours
• was only recently approved for as young as three months of age, so
safety record in young infants not as time tested
• is more irritating to stomach, so it’s better if taken with food
• is processed by the kidneys
• has added benefit as an anti-inflammatory—it can help with swelling,
inflammation, cramping, and some aches that acetaminophen can’t help

 OceanofPDF.com

 Fever Fits (febrile seizures)

Fever itself is not dangerous and does not harm a baby unless it reaches
107°F (41.7°C), which is rare. The two main reasons for treating high fever
are to relieve the overall discomfort of feeling feverish and to avoid febrile
convulsions. A baby’s immature brain may react to sudden temperature
fluctuation with a convulsion. It is not so much how high the temperature
soars, but rather how fast it rises that causes convulsions. Younger children
are most susceptible to febrile convulsions; they are unusual in children
over the age of five.
Some convulsions give warning twitches—a shaking arm, a twitching
lip, or a vacant stare. As soon as you notice one of these signs, to the
shower immediately you and baby go. A quick cooling may abort a
temperature takeoff and prevent a total convulsion. Other times a full-blown
convulsion occurs without any warning, and parents may not even realize
baby has a fever. Baby shakes all over, his eyes roll back, his skin becomes
pale, and he goes limp. While seeming like an eternity, most febrile
convulsions last only thirty to sixty seconds, not enough to harm baby, but
they may leave parents shaking. Only convulsions that cause baby to turn
blue for several minutes (very rare with febrile convulsions) are likely to
harm a baby. Expect baby to fall asleep following a convulsion, but you to
be wide-awake with worry.

 The same fever spike that caused the first convulsion may return for a
repeat performance within an hour or two. For this reason, administer feverprevention remedies right after the convulsion. If baby is sleeping, give an
appropriately dosed acetaminophen suppository and only lightly dress your
sleeping baby. If baby is awake after the convulsion, encourage extra fluids
(but no food if you suspect another convulsion coming, as baby may choke
on the food during a convulsion); also give medications and a shower, an
assisted tub bath, or an out-of-the-tub sponge bath if you sense another
convulsion coming on. (See also “Convulsions,” here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 COLDS
Most babies get six to eight colds during the first two years. Get to know
these germs well. Here is how to prevent, recognize, treat, and live with
your infant’s colds.

OceanofPDF.com

 What Is a Cold?

What is this mysterious germ that causes babies to miss sleep, parents to
miss work, and doctors to get phone calls? A cold, called an upper
respiratory infection (URI) in medical terms, is caused by germs of either
viral or bacterial type. These microbes infect the lining of the breathing
passages: nose, sinuses, ears, throat, and bronchi in the lungs. Nesting in
these moist membranes, the germs multiply. The lining reacts to this
invasion by swelling and secreting mucus, accounting for the noisy
breathing of colds. Mucus continues to pour out, giving the telltale runny
nose. Mucus also pours inside, causing postnasal drip, a throat tickle, raspy
sounds, and a cough. If germs advance farther into the caves of the
breathing tunnels, similar swelling and mucus accumulates in the sinuses
and ears. Finally, these germs make their deepest penetration into the
bronchi of the lungs, where the swollen lining narrows the airways, causing
noisy, wheezy breathing.
By this time the body is ready to fight back. Reflexes in the airways
trigger coughing and sneezing, the body’s guns, to blast the unwelcome
mucus out. Usually after coughing, sneezing, and dripping for a few days,
the body wins the fight, the cold leaves, and all in the house sleep well
again. But sometimes these germs refuse to leave without more of a fight,
and the body mobilizes higher-powered troops to wage a more explosive

 fight. White blood cells, the body’s scavengers, advance to the scene of the
invasion and attack the germs wallowing in the mucus. The by-product of
this fight is a four-letter word that will irritate your baby and cause you to
miss sleep and miss work. It is called, in medical language, mucopurulent
discharge; in parent terms, snot.
Now, the problem with snot is that it is not easily pushed around like its
earlier relative, the drip. It just stays there blocking the breathing roads.
Then it thickens and takes on a coat of a different color—green. When the
green flag goes up, it means other germs take advantage of this thick mess
—a perfect culture medium for germs. Like fertilized weeds, the bacteria
grow in the goo, and the green-yellow flag of infection is raised: green
snotty nose and yellow discharge from the eyes. As a sign that the body is
mobilizing its big infection-fighting guns, fever arrives. At this point the
battle is at a turning point. The body’s defenses and home remedies alone
may win, and the cold departs within the next few days, leaving behind only
a residual sniffle and cough. Or the illness may escalate and the child act
sicker. General Mom or Dad seeks reinforcements. The doctor prescribes an
antibiotic that gets right to the heart of the matter and kills the germs. As
this master fighter does its job, the snot thins into a drip, the swollen
passages shrink, and baby breathes nicely again—and so do the parents.
This is the story of a cold.

OceanofPDF.com

 How Colds Are Caught

The saying “to catch a cold” is medically accurate, although it is more
correct to say the cold catches you. Cold germs travel by droplet spread,
meaning they ride on microscopic water balloons tossed into the air by a
cough or sneeze, to be inhaled by other persons within cold-catching
distance. These droplets and their germ passengers also travel from hand to
hand. So not only can we catch a cold, we can literally pick one up. Baby A
rubs his own snotty nose with his hands, shakes his gooey hand with that of
Baby B, who rubs his own nose, and the germ finds a new nose home to
begin another invasion. This is why wise grandmother insisted that a snotty
child wash his hands and cover his nose and mouth when coughing and
sneezing. But grandmother was mistaken when she proclaimed that colds
come from drafts, cold feet, uncovered heads, or not eating vegetables.

SLOWING DOWN THE SPREAD OF RUNNY
NOSES

 • “Hose the nose” frequently. (See “Unstuffing Baby’s Nose,” here.)
• Teach your child to blow his own nose, using a tissue.
• Teach your child to cover her nose and mouth while coughing or
sneezing using the “cold shoulder” technique: Show her how to turn her
head toward her shoulder, while lifting her arm in front of her face,
instead of covering nose and mouth with her hands during a cough or
sneeze. Coughing into the shoulder or upper arm is less likely to spread
germs than coughing onto the hands.
• Wash your child’s hands after nose wiping and coughing.
• Avoid nose-to-nose snuggling during a cold.
• Discourage your child from rubbing her nose and eyes during a cold.

OceanofPDF.com

 More About Colds

If your baby played with a sneezing friend yesterday and is coughing today,
his friend didn’t share this germ. Most cold germs take at least two to four
days from exposure to symptoms, the incubation period. Search for where
your child played a few days ago. After the six to eight colds of the first two
years, a child’s immunity builds up, and the doctor visits and missed
workdays lessen. Expect more-frequent colds in the winter, from November
through February. The cold weather is not to blame. A more likely
explanation is that children are bunched closer together in the winter and
stay indoors more, where the air is drier and stagnates (especially in
centrally heated homes).
Besides runny noses, some colds cause a low-grade fever, generalized
aches, watery eyes, diarrhea, and a generally unwell feeling. Most viruses
make a gentle exit within a few days, leaving only a slight runny nose and a
happily running child. Occasionally a cold lingers for two to three weeks
with a nagging cough and runny nose, and then finally goes away.
Sometimes, however, colds progress into more worrisome infections
needing more vigorous treatment.

OceanofPDF.com

 Treating Colds

Most of the discomfort from a cold is due to thick mucus obstructing
narrow airways. Just as still water in a pond stagnates and becomes a
breeding ground for all kinds of organisms, so do mucous secretions in
children. Secretions trapped in the sinuses and middle ears provide an
attractive nutrient for bacteria to multiply and eventually cause a bacterial
infection. Treatment, therefore, is aimed at keeping secretions moving
through clogged airways. Remember the golden rule of treating colds—
keep the mucus thin and moving. Here’s how.

Clearing the Nose

“Hose the nose.” Since babies are usually unable to clear their own nose,
you must do it for them. Follow the technique described in the box on the
next page.
Teach baby to blow his nose. Most children under three have difficulty
blowing their nose, but it’s worth trying with your two-year-old. Teach him
to blow a small cotton ball along a tabletop, and then show him how to do it
with his nose, and “that’s the way you blow your nose.” You can also try

 squeezing the child’s lips closed while he blows, which will redirect the air
to come out his nose. Then blow your nose and have baby hold the
handkerchief in front of your nose while you blow. Next he does the same,
and you blow noses together. “Blow, don’t sniff” is the motto of the cleannose club, but blow gently.
Blowing or sniffing too hard may drive secretions into the sinuses or
ears and prolong the cold. Teach your child to gently but effectively blow
his nose. Babies seldom cough the secretions out. Instead, they swallow the
goo and their stomach rebels. Vomiting following coughing is common in
children and is generally harmless.

UNSTUFFING BABY’S NOSE
Babies can seldom blow their own nose. You have to clear the stuffy nasal
passages for them. Here’s how to “hose the nose.”
Giving Nose Drops to Baby
Purchase saline nasal spray (a specially formulated saltwater mist solution
available over-the-counter at a pharmacy). Hold baby upright. Squirt one
spray into each nostril. Next, lay baby down for a minute with head lower
than body. This allows the saltwater to loosen the thick secretions and
stimulates baby to sneeze them to the front of the nose, where you are
waiting to grab the thick stuff with your trusty nasal aspirator (veteran nose
cleaners call this gadget their snot snatcher). Expect your baby to protest
this intrusion into his nose; but little noses need to be unstuffed for
breathing, especially during feeding.
Or you can make your own saltwater nose drops. Put a pinch of salt (no
more than ¼ teaspoon) in an 8-ounce (240-milliliter) glass of warm tap
water. With a plastic eyedropper, squirt a few drops into each nostril and
proceed as above.
Be careful not to release the dropper bulb or spray bottle while it is still
in baby’s nose. This allows nasal secretions into the dropper or bottle,

 contaminating the fluid. Wash the area of the dropper or bottle that touched
the nose. Because it’s specially formulated, over-the-counter nasal spray is
kinder to the lining of the nasal passages than home-made nose drops.

Home nasal care kit (left to right): bulb aspirator, commercial saline spray,
medicine dropper, homemade saline solution (pinch of salt in a glass of
water).
Using a Nasal Aspirator
To use the nasal aspirator, squeeze the rubber bulb, then insert the plastic or
rubber tip into baby’s nose firmly enough to form a seal, and slowly release,
letting the suction draw out the mucous plugs. Do this two or three times in
each nostril, or as often as your baby needs suctioning and will tolerate the
procedure. After each use, suck soap and water into the aspirator and rinse
well with plain water. Various shapes of nasal aspirators are available at
your pharmacy.
Dr. Sears’s home cold remedy:
A “nose hose” + “steam clean” = easier breathing.

COLD AND COUGH MEDICATIONS AND
BABIES DON’T MIX
At the time of this writing, over-the-counter cold and cough medications are
not FDA approved for children under four years of age. For more

 information on their use in older children, visit AskDrSears.com or see The
Portable Pediatrician in the Sears Parenting Library.

Thinning the Secretions

Dry air and small breathing passages don’t make good roommates. The
breathing passages are lined with tiny filaments, called cilia, on which rides
a layer of mucus. This protective system acts like miniature conveyor belts,
removing lint and other particles from inspired air. Dry air, especially from
central heating, acts like a sponge, soaking up moisture from all parts of the
body—skin, hair, and especially the breathing passages. Dry air, in effect,
stops these conveyor belts. The mucus accumulates in globs and acts as a
culture medium for bacteria; this results in swollen, clogged airways and
difficulty breathing.
“Steam clean” stuffy airways. Giving baby extra fluids during the day
and running a vaporizer while he sleeps helps thin secretions, making them
easier to sneeze or cough out. Or take baby into the bathroom, close the
door, turn on the hot water in the shower, and enjoy a steam bath together.
Steam opens clogged breathing passages and helps drain the secretions.
Maintaining the proper humidity in baby’s sleeping environment will
give the breathing passages the moisture they need. Allergists caution that a
relative humidity over 50 percent may encourage the growth of molds and
dust mites and trigger allergies, whereas respiratory therapists warn that
humidity under 25 percent may clog the airways. Thus a room humidity of

 30–50 percent is ideal. Check the humidity in the bedroom, using a
hygrometer available at a hardware store. Having a higher humidity from a
vaporizer in baby’s bedroom for a few days during the worst part of a cold
is okay. Be sure to air out the room during the day by opening the windows.
Although we prefer vaporizers for adding moisture to the air,
humidifiers, if properly operated and carefully maintained, can also do a
satisfactory job. Here are some tips for using vaporizers and humidifiers:
• Because vaporizers produce hot mist they pose a burn hazard. Carefully
instruct toddlers and older children about this danger by showing them
the hot steam and teaching them it is hot. Burns on the hand can be
serious. Be sure to place the vaporizer out of baby’s grabbing distance.
• Clean vaporizers and humidifiers according to the manufacturer’s
suggestions at least once a week; more often is preferable. One-half cup
bleach to a gallon of water (125 milliliters bleach to 4 liters water) makes
a good cleaning solution (better is whatever solution is advised by the
manufacturer). Rinse well after cleaning.
• Change water daily and dry the vaporizer between uses.
• Use water (either distilled or tap) according to the manufacturer’s
suggestions.
• Place the vaporizer about 2 feet (60 centimeters) from your infant and
direct the jet across baby’s nose to deliver concentrated humidity.
• Adding medicines: Eucalyptus-containing medications to open breathing
passages are available to add to the vaporizer (not to the humidifier).
Unless advised by your doctor, these are unnecessary for children.
• In a pinch you can rig your own “vaporizer” by closing the bathroom
door and running a hot shower.

HUMIDIFIERS VERSUS VAPORIZERS

 That blast of humid air you breathe may thin the secretions and ease
breathing, but not all mist is clean or safe. Humidifier or vaporizer mist is
produced three ways: shaking the water (ultrasonic), blowing it (impellertype), and boiling it (a vaporizer). Here’s what you should know about these
appliances.
Humidifiers
Humidifiers produce a cool mist. The newest are the whisper-quiet,
ultrasonic type, which use high-frequency sound to break up water into
mist. This produces clean air (kills bacteria and mold) but may not produce
safe air. New studies reveal that this ultrafine mist may also contain the
pulverized impurities in mineral-laden tap water. These minute particles (for
example, asbestos, lead, and other minerals) can be breathed into the
airways and irritate the lower breathing passages. This potential danger can
be minimized by buying an ultrasonic humidifier with a built-in particle
filter or changeable demineralizing cartridges, or by using distilled water.
Impeller-type humidifiers are usually not as quiet as the ultrasonic, and
these humidifiers are likely to harbor bacteria and mold and spew these
germs into the air. Some of the newer impeller humidifiers contain filters.
Worst are the older rotating-drum and furnace-mounted humidifiers,
which hold a pool of stagnant water. We discourage using this type.
Vaporizers
As their name implies, vaporizers produce a hot vapor and deliver a more
concentrated amount of mist over a smaller area. Because the water is
boiled inside, the steam produced kills bacteria and molds, and the minerals
never leave the machine. For most respiratory illnesses, vaporizers are
preferred over humidifiers for delivering moisture to breathing passages. A
vaporizer also enables you to turn down central heat, thus minimizing its
drying effects. A hot-mist vaporizer can keep a nursery-sized bedroom
comfortably toasty while keeping little noses from drying out. There is one
situation, however, where cool mist is better than hot steam, and this is
during an illness called croup (see here for more information). Because
steam can burn, keep vaporizers and their cords out of reach of children.

 OceanofPDF.com

 When to Call the Doctor

Most viral colds need only good nasal care, extra fluids, and time. A trip to
the medicine shelf may be helpful, but a visit to your doctor’s office is not
always necessary. Yet oftentimes the cold lingers (the snot thickens), and
you’re faced with the decision of whether or not to take your baby to the
doctor. Here’s how to tell.
How much is the cold bothering baby? Is baby happy, playful, eating and
sleeping well, with little or no fever? This cold is simply a noisy nuisance
and needs only your home treatment.
What’s coming out of baby’s nose? If the secretions are clear and watery
(runny nose), it’s a no worry. If the discharge is becoming increasingly
thick, yellow, or green (a snotty nose) and stays that way for several days,
this is not necessarily a worry, especially if it is not accompanied by a fever
and a cranky child. A nose tip: Don’t be fooled by your child’s snotty nose
when she first wakes up in the morning. This is usual even with a simple
cold, because the secretions have had a chance to thicken overnight. Hose
the nose and see if the discharge clears. A green nose doesn’t necessarily
mean it’s a bacterial infection. Many viral colds have a thick, green
mucousy phase that may last seven days or more.

 How is your child acting? If your child is generally happy, with little or no
fever, and not seemingly ill, then you do not necessarily need to take him to
the doctor, even if his nose is green.
Look into your baby’s eyes. Eyes mirror health. If baby’s eyes are still
sparkly, don’t worry. If they are glazed, be concerned. If yellow matter
exudes from the corners of baby’s eyes most of the day (not just in the
morning), this usually merits a visit to the doctor.

SPECIAL NOTE: Discharging eyes plus a cold warrants a doctor’s
exam. This is a clue to a probable underlying sinus and/or ear infection.
Discharging eyes plus reddened eyeballs and no snotty nose may be
conjunctivitis and not a cold. These observations are why our office policy
is not to treat discharging eyes over the phone if baby has a cold. (See also
discussions of blocked tear ducts, here, and conjunctivitis, here.)

What direction is the cold taking? Days one to three, the nose is running
and the baby is running. But by day five the snot thickens and baby quiets;
and other signs appear: fever, crankiness, and a peaked look. Off to the
doctor go you and your baby. Colds without worry steadily get better over
three to five days; colds for concern steadily get worse.

 Other signs and symptoms. Common colds are mainly a nuisance because
the nasal congestion obstructs breathing. Once the nose is cleared, baby
should feel and act better. But a cranky child, snotty nose, fever,
sleeplessness, sore throat, sore ears, severe cough, or puffy, discharging
eyes are signs that more is brewing than a common cold.

What to Expect at Your Doctor’s Office

When your doctor examines your baby for a cold, he or she tries first to
make the decision if it is a viral cold that will go away without prescription
medicine or a bacterial infection. Next question is, If it is a bacterial
infection, where is it hiding: nose, sinuses, throat, ears, or chest? Third
question, Is the bacterial infection severe enough to warrant an antibiotic?
Or is a “wait and see” approach advisable? If your doctor finds no signs of
bacterial infection in any of these hiding places and baby doesn’t seem that
sick, he or she will advise you to continue home treatment, with the
admonition: “Call me if baby gets worse.” Remember this counsel. Colds
often travel into sinuses, ears, or chest, and this may require a change in
diagnosis and treatment.

How to Talk with Your Doctor About Baby’s Cold

 When communicating with your doctor by phone or in the office, have the
following cold facts available:
• When did the cold begin?
• How has it progressed? Is it getting better, worse, or staying the same?
• How much is the cold bothering your child’s sleep, play, and appetite?
• What is the nature of the nasal discharge? Is it clear and runny or thick,
yellow, green, and snotty, and for how long has it been this way?
• Are there other signs and symptoms, such as fever, eye drainage, cough,
earache, paleness, lethargy, sore throat, swollen glands, rash, persistent
vomiting, or drowsiness?
Finally, be sure to communicate how sick you feel your child is and how
worried you are. In pediatrics especially, doctors regard intuitive parents as
partners in the diagnosis and treatment of their sick child. Your running
commentary of the illness helps the doctor make the right diagnosis.
Sometimes your child just happens to act well during the five-minute doctor
visit but very sick before and after; in this case, your doctor may not have a
true picture of how sick baby really is. Your history helps.

OceanofPDF.com

 When Is a Cold Contagious?

A cold is most contagious in the first few days, plus the day before you even
realize your baby is sick. As a general guide the longer the cold persists, the
less contagious it is. If your baby has a clear runny nose and no fever, is not
acting sick, and is just noisy because of sniffling and coughing, it is seldom
necessary to quarantine him. If, however, your baby is coughing profusely,
has a snotty nose and yellow drainage from the eyes, is running a fever, and
is generally ill, keep him away from other babies for a few days. If he is in a
group where runny noses are the rule, wash his hands frequently and don’t
let him share mouthable toys.

OceanofPDF.com

 COUGHS
Besides fevers, coughs rank at the top of the call-your-doctor list. Coughs
present two problems: They are a nuisance, often keeping baby and
everyone else awake, and the cough is a signal that something unwelcome
is brewing in the lungs. Consider the following cough tips.

OceanofPDF.com

 Rate the Cough

Most colds produce coughs as the baby’s natural defense to dislodge the
obstructive mucus from the breathing passages. Coughs divide into three
categories: noisy coughs, nuisance coughs, and need-doctor coughs. If your
baby has a cold and a hacking cough but eats well, plays well, and sleeps
well, no concern or treatment is necessary. If baby is not acting sick during
the day, but the cough keeps her awake during nap time and the night, this
is a nuisance cough that may need treatment. If the cough is associated with
fever, a fast heart rate, lethargy, vomiting, or coughing up green stuff, this is
a need-doctor cough.

DR. SEARS’S ADVICE
• Happy child + clear nasal discharge = no worry.
• Increasingly unhappy child + increasingly snotty nose = time to visit the
doctor.
• Always check with your doctor if your baby’s cold is getting worse.

WORRYING ABOUT COUGHS
When Not to Worry

 • Baby has no fever and appears well.
• Baby coughs during the day and night, but is acting fairly normal.
• The cough does not interfere too much with eating, playing, or sleeping.
• The cough is steadily improving.
When to Call the Doctor

• The cough begins suddenly, persists, and you feel the baby may have
gotten something lodged in his throat.
• The cough is accompanied by severe allergies.
• Baby also has fever, chills, and is generally ill.
• Baby is coughing up thick, yellow-green mucus.
• The cough gets progressively worse.

OceanofPDF.com

 The Persistent Cough

For a week or two after the nose is clear, a cough may hang on, becoming a
nuisance for the child and family. Most lingering coughs are caused by
lingering viruses, especially with the story, “He doesn’t act sick and the
cough doesn’t bother him, it just lingers.” Allergies head the list of chronic
cough causes, especially if accompanied by other allergic signs: runny nose,
puffy eyes, wheezing. (See “Tracking and Treating Inhalant Allergies,”
here.) Don’t forget a foreign body as a hidden cause of a persistent cough.
The bronchus will not tolerate a resident peanut and, by coughing, will tell
the world to get it out. Any cough that persists for more than two weeks
merits a doctor’s exam.
Coughs associated with the common cold are seldom contagious after
the first few days of the illness, especially if baby is generally acting well.

OceanofPDF.com

 Pneumonia

Many parents bring their kids into the office with cough and fever because
they are worried about pneumonia. Pneumonia is actually fairly rare, and
most deep, junky sounding coughs with fever are simple chest colds.
Symptoms of pneumonia include rapid, labored breathing, chest pain, fever,
vomiting, and a severe deep cough. Your doctor will be able to distinguish
between a chest cold and pneumonia on examination.

OceanofPDF.com

 Three Unique Coughing Situations

There are three illnesses that cause a very specific cough that you should be
aware of.
Croup. This is a virus (not treatable with antibiotics) that causes a cough
that sounds like a seal barking. It also causes raspy breathing and a hoarse
voice. If this describes your child, see here.
Whooping cough. This is a bacterial illness that starts off like any normal
cold and cough, then progresses into severe fits of uncontrollable and
continuous coughing that last from thirty seconds to two minutes. What is
unique about these fits is that the child can barely catch his breath during
the attack, which causes his face to turn red, purple, and even blue if the fit
is prolonged. When the child is finally able to take a breath, it sounds like a
hollow, raspy “whooping” sound as the child gasps for air. If this describes
your child, see here.
Respiratory syncytial virus. If your baby’s cough is accompanied by rapid
breathing or wheezing sounds, or the chest is sucking inward with each
breath (called retractions), your baby may have respiratory syncytial virus,
or RSV. This severe cold virus is not treatable with antibiotics, but

 prescription inhaled treatments may ease the breathing distress. See RSV,
here.

OceanofPDF.com

 Calming Coughs

That hacking noise that keeps you on edge or gets baby ejected from day
care does not always need to be stopped. This noisy nuisance can be a
cold’s best friend. Secretions accumulating in the lower airways trigger the
cough reflex to dislodge the pesty mucus like some mighty wind clearing
the roads. Without the cough, secretions would form mucous plugs that both
obstruct air flow and serve as tiny culture packets for bacteria to grow. With
these cough facts in mind, treat this special chest protector kindly. If the
cough bothers baby, try the following.
Keep the secretions thin and moving. To make it easier for baby to cough
up the mucus, try the home remedies that we advised in “Thinning the
Secretions,” here.
Clap on baby’s back. Called chest physiotherapy, clapping at least ten
times on each side of baby’s back, chest, and under the armpits around four
times a day may help dislodge mucus from the airways. Following an exam,
if your doctor detects a certain place that the airways are obstructed, he or
she may instruct you to clap most where the doctor’s X marks the spot.
Clear the air. Allergens or irritants in the air, especially in baby’s sleeping
room, can cause a lingering cough and aggravate an existing cough caused

 by an infection. Definitely have a no-smoking rule when there is a baby in
the house or car. (Also see “How to Allergyproof a Bedroom,” here.)
Choose the right cough medicine. There are three kinds of cough
remedies: suppressants, expectorants, and mixtures of both. These are
different medicines for different coughs, and the wrong use may worsen the
situation.
Daytime coughs usually do not bother a baby and often need only the
remedies mentioned above. If the cough, however, interferes with baby’s
eating, napping, and playing, give an expectorant-only preparation. If the
cough still interferes with baby’s daytime functioning, try an expectorantsuppressant combination according to the dosage on the package or as
prescribed by your doctor.
Cough medications. At the time of this writing, over-the-counter cough
medications are not FDA approved for children under four years. Various
herbal and homeopathic remedies are available. We consider these to be
safe, but efficacy varies. Visit AskDrSears.com for recommendations on
natural cold and cough remedies.
We often ask parents if their infant is able to successfully cough up the
mucus out of their lungs. The answer is usually no, because they don’t see
anything coming up and out. Realize, however, that any infant or young
child will naturally swallow any mucus that is coughed up. This is fine. It is
better to get the mucus out of the lungs and swallow it than to leave it in the
lungs, where it can become infected.

 OceanofPDF.com

 EAR INFECTIONS
A father whose infant is a frequent visitor to our office for ear infections
recently opened his visit with, “My baby’s ears are the most expensive part
of his body to maintain.” Correct, but when you consider the valuable
speech and hearing that ears provide, they are well worth the price of good
maintenance.

OceanofPDF.com

 What Parents Need to Know About Infant Ears

Understanding how the ear structures work and how an infant’s ears differ
from an adult’s ears will help you appreciate why babies are prone to ear
infections and why it’s important to treat them correctly. Let’s travel with a
germ from nose to ear to see how an ear infection develops. A germ enters
the nose and throat and travels up the eustachian tube to the middle ear
space. The eustachian tube connects the throat to the middle ear and serves
to equalize pressure on both sides of the eardrum. Without this tube, your
ears would be painful, popping, and feel plugged the way they temporarily
do when you climb at high altitudes or fly. Besides being a pressure
equalizer, this tube protects the middle ear, opening and closing
appropriately and draining unwanted accumulations of fluid and germs.

 Structure of inner ear.
The reason babies get more ear infections than older children depends
on this tiny tube. Not only may it not open and close efficiently, a baby’s
eustachian tube is short, wide, and set more evenly with the throat—all
characteristics that allow germs and secretions easy access to the ear from
the throat. As baby grows, the eustachian tube lengthens, narrows, and is
angled downward to the throat so secretions have to travel uphill to get to
the ears.
During a cold or an allergy attack, fluid accumulates in all the breathing
passages and in the middle ear. The same stuff that’s in baby’s nose is
behind baby’s eardrums. This is what has occurred when your doctor says,
“Baby has fluid behind his eardrums.” The medical term for this condition
is serous otitis media (secretions in the middle ear). At this point in the cold,
baby may not act sick. However, the feeling of pressure in the ear may
awaken him at night and make him irritable. He may even be a bit off
balance when walking because the fluid sloshing around in the middle ear
affects the sense of balance. But usually at this stage babies act as if they
only have a cold. The fluid may drain back out into the throat by itself,
baby’s germ-fighting cells clearing up whatever germs may be in the fluid,
and baby will get better. That’s the good news.
Oftentimes, however, if the eustachian tube closes, this fluid in the
middle ear becomes trapped. There is a general principle of the human body
that fluid trapped anywhere usually gets infected. This trapped fluid serves
as a nutrient for germs that grow in the fluid, making it thick like pus. This

 thick fluid puts pressure on the eardrum, producing pain, especially when
baby is lying down. This is why ear infections make their untimely
presentation at night when baby lies down and sometimes seem better by
day. Pain, crankiness, and sleeplessness are the usual presenting symptoms,
sometimes (but not always) associated with fever, a snotty nose, and
vomiting. More subtle signs are seen in a breastfeeding baby who begins
sucking differently and a baby who doesn’t want to lie down. Ear pulling is
not a reliable sign. Babies play with their ears, especially during teething.

SIGNS SUGGESTING AN EAR INFECTION
• increasingly thick and snotty nasal secretions
• eye drainage
• crankiness and irritability
• frequent night waking or change in sleep pattern
• unwillingness to lie flat
• crying or screaming plus cold symptoms
• drainage from ear
• sudden worsening of a cold
Sometimes the pus under pressure bursts through the eardrum, and you
notice purulent fluid draining from baby’s ear canal—a snotty ear. This may
occur during the night and be confused with nasal discharge. Baby usually
feels better after the eardrum ruptures, since the pressure is released. Still
take baby to the doctor for treatment the next morning. (In the preantibiotic
era doctors used to lance eardrums to relieve the pressure and the
excruciating pain.)

 OceanofPDF.com

 Meanwhile, at the Doctor’s Office

The doctor looks into the baby’s ear and notices a red bulging eardrum,
which reflects why no one slept last night. Baby’s doctor may prescribe an
antibiotic if the infection is severe enough, the type and dosage depending
on the severity of the infection and baby’s past response to antibiotics. Then
your doctor adds a very important reminder—“and we’ll recheck your
baby’s ears in two or three weeks.” Three important points to remember
about ear infections: follow-up, follow-up, follow-up.

TUGGING AT EARS
Many parents bring their children into our office because they are pulling
on their ears. There are no cold symptoms or fever, just ear pulling. Tugging
on the ear almost never means an ear infection when there is no
accompanying cold or fever. Teething is actually the most common cause of
ear tugging. Baby is looking for some way to relieve the pain and pressure
of teething. So if baby is pulling or digging at his ears, shows signs of
teething, and there are no fever or cold symptoms, then there is probably no
ear infection.
After a day or two on the antibiotic, baby should feel somewhat better. If
there is no improvement within forty-eight hours, be sure to check with
your doctor, even earlier if baby’s condition worsens. Upon first sight of
your baby’s ear infection, the doctor tried to match the antibiotic to the
infection, but only the baby’s response will tell if this has been the right
match. But don’t expect immediate improvement; it may take twelve to

 twenty-four hours for the antibiotic to start to work. And the fever, if
present, may last one or two days. Antibiotics do not lower fever. They treat
germs, and when the germs leave, the fever breaks.

COMFORTING LITTLE AIRBORNE EARS
Here are some ways you can prevent or minimize ear discomfort when
traveling with your baby by air. Breastfeed or bottlefeed, or give baby
something to suck on or drink on takeoff and landing. If baby is sleeping on
takeoff, no need to awaken. Takeoff does not seem to bother the ears as
much as landing. When the plane is descending is the only time in the
whole world you ever want to wake a sleeping baby. The eustachian tubes
don’t work well to equalize pressure when asleep. If baby has a cold or
stuffy nose, use saline and suction a half-hour before takeoff. To combat the
dry cabin air, place a washcloth moistened with warm water in front of your
baby’s nose to humidify little breathing passages, or use saline nose drops.
Better yet, express a few drops of breast milk into baby’s nose while
nursing.
Suppose your baby feels better, even completely well, after three days
into the antibiotic treatment. Tempted to stop the medicine now? Don’t! The
fluid and germs are most likely still hanging around and will flare up if you
stop the treatment too soon.
Do all ear infections need antibiotics? No. New research is showing that
mild to moderate ear infections often resolve without antibiotics. A recent
American Academy of Pediatrics policy recommends a “wait and see”
approach. If your child has a mild ear infection and isn’t acting too sick, the
doctor may choose to observe the baby over the next few days without
prescribing an antibiotic. In this case, just treat the pain and any fever with

 medications and anesthetic eardrops. If, on the other hand, baby gets more
fussy and the fever worsens or persists, an antibiotic may be warranted.

OceanofPDF.com

 How Ear Infections Resolve

After an ear infection is treated, it will take one of four courses:
• The infection and the fluid will drain completely out of your child’s ear
within one to four weeks.
• The infection will resolve, but some non-infected fluid will remain in the
middle-ear cavity for as long as three months.
• The infection will only partially resolve, and after several days without
antibiotics it will regrow and turn into another infection. This can occur if
the antibiotics are stopped too soon or if the infection is resistant to the
antibiotics.
• The infection will be completely resistant to the antibiotic, your child’s
ear pain and fever will persist for two to three days on that treatment, and
a stronger antibiotic may be needed.
It is important for your doctor to reevaluate the ears two to four weeks after
an infection. This serves several purposes: to make sure the infection is
clearing up; to make sure the middle-ear fluid is resolving (if the fluid stays
around continuously for more than three months, your doctor needs to
know); and to help determine if the next ear infection is a new one or a
continuation of an old infection.
Why worry about ear fluid if it is not infected? One main worry about
chronic middle-ear fluid is that it decreases hearing. While this isn’t really a
problem if it is temporary (a few weeks of hearing loss won’t interfere

 significantly with speech development), going for several months with
hearing loss can greatly affect language acquisition during the crucial
learning years. Another more worrisome possibility is that the middle-ear
fluid can thicken over a few months into a sticky gel, a condition called
“glue ear.” This “glue” interferes with the bones in the middle ear that
transmit sound, and if left in the ear for too long can occasionally lead to a
permanent decrease in hearing. Your doctor may use an instrument called a
tympanogram (it looks just like an ear thermometer and is painless) to help
measure the middle-ear pressure and evaluate how much middle-ear fluid is
present.
This is why follow-up with the doctor is so important. If your doctor
sees the middle-ear fluid persist for several months after an ear infection, he
or she may refer you to an ear, nose, and throat (ENT) specialist, who may
suggest inserting ear tubes to drain the fluid before it turns into glue ear. If,
on the other hand, your doctor sees the fluid resolve completely, then glue
ear is not a concern. And when your doctor sees your baby a few months
later for his next ear infection, and normal ears have been documented in
between the two infections, then you and your doctor don’t need to worry
that this condition may have been present over those few intervening
months.

OceanofPDF.com

 Preventing Ear Infections

Suppose this scene repeats itself with increasing frequency and severity
over the next year, a common occurrence in pediatric practice. Here are
ways to prevent or at least lessen the frequency and severity of ear
infections.
Breastfeed as long as possible. Breastfed infants have fewer ear infections.
Control allergens. Allergens cause mucus, which serves as a culture
medium for bacteria and infections, to build up in the middle ear. Be your
baby’s allergy detective to determine the most probable allergens your baby
may be exposed to. The most common are inhalant allergies—cigarette
smoke, dust, and animal dander. Above all, don’t smoke around babies. Take
particular precautions to rid your baby’s sleeping environment of fuzzy and
stuffed animals that collect dust (see here for tips on defuzzing your baby’s
bedroom). Food allergies, particularly to dairy products, also contribute to
ear infections.
Change baby’s social situation. Is baby hanging around with snotty-nosed
babies? Babies in day care do get more colds. Consider placing your baby
in a less crowded day care or consider a home day-care setup in which the
provider has strict policies to either separate or send home sick children.

 HOW TO PREVENT EAR INFECTIONS
• Breastfeed.
• Control allergens.
• Minimize exposure to sick babies.
• Feed upright.
• Treat colds early.
• Keep nasal passages clear.
• Schedule frequent follow-up exams.
• Treat surgically with ear tubes.

Feed baby upright. If your baby is bottlefed, feed him upright, or at least
at a forty-five-degree angle. This lessens the chance of milk or formula
entering the eustachian tube from the throat and setting up inflammation
within the tube and middle ear. Breastfeeding lying down seldom
predisposes baby to ear infections because the swallowing mechanism is
different and breast milk is less irritating to the middle ear tissues. But if
your breastfed infant is prone to recurrent ear infections, avoid feeding
lying down.
Treat colds early. Note your child’s usual cold-to-ear-infection sequence. If
the typical pattern is a clear runny nose and a happy child, progressing to a
snotty nose and a cranky child, then escalating into a full-blown ear
infection a few days later, it would be wise to consult your doctor early,
before the cold progresses to an ear infection.

 Keep nasal passages clear. Steam treat (see here) and hose the nose (see
here) to help drain snotty secretions.

OceanofPDF.com

 Recurring Ear Infections

Suppose you have tried all the above preventive measures, your baby is still
in and out of the doctor’s office with recurrent ear infections, and she
begins to show signs of deteriorating behavior, such as chronic irritability,
which we call an ear personality. These behavior changes are common in
babies with recurrent ear infections simply because they do not feel well or
hear well and therefore do not act well. In fact one of the earliest changes
parents notice after constant ear infections are brought under control is
improvement in baby’s behavior.
The entire prevention regimen, including maintenance antibiotics and
surgical treatment, simply buys time until your child’s immunity to germs
increases and the eustachian tubes mature. Most children outgrow the
tendency to recurring ear infections by age three to four years.

Long-Term Antibiotic Treatment

One tool in the prevention of recurrent ear infections is the use of a lowdosage, mild antibiotic once or twice a day for one to six months, especially
during the winter months.

 Parents are naturally uneasy about giving their child an antibiotic for so
long a time, but consider the alternatives. A low dosage of a mild antibiotic
is easier on baby’s system than periodic progressively stronger antibiotics.
The antibiotics that are used for prevention, similar to those that some
children take daily for twenty years to prevent rheumatic fever, show no
harmful effects. Without this prevention regimen the baby with recurrent ear
infections may suffer temporary hearing loss at a time when good hearing is
necessary for optimal speech development. Ear infections that occur too
frequently and persist too long may even cause permanent hearing loss.
Without this prevention regimen, surgical treatment may be the next step for
the child with recurrent ear infections.

PROGRESSION IN TREATMENT OF
RECURRING EAR INFECTIONS
For proper management and prevention of ear infections, it is important to
go through each step in a timely manner. When the first three steps are
followed properly, the majority of babies with recurrent ear infections do
not need step four, surgical treatment.
Step one: Treat each ear infection as it occurs. Continue treatment and
careful follow-up with your doctor until the infection is completely resolved
and baby’s ears are normal. If the ear infections become more frequent,
progress to:
Step two: Take preventive measures. As suggested earlier, try the
prevention regimen of breastfeeding, controlling allergens, monitoring
baby’s exposure to sick children, feeding baby upright, treating colds early,
and clearing baby’s nasal passages. If the ear infections continue to occur,
progress to:

 Step three: Try a course of daily maintenance antibiotics. If you still
frequent the doctor’s office, move on to:
Step four: Treat surgically with the insertion of tubes.
Keeping the germs and the fluid out of the middle ear for an extended
period of time also allows the middle ear structures, especially the
eustachian tubes, to recover from the constant infections. Usually by this
time a vicious circle has been set up whereby the eustachian tube has been
so chronically damaged that it malfunctions, which predisposes to more ear
infections. Oftentimes a preventive antibiotic treatment may keep the baby
free of ear infection long enough for him to finally grow out of it. Except in
allergic babies (and even this is questionable) decongestants and/or
antihistamines have not been shown to be of any value in treating or
preventing ear infections. And remember, antibiotics only kill germs. They
do not drain fluid from the ears. Keeping your baby’s nasal passages clear is
good preventive medicine.

Surgical Intervention

Occasionally the prevention regimen does not work, and baby continues to
get frequent ear infections. By this time the fluid in the middle ear has
become thick, like glue, and requires surgical drainage. This operation is a
myringotomy, during which, under light general anesthesia, an ear, nose,
and throat specialist drains the gluelike fluid from the middle ear. At this
time the doctor inserts a tiny plastic tube (about the size of the tip of a

 ballpoint pen) into the eardrum. These plastic tubes remain in place for
around six months to a year, allowing accumulated fluid to drain out, thus
lessening the frequency of middle ear infections and producing an
immediate improvement in baby’s hearing. This procedure requires about a
half hour and is occasionally done in a doctor’s office, but is most often
done as outpatient surgery in the hospital. These tubes fall out by
themselves. The tiny hole left in the eardrums seals over by itself.

OceanofPDF.com

 Self-help for Middle-of-the-Night Earaches

Doctors and parents have professions that require giving up the right to a
full night’s sleep. But it is seldom necessary to consult your doctor in the
middle of the night if your baby awakens with an earache, unless he seems
generally and seriously ill. The only treatment that your doctor could advise
that you could not do yourself would be an antibiotic, and this will not
immediately relieve the pain. Also, you may have difficulty finding a
drugstore open in the wee hours of the morning.
Try these middle-of-the-night pain relievers until you can contact your
doctor the next morning. You can even try these out during the day until
prescribed antibiotics take effect.

 • Give your baby acetaminophen or ibuprofen (see here for dosages). It is
safe and appropriate to double the first dose of acetaminophen.
• Put some cooking oil, such as vegetable oil or olive oil, in a small glass
and warm it by setting the glass in warm water. Squirt a few drops into
the sore ear. Massage the outer edge of the ear canal to move the drops
down toward the eardrum to relieve the pain. You can use mullein garlic
oil ear drops if you have them.
• If your infant is prone to ear infections, keep the prescription painrelieving drops Auralgan on hand.
• Encourage your baby to lie with the sore ear up, or sit your baby upright
and try to help him go to sleep in that position. You may need to sit
propped up in bed on a couple of pillows and allow your baby to fall
asleep on your chest with the well ear toward your chest and the sore ear
up.
• To promote drainage of secretions from the nasal passages (and possibly
the eustachian tubes), give baby a steam bath (see here).

OceanofPDF.com

 DOES YOUR BABY HEAR? HOW TO TELL
Here are some easy observations to make at various ages to check your
baby’s hearing. If the answer to many of the questions is no, have your
baby’s hearing checked by your doctor.
Age

Observation
Does baby:
Birth–3 months Startle or blink at sudden noises?
Stop crying when you
talk?
Stop sucking when you talk?
Seem aware of your voice?
Awaken to sound, not only when the
crib is jostled?
Turn her head toward your voice?

3–6
months

Recognize and respond to your
voice?
Smile when spoken to?
Coo when you talk?
Settle to music?
Turn her head in search of a
new sound?

6–9
months
Babble
sounds?

many
Vocalize different sounds for different
needs?

 9–12
months

Turn when her name is called from
behind?
Turn her head toward
speaker at the table?

a
Imitate your sounds?
Appear
attentive
during
conversations?
Respond
to
“no”;
say
“mama,” “dada”?

12–18
months

Turn toward a familiar object or
people when they are named?

18–24
months

Understand “Throw the
ball”?
Run toward the door when
you say “go”?
Wave when you say “byebye” without gesturing?
Speak at least ten words?

Sometimes
repeat
your
requests?
Point less and speak more words or sounds than in the
previous stage?
Follow your requests without watching your face very
closely while you are speaking? (Be suspicious of the
child who rivets to your face during conversation; she
may be lip-reading.)

 Treating Ear Infections with Antibiotics over the Phone

Doctors are reluctant to do this for several reasons. Even very painful ears
are not necessarily infected. We have seen many children over the years
with complaints of severe ear pain, and their ear exam is normal. Early mild
ear infections don’t necessarily need antibiotics. Better to make the trip to
the doctor and possibly save your child a course of antibiotics. Visually
confirming an ear infection will also help your doctor determine the status
of the ear on follow-up appointments.

OceanofPDF.com

 SINUS INFECTIONS
As germ-carrying air travels through the breathing passages, there are
several out-of-the-way places where infections can occur. We just finished
our trip through the middle ear. Next are the sinuses, small cavities in the
facial bones along the sides of the nose, beneath the eyes, and above the
eyebrows. Like the nose during a cold, the lining of the sinuses becomes
inflamed as it secretes mucus. This mucus accumulates in the sinuses and
drains into the nose and either drips forward, contributing to a runny nose,
or flows back into the throat, causing a post-nasal drip, throat tickle, and
resultant cough when lying on the back. Instead of draining and clearing as
with a cold, the fluid sometimes collects in sinuses, becoming stagnant and
infected. Unlike earaches, runny noses, or sore throats, sinus infections have
subtle signs and symptoms and are often overlooked because baby does not
seem that sick. Realize that sinus infections rarely just appear out of the
blue. It usually takes seven to ten days for the above process to create
enough bacterial overgrowth to lead to a full-blown sinus infection. So if
your child is experiencing some of the symptoms described below, don’t
run to the doctor on day one. Wait and see how things progress.

OceanofPDF.com

 Symptoms

Because the sinuses are located inside the bones of the face and nose, your
doctor can’t actually visualize the infection like he or she can with an ear or
throat infection. Your doctor will rely heavily on your description of
symptoms, as well as an examination of the nose, ears, eyes, and face.
Suspect a sinus infection when the following conditions are present:
• yellow or green nasal discharge for more than a week
• a lingering cold (more than a week or two), or a cold that keeps recurring
as soon as antibiotics are finished
• dark circles under the eyes and puffy lower eyelids
• a pale and peaked face
• mucus drainage from the eyes
• a productive cough, usually worse at night
• odorous breath coming from the infected mucus in the back of the throat
• fatigue and low-grade fever
• headaches around the eyes, forehead, and cheeks

OceanofPDF.com

 Treatment

Trends in antibiotic treatment for sinus infections have become more
conservative recently. Research has shown that early and mild sinus
infections may resolve with proper and vigorous nonantibiotic measures,
such as “nose hosing” and “steam cleaning” (see here and here).
Sinus infections when treated are treated like ear infections, but they are
treated longer. It is not unusual for a child to need two to three weeks of
antibiotics to completely clear up a sinus infection. In addition to
antibiotics, it’s important to clear baby’s nose to help the secretions drain
out of the sinuses.

HIGH-TECH PARENTING AND DOCTORING
Partner with your pediatrician to make the right diagnosis of your medical
concerns. Video or audio record the symptoms you’re worried about, such
as baby’s difficulty breathing, bizarre movements, or painful cries. Play
show-and-tell with your doctor. As you describe baby’s symptoms, show
your recordings on your cell phone for your doctor to witness. We have
found these helpful in diagnosing croup, whooping cough, normal quirky
shakes versus seizures, obstructive sleep apnea, cries and contortions
revealing GERD, and more. Your doctor will appreciate your techie help.
Sinus infections are more common in preschool and school-age children
and adolescents, but even the small sinuses of infants get their fair share of
cold germs.

 OceanofPDF.com

 CROUP
Croup (the medical term is laryngotracheitis) is a virus infection of the
upper airway passages. What makes croup of such concern is the location of
the infection. The vocal cords are already the narrowest part of the air
passages, and any swelling from infection may narrow the airway enough to
obstruct breathing.

OceanofPDF.com

 Symptoms

Croup may begin without warning when baby suddenly sits up in bed with a
barking cough, sounding like a seal. Or it may begin as a cold that gradually
escalates into a croupy cough in addition to fever, hoarse voice, raspy
breathing, and a sore throat. The main concern of parents is to recognize
when croup is serious and when it is not.

Signs of Nonserious Croup

The behavior of your baby and how the croup progresses are the features to
observe. If your baby is smiling, happy, playful, looking around, interested
in the environment, and not obviously bothered by the croup, these are good
signs. As a final reassurance, if your barking baby is able to lie down and
sleep without repeated interruption, his breathing is not jeopardized. Don’t
worry if you hear mild raspy breathing as long as baby is sleeping
comfortably. Mild croup rarely warrants an urgent call to your doctor, as it
can easily be minimized with the measures below.

Signs of Serious Croup

 Here’s when to be concerned but not to panic. The baby whose airway is
obstructed and who is unable to get enough air has a worried look on his
face and is not interested in any play or interaction, as if concentrating all
his energy on getting air. Baby won’t lie down; he just sits up and barks,
and he can’t sleep. When you watch the little dent in baby’s neck just above
the breastbone, it caves in with each labored breath. This sign is called
indrawing. When baby breathes in, you will hear a raspy drawn-out noise
called stridor. These are potentially dangerous signs that need immediate
medical attention.

OceanofPDF.com

 Treating Croup

The first thing to do in treating croup is to relax your baby. Here’s where
parents’ TLC really shines. Anxiety (baby’s and parents’) aggravates croup.
If you can relax baby, his airway may also relax. Sit baby upright in your
lap, play soft music, sing lullabies, read a story, or let baby watch soothing
television. If breastfeeding, offer the great pacifier. (See discussion on
relaxing the hospitalized child, here.)
Humidity helps clear baby’s swollen breathing passages. Close the
bathroom door, turn on the hot shower (or bathtub faucet), and sit with baby
on the floor (if the room stays humid enough, as steam rises), or sit on the
counter while you read a story. Open a window if possible. The cool air
mixed with steam may work better than steam alone. You can also do this in
the bedroom with a steam vaporizer. Let baby lie with his head on a pillow
on your lap or propped up against you. You could instead place a vaporizer
shooting steam directly over baby’s nose, or make your own croup tent by
placing a sheet over the crib and directing a cool-mist humidifier into the
tent. In our experience croupy babies may resist the confines of a tent. Let
baby fall asleep first in your arms and then position your sleeping baby
upright in an infant seat inside the mist tent. Or you can even sleep for a
while together in the steamy bathroom.

 If baby has a fever, give an appropriate dosage of fever-lowering
medicine (see here). Let baby drink slow sips of juice, but it’s not wise to
feed solid food during a croup attack in case baby chokes or vomits and
aspirates the food into his lungs. Don’t give over-the-counter medicines,
especially decongestants or antihistamines, without your doctor’s advice.
These may dry the narrowing air passages that the moisture is trying to
open. One of the best treatments is taking baby out in the cool, moist night
air (but don’t tell grandmother). Take a slow car ride with the windows
down. The misty night air is why babies with croup often improve en route
to the hospital.
Even though antibiotics are not used to treat this viral illness, there is
one prescription medication that can shrink the swelling in your baby’s
airways and vocal cords and greatly improve the breathing. This medicine is
an oral steroid. Steroids sound scary to most parents, but all the bad things
you hear about steroids occur from chronic use, not from a brief course of
several days. When used in croup, the steroids work for about twenty-four
hours and are typically given during the second and third nights (the worst
part of the illness). But don’t page your doctor in the middle of the night
just to ask for a steroid prescription. It takes about eight hours for this
medicine to work, so it may not help if given in the middle of the night.

OceanofPDF.com

 When to Move Quickly

After trying the preceding treatment, assess in which direction your baby is
going. If indrawing is lessening, color is returning to baby’s pale cheeks, or
baby initiates some interaction or wants to drift off to sleep (though still
breathing noisily), continue with the steam and a watchful eye and ear.
Watch for the following emergency signs, and if any of them occur, call the
doctor and rush baby directly to the emergency room.
• The indrawing is becoming more labored, and baby’s inhaling changes
from a low-pitch stridor to a whistling sound.
• Baby becomes paler.
• Baby can’t speak or cry from lack of breath.
• Baby is struggling more to get each breath.
• The indrawing is increasing, but the sound of breathing is decreasing.
En route to the emergency room, remember to leave the car windows
open for humidity and ventilation, and try to settle baby with a calming
song. Croup merits concern at all stages of severity. If at all in doubt which
direction your baby’s croup is taking, consult your doctor or take baby
immediately to the local emergency room or children’s hospital.

OceanofPDF.com

 The Expected Course of Croup

The croupy, barky, raspy, feverish phase of croup generally lasts around five
days. Croup usually improves during the day, only to flare up again each
night. The second and third nights are typically worse than the first night.
So it is important to check in with your doctor the morning after croup
begins to see if an appointment is necessary. After these five days, most
cases turn into a junky-sounding chest cough that lasts another week or so.
Do not worry about this cough unless fever persists for more than five days
or your child seems unusually ill.

OceanofPDF.com

 DIARRHEA
If an infant has stools that are runnier than normal but no more frequent,
then this is not really true diarrhea. Diarrhea, meaning liquid stools, refers
more to the frequency of the bowel movements than to the consistency.
During infancy the most common causes of diarrhea in order of frequency
are gastrointestinal infections, colds, food intolerances, and antibiotic
treatment. Throughout infancy, it is normal for the stools to periodically
change in consistency or color, especially following a change of diet. Do
not worry if your infant’s stools become looser for a few days. This is just a
normal variation in intestinal function. Teething is a common reason for a
few days of runnier stools.
When the intestinal lining is infected, it heals very slowly. The lining
contains millions of tiny projections through which liquidized food weaves
and is absorbed. When infected, this brushlike lining is injured, along with
the digestive enzymes it contains, allowing the food to pass through
undigested. In fact, “diarrhea” comes from a Greek word meaning “to flow
through.”

SIGNS OF DEHYDRATION
Mild to Moderate Dehydration

 • weight loss of 5 percent
• still playful, but quieter behavior
• dry mouth, fewer tears when crying
• urination less frequent than usual

Severe Dehydration
If your child has three or more of the following signs, or is acting unusually
ill, you should seek medical attention.
• weight loss of 5–10 percent
• lethargic or hyperirritable behavior (see here)
• sunken eyes
• sunken soft spot in the head (in infants under one year)
• dry mouth, no tears when crying
• dry, pale, wrinkled skin
• infrequent urination (only two times a day or less)
• dark yellow urine

The stools of diarrhea from gastroenteritis are frequent, watery, green,
mucous, foul smelling, explosive, and occasionally blood tinged. Usually
there is a raw red rash around the anus. In addition, baby often has other
signs of a viral infection: a cold and a general unwell feeling and
appearance.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Dehydration: When to Worry About Diarrhea

Most diarrhea illnesses are more of a nuisance than a medical problem and
clear up easily with extra fluids and minor changes in the diet. The main
concern with diarrhea is dehydration. Your baby’s body contains just the
right balance of salts (called electrolytes) and water. Healthy intestines and
kidneys regulate this balance. A proper balance is necessary for organs to
function. Diarrhea interrupts this balance, causing the body to lose water
and electrolytes. Add vomiting and you further increase the risk of
dehydration.

OceanofPDF.com

 Managing Your Baby’s Diarrhea

Step one: Determine the cause. Have you changed baby’s diet lately—for
example, switched from formula to cow’s milk, weaned from breast milk to
formula, added new foods—or is baby overdosing on any one food, such as
juice? (See here for a discussion of juice diarrhea.) Loose, watery stools
(usually without mucus or blood) in an otherwise well baby and a red ring
around the anus (allergy ring) are signs of an intolerance to a recently
introduced food. Go back to baby’s previous diet and reduce or eliminate
the suspected offender (see the discussion of food allergies, here). The
stools should return to their previous characteristics within a week. Or does
your baby have a cold and fever, and is he generally unwell in addition to
having loose, mucous stools? If so, the diarrhea is probably due to an
infection (see box). Go on to the next step.
Step two: Determine the severity of the diarrhea and dehydration. Is
baby playful and wet (eyes, mouth, diaper)? Perhaps except for more
frequent messy diapers, you wouldn’t know anything was amiss. In this
case you don’t have to change anything (except more diapers), and observe
what direction the stools take.
If you have access to an accurate infant scale, weigh your preferably
undressed baby daily during a diarrhea illness. As a general guide: no

 weight loss—no worry, and no need to call your doctor yet. Both the degree
and the rapidity of weight loss determine the severity of dehydration. If
your baby has not lost significant weight, she is not becoming dehydrated.
However, if your child loses 5 percent of her baseline body weight (for
example, a weight loss of 1 pound in a 20-pound baby), she has experienced
mild to moderate dehydration, and this merits a phone call to your doctor. A
rapid weight loss is more of a concern than a gradual one. A 20-pound
infant who loses a pound of body weight over the period of a day is much
more worrisome than one who loses the same amount of weight over a
week’s time. But infants usually appear very sick if they are losing weight
rapidly; they do not act as sick if their weight loss has been gradual. Ten
percent weight loss, especially if occurring within a few days, suggests
serious dehydration, and you should call your doctor immediately,
preferably even before this degree of weight loss occurs.

INFECTIOUS CAUSES OF DIARRHEA
Here are the most common causes of diarrhea. These conditions generally
are not treated with antibiotics, except where noted.
Rotavirus. This is a very common cause of diarrhea, especially during late
fall and winter. It is characterized by very foul smelling, watery, green or
brown diarrhea that can persist for weeks. Fever and vomiting are common
at the onset of the illness.
Other viruses, such as the flu, also commonly cause diarrhea.
Bacteria. These include E. coli, salmonella, and several others. Diarrhea
may be accompanied by vomiting and fever. Blood in the diarrhea is a
hallmark finding with bacterial intestinal infections. Even though these are
bacterial infections, they are not always treated with antibiotics.

 Parasites. These are usually contracted during foreign travel. The telltale
sign of a parasite is very watery diarrhea that lasts beyond two weeks.
These conditions are all generally contagious as long as any diarrhea is
present.
If you notice the stools are getting more frequent, greener, and more
watery and explosive, and your baby begins to act sick, though still wet and
playful, progress to the next step.
Step three: Eliminate irritating foods. If baby is also vomiting, stop all
solid foods, milk (except breast milk), and formula. If baby is not vomiting
and has only mild diarrhea, stop all dairy products, juices, and high-fat
foods. If the diarrhea is severe (watery, explosive stools every two hours),
stop all foods, milk, formula, and juice. It is rarely necessary to stop
breastfeeding. Refrain from these foods and liquids for from twelve to
twenty-four hours, depending on the severity of the diarrhea, while at the
same time beginning oral rehydration (step four).
Step four: Prevent dehydration. If baby is not breastfeeding, substitute for
baby’s regular diet an oral electrolyte solution (for example, Pedialyte),
available without prescription at your local pharmacy or supermarket. These
solutions contain an ideal balance of water and electrolytes to replace what
your baby is losing in the diarrhea. They also contain an amount of sugar
that won’t aggravate the diarrhea, especially those solutions made with rice
syrup. If your child won’t take an electrolyte solution, try white grape juice
(the juice that is most friendly to inflamed intestines), diluted to half

 strength with water. Give small, frequent feedings, using the sips-and-chips
method: sips of the solution and ice chips or Popsicles made with the
electrolyte solution. If your baby takes a bottle, instead of his normal
formula offer half as much oral electrolyte solution twice as often. The
minimum fluid requirement of the solution to offer your baby is 2 ounces
per pound of body weight (130 milliliters per kilogram) per twenty-four
hours. For example, if your baby weighs 20 pounds, offer 40 ounces in
twenty-four hours. When sick, many infants refuse to take this much, but try
your best. If baby has vomiting and diarrhea (dubbed a “double-ender”),
offer small sips even more frequently. Some infants may take only 1 to 2
teaspoons every five minutes in the first day or two of the illness.
If your baby is breastfeeding, let him feed as much as he wants. He’ll
get all the fluid he needs and will be comforted by the sucking. If he rejects
the breast temporarily, offer him an oral electrolyte solution. Even if he
vomits, allow him to feed—perhaps more slowly on a not-so-full breast. If
the milk only stays down ten to twenty minutes, much of it will be
absorbed, and it won’t hurt baby to bring up breast milk. In fact, having
something to bring up is probably more comfortable than dry heaves.
Step five: Resume regular feedings. According to the course of diarrhea
and the sick level of your child, along with your doctor’s advice, resume
dilute formula (half formula and half oral electrolyte solution) or resume
regular breastfeeding once the diarrhea slows down. Advance to fullstrength formula around twenty-four hours later. Between twenty-four and
forty-eight hours, resume baby’s previous diet but continue small, frequent

 feedings for a few days. Avoid cow’s milk as a beverage until the diarrhea
subsides, but yogurt is all right. During the one-to-six-week recovery period
from a severe intestinal infection, your doctor may advise using a
nonlactose soy formula, since the healing intestines may not tolerate
lactose. If baby’s diarrhea relapses when resuming solids, back off a bit and
return to the previous step. For a general guide, as your baby’s stools
become more solid, so may the diet.
Intestines heal slowly. It is very common for “nuisance diarrhea” to last for
several weeks during the recovery phase of a viral intestinal infection. “The
stools remain loose but baby remains well” may be the story for a month. If
diarrhea persists, especially if accompanied by abdominal pain and poor
weight gain, your doctor may wish to order several stool cultures, looking
for a parasite, such as Giardia.

KEEP A DIARRHEA RECORD
To keep track of your baby’s illness, make a diarrhea chart. This record
helps your doctor advise you on how soon to resume baby’s regular diet and
whether or not baby is becoming dehydrated. Charting helps you do your
part in the medical partnership with your doctor.

 Number and
Nature
of
Day Weight Stools
Treatment
1 20 lb. 8,
green, 40 ounces Pedialyte
watery

2

19.5
lb.

Course of Illness
Vomiting
stopped, slight
fever,
stools
same.
6, no change 20 ounces Pedialyte, resumed Fever gone, baby
full-strength
formula
(20 more perky.
ounces and rice cereal and bits
of banana)

OceanofPDF.com

 More Tips on Treating Infant Infectious Diarrhea

In light of new research, management of infant diarrhea has undergone
three changes.
Routine use of oral electrolyte solution. Scratch previously recommended
homemade solutions: gelatin, cola, ginger ale, juice, and sugar water. While
all right if oral electrolyte solutions aren’t available (it’s wise to keep a
bottle in your medicine cabinet), they are no longer recommended because
their salt content is too low and the sugar content is too high and could
possibly aggravate the diarrhea.
Earlier feedings. Starving diarrhea is not helpful. Earlier feedings provide
needed nutrition and may accelerate healing. The American Academy of
Pediatrics recommends the treatment described in step five: resuming fullstrength formula by twenty-four hours and progressing to a regular diet by
forty-eight hours. Even temporarily using the time-honored BRATY
(bananas, rice cereal, applesauce, unbuttered toast, and yogurt) may be
necessary only in severe cases.

THE BRATY DIET
Here are five foods you can feed your infant that may help slow down the
diarrhea: bananas, rice or rice cereal, applesauce, unbuttered toast or bread
(if over age one), and yogurt.

 Avoiding juice. Juice may not be the intestines’ best friend. Many juices
contain sorbitol, a sugar that is not absorbed in the intestines and that acts
like a sponge, absorbing water from the intestinal lining into the stools,
increasing their water content and thus aggravating the diarrhea. That’s why
prune juice is a laxative. Too much juice (especially pear, cherry, and apple)
may cause diarrhea and is also a subtle cause of abdominal pain and
bloating

in

toddlers

who

overdose

on

it.

(These

are

general

recommendations. It’s best to check with your doctor, since your child may
need special dietary manipulations.)

OceanofPDF.com

 What Not to Do for Diarrhea

Inflamed intestines need tender care. Here are some things that may
aggravate the diarrhea.
• Don’t stop breastfeeding. It is rarely necessary to stop breastfeeding,
since human milk is not irritating, may even be therapeutic, and may be
the only food and fluid a sick child will take or tolerate.
• Avoid boiling solutions, especially milk and sugar, since boiling may
cause the water to evaporate, making the solution too strong and
aggravating the dehydration.
• Do not withhold food for longer than forty-eight hours. Your child needs
nutrition for healing, and a clear fluid diet alone may itself produce
diarrhea, called starvation stools.

WHEN TO CALL YOUR DOCTOR
Call your doctor if
• dehydration is worsening
• baby has lost more than 5 percent of her body weight
• your child is becoming increasingly lethargic
• the fever remains high
• the vomiting continues
• baby is having increasingly severe abdominal pains

 OceanofPDF.com

 Medications for Diarrhea

Diarrhea is best treated with fluid replacement, using a commercial oral
electrolyte solution and the BRATY diet, as previously described. Seldom
are drugs necessary to treat diarrhea in infancy. In fact, narcotic
medications, which are often used to control diarrhea in adults, are not safe
for children. While these medications stop the diarrhea by slowing down the
action of the intestines, this may actually worsen the condition, since it
allows the germs and infected fluid to stagnate in the gut and increases the
chance of these germs entering the child’s bloodstream, where they can
cause serious illness. Also these medications, while externally stopping the
diarrhea, still allow the fluid to be lost into the intestines (internal diarrhea),
producing a silent dehydration that may not be appreciated because the
diarrhea appears to be lessening.
Baby may get diarrhea as a result of antibiotics; giving acidophilus
powder and plain yogurt daily during antibiotic treatment and for a few
weeks after lessens diarrhea. This works by restoring the normal bacteria in
the gut that are killed by antibiotics. Acidophilus or Lactobacillus bifidus is
available at nutrition stores.

PROBIOTICS
Probiotics (meaning “for life”) are bacteria that promote intestinal health.
Also known as “good bacteria,” these organisms coat the intestinal lining

 and fight off disease-causing bacteria by keeping them from penetrating the
intestinal lining. This century-old idea of feeding the gut good bacteria to
fight bad bacteria has recently received scientific validation. Probiotics (the
most familiar is lactobacillus acidophilus, one of the main bacterial cultures
in yogurt) come in a variety of pills, liquids, and powders, and are found at
pharmacies and nutrition stores. Consult your baby’s doctor for the dose and
form best suited for your baby’s intestines. Probiotics have been found
useful in the following medical situations:
• following antibiotic therapy
• rotavirus-associated diarrhea
• lactose intolerance
• intestinal bacterial and viral infections
• chronic, allergic eczema in infants
• diarrhea from any cause
• bladder infections
To prevent a rash, apply a barrier cream with every diaper change.

OceanofPDF.com

 VOMITING
“If it’s not one end, it’s the other,” complained a mother about her baby’s
sensitive intestines. It’s a fact of infant life that some of what goes into a
baby will come back up. Here are the most common causes of vomiting in
babies and what to do about it.

OceanofPDF.com

 Vomiting in the First Month

Most vomiting in the first few months is simply the nuisance of spitting up
(see here). Next on the regurgitation list is formula allergy, allergens in
breast milk (see here), or lactose intolerance (see here). These are temporary
nuisances that baby will outgrow. But there are some newborn medical
conditions that need special attention.

Pyloric Stenosis

The most serious cause of vomiting in infancy is intestinal obstruction,
either partial or complete. A blockage in the intestines prevents the milk
from getting through, and back up the esophagus it comes. The most
common of these is pyloric stenosis.
Pyloric stenosis is the narrowing of the lower end of the stomach, called
the pylorus. While the condition is seldom apparent in the first week or two
after birth, the muscle that circles the pylorus gradually grows thicker until
it squeezes the end of the stomach like a band. When the pylorus is only
partially obstructed, the milk trickles through, and baby appears only to spit
up. But toward the end of the first month, as the opening becomes narrower,
the milk backs up in the stomach, and the stubborn stomach tries with great

 force to push the milk through the narrowed opening. Some leaks through,
but most comes forcefully out as projectile vomiting. Baby may spray the
milk a distance of 2 feet (60 centimeters) across your lap. Whereas the
normal spitter dribbles on the burp cloth on your shoulder, the projectile
vomiter spews the contents up to a few feet away.
How to recognize pyloric stenosis. Signs that your baby may have pyloric
stenosis are the following:
• progressively worse projectile vomiting
• weight loss or failure to gain weight
• signs of dehydration: wrinkly skin, dry mouth, dry eyes, and decreasing
number of wet diapers
• stomach swollen like a big, tense balloon after feeding and deflated after
vomiting
• increasing hunger and eager feeding, followed by vomiting and repeated
vigorous feeding
Some normal babies may experience projectile vomiting once or twice a
day if overfed, underburped, or jostled too much. But persistent projectile
vomiting accompanied by weight loss and dehydration needs immediate
medical attention.
Helping your doctor diagnose pyloric stenosis. If you suspect your baby
may have this condition, make a doctor’s appointment, but do not feed your
baby for an hour or two before your appointment. (Unless baby is obviously
dehydrated, this is not a medical emergency, and you can usually wait to see

 your doctor during regular office hours. This condition has been brewing
for a week or two.) By the description of the frequency and nature of the
vomiting, and your description of your concern as an intuitive abdomen
watcher, your doctor will suspect this condition. To confirm pyloric stenosis
your doctor may want to watch you feed your baby while looking for the
ballooning of the tense stomach and feeling the pyloric muscle in spasm (it
feels like an olive). Occasionally, if diagnosis is suspected but the
abdominal signs are not definite, your doctor may order X rays of the
stomach or an ultrasound of the pylorus to confirm the diagnosis.

COMMUNICATING WITH YOUR DOCTOR
ABOUT VOMITING
When phoning your doctor, have answers ready for the following questions:
• How did the vomiting start: suddenly or gradually?
• What is the character of the vomitus? Is it clear, dark green, curdled, or
sour? Is it spit-up or projectile?
• How often is your child vomiting?
• What amount of vomitus is produced each time?
• Are other household members sick with similar signs?
• Does baby’s abdomen hurt? Where, and how much? Is it tense, balloonlike, soft, caved in?
• Does baby have any signs of dehydration? (See here.)
• How sick does your baby seem overall?
• Is baby’s condition the same, getting better, or worse?
• What treatment have you tried?
• What other symptoms are present (diarrhea, fever, cough)?

 Treatment. Following the confirmation of the diagnosis it is usual for baby
to need a day or two of rehydration with intravenous fluids in the hospital
before surgery. The operation to relieve the pyloric obstruction takes about a
half hour and is done through a small incision in the upper abdomen.
Improvement is immediate, and recovery time short.

Gastroesophageal Reflux

This condition is one of the most frequent causes of vomiting in the early
months of life. See here for a detailed discussion.

OceanofPDF.com

 Vomiting in the Older Infant

Vomiting in older babies is usually caused by an intestinal infection, such as
an intestinal flu called gastroenteritis (see here). Sometimes vomiting
accompanies common illnesses such as ear or throat infections, or more
serious conditions, such as urinary tract infections, pneumonia, meningitis,
encephalitis, and appendicitis. Vomiting due to intestinal infection is usually
accompanied by diarrhea, fever, abdominal pain, and sometimes cold
symptoms.

Treatment of Vomiting

Management is the same as for diarrhea (see here) and is mainly to prevent
dehydration caused by the loss of fluid and body salts in the vomitus. The
most effective way to ease the discomfort and prevent dehydration is to give
your baby Popsicles made with oral electrolyte solutions. This acts as a
slow drip into baby’s stomach. Offer small, frequent doses of fluid.
Sometimes it is necessary to give baby a teaspoon of liquid every five
minutes; any more than that may be rejected. If breastfeeding, offer one
breast at a feeding and feed more frequently but for a shorter time.

 Keep in mind it is normal for a child to vomit several times an hour for
the first few hours of any stomach or intestinal infection. Expect any fluids
you put into your child to just come right back up again. One helpful tip
during this initial severe phase is total stomach rest. Don’t even try to get
down any fluids until this phase is over. Some kids, on the other hand,
prefer to have a little bit of liquid to throw up rather than to dry-heave for
hours. Review the signs of dehydration (see here), and be especially
watchful for dehydration if the vomiting lasts more than a day and is
accompanied by diarrhea or if your child is becoming generally more ill.
Prescription antivomiting medications are available if the vomiting does not
subside.

BLOOD IN VOMITUS
Don’t be alarmed if you see an occasional blood-tinged vomitus. This
commonly happens with retching types of vomiting because of tiny tears in
the blood vessels lining the esophagus as the forceful fluid shoots by. This
usually is not serious and subsides quickly if you give your baby cold
liquids, especially ice chips and Popsicles. Call your doctor if the amount of
blood in the vomitus is increasing.
It is common for many vomiting illnesses to have a brief recurrence one
or two days after the initial vomiting subsides. This may be a sign that too
much food is being given too soon. Take a step back in your routine until
this second round of vomiting stops.

Food Poisoning

 More common in older children and adults than in babies, food poisoning
generally begins between four and twenty-four hours after the offending
meal. Baby retches (dry heaves) and experiences chills, but there is usually
no fever. You may also feel that baby has pain in his upper abdomen, but
when you press on it, it is soft, not tender, and baby usually does not protest
when you press on the lower abdomen. Give your child ice chips and
Popsicles made with oral electrolyte solutions and withhold all other food
(breastfeeding is fine), and the symptoms of food poisoning will usually
subside within six to eight hours, although it may persist for up to twentyfour hours. If baby is becoming dehydrated, call your doctor. (See “Signs of
Dehydration,” here.)

Intestinal Obstruction

When is vomiting a medical emergency? Rarely, intestines may become
twisted or the small intestine may telescope into the large intestine (called
an intussusception), and the intestines become obstructed. This is a medical
emergency demanding immediate medical and surgical attention. Here are
the general signs of intestinal obstruction:

 • sudden onset of severe colicky abdominal pain
• persistent dark green–stained vomiting, sometimes projectile
• obvious discomfort and sometimes agonizing pain, but may be
intermittent rather than constant
• absence of bowel movements
• pale and sweaty skin
• signs worsening rather than improving

When to call your doctor after hours for vomiting. It is rarely necessary
to page your doctor after hours during the first few hours of vomiting.
Here are situations that do warrant a call to your doctor after hours:
• The vomiting is occurring several times an hour and you want to try a
prescription anti-vomiting suppository (not generally used in infants
under two years).
• Your child is severely dehydrated (see here).
• Your child has symptoms of intestinal obstruction (see above),
meningitis, pneumonia, bladder infection, appendicitis (see here,
“Childhood Illnesses at a Glance,” for more on these), or you feel your
child is seriously ill.

At the doctor’s office. Your doctor may not be able to tell you exactly what
the cause of the vomiting is. His or her main task is to make sure it is not
one of the above worrisome causes, determine the degree of dehydration
(and whether or not a trip to the ER for IV fluids is needed), and prescribe
anti-vomiting medication if needed.

 OceanofPDF.com

 CONSTIPATION
Constipation refers to the compactness of the stools and the difficulty
passing them, not the frequency of bowel movements. Consistency and
number of stools varies according to age and from baby to baby. In general,
newborns have several stools a day that are soft and the consistency of
seedy mustard, especially if breastfed. Formula-fed infants usually have
fewer and firmer stools. Some breast- or formula-fed infants may have a
bowel movement only once every few days. As long as it passes fairly
easily and without too much discomfort, this is not considered constipation.
Once solid food enters the diet, the stools become more formed and less
frequent, and some babies may have a bowel movement without difficulty
only once every three days.
Normally, as digested food travels down the intestines, water and
nutrients are absorbed, and the waste material becomes stools. For a soft
stool to form, enough water must remain in the waste material, and the
lower intestinal and rectal muscles must contract and relax to move the
stool along and out. Malfunction of either of these mechanisms, too little
water or poor muscle movement, can cause constipation. Being plugged up
with hard stool for three days can be very uncomfortable. In fact, we did not
appreciate this until we strained along with one of our babies, who was

 constipated for the first two years of his life. As Martha would help him
produce a bowel movement, she would proclaim, “I feel like a midwife.”
Constipation often becomes a self-perpetuating problem. Hard stools
cause pain on passage; consequently, baby holds on. The longer the stool
remains, the harder it becomes—which makes it even more painful to pass.
And the longer the large stool stretches the intestines, the weaker their
muscle tone becomes. To complicate matters, passage of a hard stool
through a narrow rectum often tears the rectal wall (called a rectal fissure),
accounting for the streaks of blood. This painful tear prompts baby even
more not to want to have a bowel movement.
To tell if your baby is constipated, look for the following signs:
• in a newborn, firm stools less than once a day with straining and
difficulty passing them
• dry, hard, large stools and pain on passing them
• hard, pebblelike stools passed by a baby who strains during a bowel
movement, drawing her legs up on her abdomen, grunting, and getting
red faced
• streaks of blood along the outside of the stool
• abdominal discomfort along with hard, infrequent stools

OceanofPDF.com

 Finding the Cause

New foods or milks can set off constipation. Has your baby begun new
foods, such as rice cereal, switched from breast milk to formula, or formula
to cow’s milk? If you suspect a food or milk change as the culprit, return to
the looser-stool diet. For bottlefed infants, consider experimenting with
various formulas to find the one that is kindest to the stools. Also, give your
formula-fed baby an extra bottle of water a day.
The cause could also be emotional. Is your toddler going through a
negative phase or emotional upset that may cause reluctance to have a
bowel movement? When a person is upset, his or her intestinal functions
may be upset, showing either diarrhea or constipation.

OceanofPDF.com

 Treating Constipation

Lessen constipating foods. White rice, white bread, rice cereal, bananas,
apples, cooked carrots, milk, and cheese are potential constipators, though
food effects vary widely among babies. (See “Constipation When Starting
Solids,” here).
Add fiber foods to baby’s diet. Fiber softens the stools by drawing water
into them, making them bulkier and easier to pass. Fiber foods for older
babies are bran and barley cereals, graham crackers, whole-grain breads and
crackers, and high-fiber vegetables such as peas, broccoli, and beans.
Laxative fruits are apricots, prunes, plums, and peaches.
Give baby more water. Here is the most often forgotten, least expensive,
and most readily available stool softener. Extra water must accompany extra
fiber. Otherwise, fiber can make stools harder rather than softer.
Try glycerin suppositories. As they are going through a phase of learning
how to have a bowel movement, many babies in their early months grunt
and draw up their legs to push out a stool. But the straining baby may
appreciate a little outside help with a well-timed, well-placed glycerin
suppository. Available without prescription at your pharmacy, these look
like tiny rocket ships. If your baby is straining, insert one as far into the

 rectum as you can and hold baby’s buttocks together for a few minutes to
dissolve the glycerin. These are especially helpful to lubricate the rectum if
baby has a rectal tear. Don’t use for more than a few days without your
doctor’s advice. For newborns through six months, cut a pediatric
suppository in half lengthwise.
Use a laxative. When using a laxative, try the most natural first. Begin with
diluted prune juice (half and half with water), 1 or 2 tablespoons (15 to 30
milliliters) for the four-month-old and as much as 8 ounces (240 milliliters)
for the toddler. Try strained prunes or make a prune puree (stew your own
or buy commercial), either straight or disguised (mixed with a favorite
food), or spread it on a high-fiber cracker. Apricots and the three P’s—
prunes, plums, and peaches—usually exert a laxative effect. If these seem
insufficient, here are other ideas to try:

 • Flaxseed meal and psyllium husks (basically, very fine flakes of psyllium
bran) are natural-fiber stool softeners available at nutrition stores. These
bland laxatives are sprinkled on cereal or combined with a fruit-andyogurt mixture. Try 2 teaspoons a day for a six-month-old; for toddlers,
try 1 or 2 tablespoons a day.
• Nonprescription laxatives such as Maltsupex (a malt-barley extract) may
soften your infant’s stool. In the baby from one to two years, give 1
tablespoon a day mixed with 8 ounces water or juice. As the stools
soften, cut back on the dose.
• One of the most successful laxatives we have prescribed in our pediatric
practice is flaxseed oil. Whereas flaxseed meal contains both the oil and
the fiber and is therefore also a useful laxative, young infants may prefer
the smooth texture of the oil over the grainy texture of the meal. Besides
being a natural laxative, this oil is a rich source of omega-3 fats and
provides extra calories for those picky-eater toddlers. Start with 1
teaspoon per day for the six-month-old, or a tablespoon a day for a oneto two-year-old. Most infants and toddlers won’t take flax oil straight, so
mix it in pureed fruit, a fruit-and-yogurt smoothie, or in barley cereal.
Unlike the commonly used laxative mineral oil, which provides no
nutritional value and may take vitamins with it as it slides through the
intestines, flax oil is a nutrient that facilitates the absorption of many
vitamins. For this reason, we recommend flax oil over mineral oil as an
effective and nutritious laxative for infants and children.
• Laxative suppositories (glycerin suppositories containing a laxative
ingredient) may be used with your doctor’s permission if the constipation
is severe and resistant to the preceding simpler measures. Another way to
treat constipation from below is with liquid glycerin (Baby Lax) gently
inserted by dropper into baby’s rectum.

Try an enema. Baby Fleet enema may be tried if your toddler is miserably
constipated and nothing else is working. It is available without prescription,
and directions are on the package insert.

 Be sure to continue to try dietary manipulations and natural food laxatives
so your baby does not become dependent upon suppositories or other
laxatives. Fortunately, as the wisdom of baby’s body sorts out which foods
are intestinal friendly and learns to respond more quickly to bowel signals,
this uncomfortable problem will pass.

Chronic Constipation in the Older Toddler

The above principles and treatments apply to older toddlers as well as to
infants. However, there are some differences in the physiology of the older
toddler’s colon that parents must understand when dealing with chronic
constipation.
The normal colon. Normally the colon slowly fills up with stool. When it
gets stretched to a certain point, the colon sends nerve signals to itself (and
to the brain) that cause it to naturally contract to push the stool out. This is
the sensation we get when we feel we need to have a bowel movement. This
normally occurs one to three times each day.
The constipated colon. A chronically stretched colon, as occurs when stool
is not routinely pushed out, will stop sending nerve signals to itself or to the
brain. The child will therefore not get the urge to pass the stool. This is a
chronic cycle that gets increasingly worse.

 Treating chronic constipation. When using the above principles to soften
the stool and increase bowel movements, continue the treatments for at least
two months. Your goal is to help the colon shrink back down to its normal
size, so that it will start sending signals again when it gets stretched. It takes
two or three months for this resetting of the colon’s stretch point to occur.

Dr. Jim notes: Don’t force your child to sit for hours on the toilet. Your
child can go only when the colon is naturally contracting. The best time to
encourage a bowel movement is when you see your child trying to hold it in.
This means he is getting a signal but fighting it. And remember, rectal
muscles relax when the feet are planted squarely on the floor, whereas
dangling feet tighten rectal muscles and make it harder to go.

OceanofPDF.com

 TRACKING

AND

TREATING

INHALANT

ALLERGIES
Many of the substances in the air around baby are unwelcome in the
breathing passages, and the body reacts by uncomfortable signs we call
allergies. The fight that occurs when an allergen enters the body through the
air is similar to the struggle described in detail under food allergies, here.
Sneezes, wheezes, drips, and itches are frequent nuisances in the life of an
allergic child. The good news is that parents can help.

OceanofPDF.com

 Is Your Child Allergic? How to Tell

All of the common signs of respiratory allergies are listed here. Inhalant
allergies often have a seasonal variation, and the following signs and
symptoms are the most frequent ones your child is likely to show:
• clear runny nose and watery eyes
• bouts of sneezing in quick succession
• constant sniffing
• nosebleeds
• a crease on the top of nose from frequent wiping (called the allergic
salute)
• dark circles under the eyes (allergic shiners)
• frequent colds and/or ear infections
• night cough and a stuffy nose in the morning
• noisy breathing at night
• coughing during exercise
• lingering cough, often rattling or wheezy

A TIP FOR ALLERGY DETECTIVES
If you suspect that your child is allergic to something in the environment
but you are uncertain, take a vacation. If your child’s usual allergic signs
and symptoms subside or change, you can bet he is allergic to something
around the house.

 Is it an allergy or a cold? In both cases little noses run and little chests
cough. But if you have to decide whether your child is able to attend day
care, see “Colds Versus Allergies,” here. If you can’t determine whether it’s
allergies or a cold from the immediate symptoms, then you will just have to
give it time. If symptoms persist for more than several weeks, then allergies
are more likely. It is not imperative that you distinguish between the two
conditions in the short term, since treatment to relieve the symptoms is the
same. (See “Treating Colds,” here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Tracking Down Your Baby’s Allergies

Decide first how much of a problem your baby’s allergies are. Are they
simply a noisy nuisance that time and a ton of tissues will wipe away? If so,
don’t delve into the time-consuming world of allergy prevention. Or are the
allergies interfering with your baby’s normal growth, development, and
behavior? As your baby’s allergy detective, try to find out the most probable
allergens that trigger the allergic signs. Here are the four most common
categories of inhalant allergies and what to do about them.
Pollens. Suspect these if your baby’s allergies are seasonal, occurring when
the pollen count is high, during windy days, and when your allergic friends
are also dripping and sneezing. If outside pollens are the suspect, try the
following:

 • Keep baby indoors on the windy days of pollen season. You can access
local pollen count information on the Internet.
• Avoid places where pollens and other allergens are prevalent—for
example, weedy and flowery fields.
• Keep the windows closed, at least in baby’s sleeping room.
• To remove the pollen, bathe baby and wash her hair before bedtime;
launder the pollen out of clothing.
• Consider air-conditioning and an air-filtering system for a bedroom or the
whole house if the allergies are severe.
• When driving, keep windows closed.
• Don’t hang bedding or clothes outside; they become pollen catchers.

Animal dander. Next, suspect the family cat, dog, bird, or the neighbor’s
pet. Does your baby sneeze, drip, or wheeze when playing with a pet? If a
pet is suspected, at least banish him from the room where baby sleeps.
Contrary to what you may think, it is not the animal hair that is allergenic, it
is the dander (skin shedding) that triggers allergies. Oftentimes baby can
play with his allergenic pet outdoors without suffering allergies but begins
to sneeze as soon as the pair snuggle together indoors. Again, how much
you need to separate baby and pet depends upon how much the allergies
bother baby. If you have a strong family history of allergies or baby has
other allergies, it would be wise, before acquiring a pet, to let baby and
prospective pet hang around each other (indoors) for a test sniff. All dogs
and cats are potentially allergenic, but some breeds seem more so than
others. If you are a very allergic family, think goldfish.

 Molds. The spores of plants that thrive in dark, cool, damp places are called
mold or mildew. Molds are found in cellars, closets, attics, piles of clothing
in corners, old mattresses, pillows and blankets, baskets, damp carpet,
garbage cans, shower curtains, shower stalls, bathroom tiles (especially
damp corners), and houseplants. A frequently overlooked source of molds
spewing out into the bedroom is a humidifier (see discussion of humidifiers
and vaporizers, here). Outdoor sites of molds are piles of damp, dead grass,
leaves, or stacked firewood. To demold your baby’s sleeping or playing
environment:
• Air out and clean all of the mold sites mentioned above. Use a moldkilling disinfectant such as bleach (keep out of a toddler’s reach) to clean
mold areas.
• Close windows that are near mold-producing or pollen-shedding shrubs.
Also, clear damp piles of debris in the yard, and prune the shrubbery.
• Remove carpet and wallpaper that are damp from recent water leaks.
• If you run a humidifier during months of central heating, there’s likely to
be mold on the draperies or wallpaper. In this case, clean the drapery
frequently and remove the wallpaper.

HOW TO ALLERGYPROOF A BEDROOM
The Bedding

 • Encase mattress, box springs, and pillow with dustproof zippered covers.
• Avoid down or feather pillows and comforters. Also avoid kapok or
foam-rubber pillows (foam may grow mold if damp). Purchase
nonallergenic pillows and coverings made with polyester materials.
• Defuzz baby’s immediate sleeping environment: Remove fuzzy stuffed
animals and furry toys from baby’s crib or bed and from the bedroom if
baby is highly allergic. Tuck them away in a garbage bag in the garage. If
your child is attached to a fuzzy favorite, choose one that can be
frequently washed. Replace wool blankets and sleepwear with synthetics
or cotton and wash frequently. Air and vacuum the mattress and wash
pillowcases, mattress pads, and blankets in hot water at least every one or
two weeks.
• Avoid stuffing items under the bed for storage.
• Move the crib or bed far away from the window (if open) and away from
air vents.
Bedroom Furnishings

 • Replace fabric and upholstered chairs with plastic, wood, or canvas.
• Use throw rugs on a wooden or linoleum floor and wash the rugs
frequently. Avoid plush carpet if possible.
• Avoid ornate furniture with dust-collecting crevices.
• Avoid books or bookshelves, which are sure dust catchers.
• Don’t use the bedroom as a storeroom.
• Avoid piling clothes about the room. Keep all dust-collecting clothes and
other items in closets and keep the closet door closed.
• Roll-up window shades are preferable to the more dust-collecting blinds.
• Use easily washed cotton curtains—no draperies, please.
• Check how allergenic the furniture material is. A subtle allergen is the
form board made with formaldehyde that may be used in the construction
of beds or other furniture. Check with the manufacturer.
Ventilation and Air Purifying

• Keep the door to the bedroom closed and the pet out.
• Keep the windows closed during pollen season.
• Put filters or cheesecloth over air vents; best is to close the one in baby’s
bedroom.
• Avoid electric fans; they collect and circulate dust.
• Consider an air filter; there are two types: HEPA (high efficiency
particulate accumulator) and ionic (preferably one that doesn’t use
ozone). These remove dust mite sheddings, pollens, molds, spores,
animal dander, and many of the irritants from smoke and fumes. The cost
of air cleaners may be covered by your insurance if you have a doctor’s
prescription.
Cleaning Tips

 • Do not vacuum when your baby is in the room, because vacuum cleaners
spread dust. Air the room after vacuuming. Use a tank-type vacuum
cleaner with a water filter to prevent some dust and mites from reentering
the room. Best is a HEPA dustless vacuum cleaner, which both picks up
and retains the invisible dust allergens.
• Wet dusting is better than dry.
• Damp-mop the floor with a mold-killing disinfectant, such as a bleach
solution.
• Banish smokers from your home.
• Beware of other allergens and irritants in the air: cooking odors,
deodorizers, air fresheners, fireplace smoke, houseplants, perfumes, baby
powders, cosmetics, mothballs, and insect sprays.
Seldom do parents have to go to such great lengths to make their baby’s
environment allergy-free. But for highly allergic babies most of the above
allergyproofing tips are required. Consult your doctor or pediatric allergist
for other suggestions in tracking down and dealing with your baby’s
allergies.
One clue that mold is your child’s allergy trigger is that symptoms flare
during heavy rains (when mold thrives). The extent of your mold mowing
depends on the severity of baby’s allergies. Most persons and a little bit of
mold coexist well together. An environmental testing company can test your
house to see if mold is a problem. In some cases, the mold is too extensive
to clean up, and you may need to move. Usually, however, the company can
assist you in cleaning up the mold enough to decrease your family’s
exposure to a healthy level.
Dust. The allergens on dust are caused by tiny insects called dust mites.
These critters are like microscopic crumbs and live among the dust in

 carpets, bedding, and upholstered furniture. They thrive in warm, humid
environments and feed on the flakes of skin humans continuously shed. The
mites excrete tiny pellets that float through the air into a person’s allergyprone respiratory tract. It’s this excrement that triggers allergies, not the
dust or the mite itself. But lessening dust does help control the allergenic
substances. Acarosan powder can be applied to carpets to kill dust mites and
to neutralize their allergenic sheddings and make them easier to remove by
vacuuming. Ask your allergist about this product.
A dust-free home is as impossible to achieve as a constantly clear nose.
But there are ways to minimize dust and defuzz your baby’s environment.
Again, remember the severity of your defuzzing is proportional to the
severity of baby’s allergies. Don’t overdo dust prevention for a mildly
allergic child. Begin in the bedroom if your baby has a lot of nighttime
breathing noises and awakens in the morning with a stuffy nose. (See here
for how to allergyproof a bedroom.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Allergies at School

If your child’s symptoms are worse at school, here are several causes to
consider:
• Cockroaches in lockers or other areas. Their feces can trigger allergies.
• Pets in the classroom. Sometimes the class gerbil, rabbit, or other rodent
may be the culprit. Ask the teacher to have someone take the pet home
for two weeks and see if your child’s symptoms improve.
• Dust mites and mold. Talk to the school principal about how to detect
and correct any possible sources.
• Plants and grasses. There may be specific grass or pollens present only at
school. Unfortunately, it is difficult to prevent exposure to these.

OceanofPDF.com

 Seeing an Allergy Specialist

If your child’s symptoms do not improve after you have done your own
investigating and prevention, an allergist can perform skin testing to see
which specific things your child is allergic to. This will help you focus your
preventive measures on specific allergens, instead of trying to prevent
everything. Blood testing for allergies is also available through your
pediatrician.

OceanofPDF.com

 Medications for Allergies

Antihistamines are used more in older children and adults but are also
available for babies. Better is to use the nonmedication tips for nasal
hygiene and move secretions along (see here). Depending upon the severity
of your baby’s allergies, your doctor or allergist can suggest a safe and
effective medical regimen.

OceanofPDF.com

 ECZEMA
Eczema, or atopic dermatitis, is the most common rash of infancy and
childhood. It is caused by a combination of a genetically hyperactive
immune system that makes the skin react to foods and the environment, a
genetic tendency toward dry skin, and specific allergens. The rash shows up
as:
• Dry skin. You may feel tiny white bumps as you run your fingers across
the rough skin.
• Dry patches. Scaly, dry, white, or bumpy red patches appear anywhere on
the body.
• Flare-ups. From time to time, especially during winter, some areas of the
skin become more irritated and flare up into raised, red, slightly oozing
patches. These generally occur near skin creases, most commonly the
inside of the elbows and behind the knees, but also on the neck, wrists,
hands, and feet.

OceanofPDF.com

 Treating Eczema

If the eczema appears in only a few mild patches and is not bothering your
child, you can just leave it alone. If, on the other hand, it is more significant,
then follow the recommendations below. Treatment is aimed at both
lubricating the dry skin and removing allergic and irritating triggers.

Moisturize and Avoid Skin Irritants

Apply a hypoallergenic, unscented moisturizing lotion or cream to your
child’s skin two or more times each day. There are dozens of brand names,
and no one is best for every child. Experiment with different lotions until
you find one that works and is tolerated by your child. Those containing
jojoba oil, shea butter, and cocoa butter are effective. Try these tips for
avoiding dry skin:

 • Avoid hot baths, which rob the skin of its natural oils. Bathe your child in
lukewarm water.
• Do not let your child sit in soapy water or bubble baths.
• Gently pat the skin dry with a towel. Do not rub.
• Do not use soap, even liquid baby soap. This can dry the skin. Instead,
use a hypoallergenic, unscented moisturizing bar like Dove.
• Maintain a humidity around 40 percent in your home. (Higher than 50
percent may cause mold.) Use a humidity gauge if needed for accuracy.
Run a humidifier, air conditioner, or both during dry weather. During the
winter months, when using central heating, run a humidifier as needed.
• Avoid wool and synthetic materials. They can be more abrasive and
irritating to the skin. Organic cotton clothing is best.
• Use cotton sheets and soft, cotton blankets.
• Wash new clothes before your child wears them. This will get out any
chemicals from the manufacturing process.
• Use a mild, dye-free and perfume-free detergent such as Dreft, Ivory
Snow, or All Clear. Liquid detergents rinse out better. Double rinse the
wash to get out all the detergent. Avoid using fabric softener and dryer
sheets.
• Bathe your child after she plays in the grass or engages in activities that
make her sweaty.
• Apply a suntan lotion that doesn’t irritate your child’s skin. PABA-free is
better.
• Dress your child in loose-fitting clothes with long sleeves and pants.

Feed and Water the Skin

 In our pediatric office we have seen amazing results by feeding infants with
eczema or dry skin a diet rich in omega-3 fats, or by increasing the omega3s in the diet of a breastfeeding mother. Also, hydrate your infant by
encouraging him to drink several extra glasses or bottles of water a day.

Investigate and Avoid Allergic Triggers

If you can pinpoint and avoid any allergens that may cause or worsen the
eczema, then you should see a dramatic improvement in your child’s
eczema.

BABY SKIN CARE: WHAT EVERY PARENT
SHOULD KNOW
Keeping your baby’s skin healthy means not only what you put onto it but
what you put into it. Try these tips for keeping your baby’s skin looking and
feeling healthy:

 1. Feed baby’s skin. The best foods for skin are those that both improve
its natural oils and decrease inflammation or itchy and scaly rashes. We
call these the five S’s: salmon, salads, smoothies, spices (e.g., turmeric
and black pepper), and supplements (e.g., fish oil and fruit and
vegetable extracts). Keep your baby’s skin well hydrated with lots of
fluids.
2. Moisturize baby’s skin. Think of using moisturizers as dressing your
baby’s skin with a protective layer of clothing, especially during the dry
and dehydrating winter months of central heating. Use what we call the
soak-and-seal method. After giving your baby a bath, leave the skin
slightly damp. Apply a moisturizing ointment or oil to the skin to seal in
the moisture.
3. Use emollients instead of powders. Powders tend to cake in the skin
folds and can actually make rashes worse. Besides, if inhaled, powders
can irritate baby’s sensitive respiratory passages.
(See related section on sun protection, here.)
Food allergies. The six most common foods that trigger allergies are dairy
products (milk, yogurt, cheese, butter), eggs, soy, peanuts, fish, and wheat
gluten. Eliminate all six foods for two to three weeks. If you see a dramatic
improvement, reintroduce each food one at a time to determine which one is
causing the allergy. Breastfeeding moms should also try this with their own
diet if their infant has eczema. If using formula, try a different one. (See
here for types of formula, and here for more on food allergies.)
Environmental allergies. Dust, mold, pets, and seasonal outdoor allergies
such as pollens are more likely to cause nasal allergies and asthma rather
than eczema. They can, however, contribute to eczema.

 Relieve the Itching

Follow these steps to minimize the itching:
• Hydrocortisone cream. During a flare-up, you can apply extra-strength
over-the-counter hydrocortisone cream to problem areas twice a day for
several days. Your doctor can also prescribe a stronger cream if needed.
(Don’t use prescription-strength cortisone cream on the sensitive skin of
baby’s face without the approval of your doctor.)
• Oral antihistamines. Available over the counter and by prescription, this
medication can dramatically relieve the itching, especially at night.
Consult your doctor before giving medication to your child.
• Keep your baby’s fingernails cut short and clean them regularly.
Most children outgrow their eczema during childhood. Some, however,
will continue to live with this condition into adulthood.

OceanofPDF.com

 QUESTIONS PARENTS HAVE ABOUT AIDS
Compared with many other infectious diseases, AIDS is relatively uncommon among infants. But
it’s high on parents’ worry lists. Despite the hype about AIDS in the media, 99.95 percent of the
U.S. population are HIV-negative. It’s estimated that HIV-positive mothers represent only around
0.01 percent of women giving birth in the United States. AIDS stands for “acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome” and is caused by the human immunodeficiency virus, or HIV. This
virus incapacitates the immune system, making the body vulnerable to overwhelming infections
such as pneumonia and infections of the blood. In infants, AIDS may also cause abnormalities in
brain development, failure to thrive, tumors, and is eventually fatal. Here are the most common
questions parents have about AIDS.
How can my baby contract AIDS?
AIDS can only be transmitted in these ways:
• sexual intercourse
• blood transfusions
• infected hypodermic needle
• infected mother to her baby during pregnancy or possibly through breast milk
AIDS cannot be contracted from

 • saliva
• tears
• coughing
• sneezing
• sweat
• utensils
• dishes
• toilet seats
• pets
• flies
• mosquitoes
• excrement
• swimming pools
• clothing

Can my baby get AIDS from playing with an AIDS-infected baby?
No. The AIDS virus does not spread through the air or casual daily contact. As a testimony to how
difficult it is to transfer the AIDS virus among children, studies have shown that children who live
with AIDS-infected siblings have not been infected with AIDS, even though they share toys,
toothbrushes, drinking glasses, and so on.
Could my baby contract AIDS at a day-care center?
Babies have caught just about every other infectious disease in a day-care center, but not AIDS.
AIDS cannot be contracted by a hug or a kiss, and AIDS experts feel that transmitting AIDS
through a child’s bite would be extremely unlikely. Even if an AIDS-infected baby gets cut, the
infected blood would have to be injected into the blood of another child, perhaps through an open
wound. Though theoretically possible, this coincidence would be highly unlikely.
Can babies get AIDS from pets or toys?
No. The AIDS virus can only survive in a human body. Even toys that might be contaminated with
infected blood can be disinfected with simple household bleach.

 Can an AIDS-infected pregnant mother transmit AIDS to her preborn baby?
Yes, studies estimate she has approximately a 30–50 percent chance of such transmission, yet this
transmission is often preventable with medication.
Could my baby get AIDS from a blood transfusion?
At present the risk is negligible. With current blood-screening techniques, the Red Cross estimates
the chances range from one in forty thousand to one in one million. Since this risk will still bother
you, if baby needs a blood transfusion blood can be donated by you or a family member or a
friend with compatible blood type.
Can AIDS be transmitted from an infected mother to her baby through breast milk?
New insights have shown that HIV-positive mothers should not always be discouraged from
breastfeeding their babies for fear of transmitting this infection through their milk. Though the
science of HIV-transmission is clouded by emotion and politics, it seems that the risk of maternalinfant transmission through breastfeeding is much lower than previously suspected. The risk of
transmitting AIDS through breast milk is definitely lower than the risk of transmitting it through
the blood during birth. In light of recent research, we advise an HIV-positive mother to consult an
HIV specialist before concluding that she absolutely cannot breastfeed her baby.
Would it be safe for me to be a foster parent for an AIDS-infected baby?
Yes. As in school or day care, the chance of an AIDS-infected baby transmitting the virus to
family members, friends, or foster parents is, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics
Task Force on Pediatric AIDS, “virtually nonexistent.”
Researchers are prudently working to formulate both a safe and effective drug to cure AIDS
and a vaccine to prevent it. For now, the best way to prevent AIDS in babies is to prevent it in
adults.

CHILDHOOD ILLNESSES AT A GLANCE

 Illness

Cause

Signs
and Home
Symptoms
Treatment

Medical
Treatment

Of
Note

Special

Appendicitis

Inflammation Abdominal
None;
pain; may begin observation
as general pain
in middle, then
confines itself
to lower-right
part
of
abdomen;
becomes
increasingly
severe;
fever
and lack of
appetite usual;
vomiting
possible;
extreme
pain
when
lowerright abdomen
is pushed on

Asthma
(wheezing)

Food
or Whistling,
Rest,
For
asthma A
few
environmental crackling sound relaxation;
attack:
episodes
of
allergies; lung during
upright sleep if prescription
wheezing
infections
exhalation; may possible; steam albuterol
does not mean
occur
during treatments in inhaler (to relax asthma;
inhalation
if bathroom; clap and
expand “asthma”
more
severe; on chest to lung airways) means chronic
may
worsen encourage
every
3–4 or recurrent
with exercise or coughing; for hours; steroid wheezing
during coughs chronic asthma liquid or pills if episodes
and colds; may try food-allergy severe.
For
just be a tight, and
chronic
frequent cough environmental- asthma: allergy
without audible allergy
avoidance and
wheezing; may avoidance; for testing; daily
have
other breastfed
preventive
allergic signs; infants avoid steroid
or
asthma attack is dairy and other antihistamine
wheezing with allergens
in inhaler; allergy
fast,
labored mom’s
diet; medications

Evaluation by Consider
doctor or ER: other causes,
blood
work, such as severe
urine test, X gas
pain,
ray,
or bladder
ultrasound may infection, or
or may not severe
confirm
constipation
diagnosis;
surgery
if
confirmed or
highly
suspected

 breathing and change formula
indrawn
skin to soy or other
over the neck, formula; nonribs, and upper prescription
abdomen
expectorants
Bladder
infection

Bacteria

Boils

Bacteria,
Raised,
red, Apply
hot May incise and Avoid
usually
tender,
warm compresses 10 drain;
squeezing or
staphyloswellings
on times daily for prescription
picking
to
coccus; may skin; common a few minutes antibiotic
avoid scarring
arise from an on buttocks
to bring boil to ointment after and spreading
infected
head; continue draining; oral
pimple
a few days antibiotics may
after boil pops be needed
and
drains;
keep covered
until drainage
stops

Bronchiolitis Virus
(spasm
and RSV
inflammation of
small airways;

Three
classic Plenty
of Urinalysis and Urinalysis
urinary signs: fluids; 1 cup urine culture (if may
reveal
frequency—
cranberry juice needed)
to infection; if
urination one or (or a cranberry diagnose
not,
urine
more times per mixed
juice) infection;
culture may
hour; urgency— once or twice antibiotics
if take up to 48
feeling
of per day
infection
hours
to
needing
to
suspected
or confirm
urinate
is
confirmed;
infection
extremely
continue
urgent;
may
cranberry juice
have
and fluids
“accidents”;
burning during
urination.
Accompanying
fever, back or
side pain, and
vomiting may
indicate more
severe kidney
infection

called Like
“baby Comfort and Prescription
If baby is a
asthma,” rapid, calm
baby; albuterol
(to “happy
shallow, noisy, induce
sleep relax
and wheezer,” no
labored
with
baby expand
lung treatment may

 usually
in
usually
in
infants under 1
year)

breathing; tight propped up 45 airways) can be be
needed;
cough; paleness, degrees;
liquid
by minor
fatigue, anxiety; nonprescription mouth, inhaler recurrences
cold symptoms expectorant to with mask, or common with
loosen
chest nebulizer (turns subsequent
congestion;
medicine into a colds
increase fluids, mist that is
give
small inhaled);
if
frequent
severe,
feedings;
try hospitalization
chest clapping; with
oxygen
steam
in therapy
bathroom

Bronchitis
Usually virus Cold symptoms, Rest,
Prescription- Most
(spasm
and or
allergies; low
fever relaxation;
strength cough bronchitis in
inflammation of sometimes
(101°–102°F/ upright sleep if medicine
at infants
and
the
large bacteria
38.3°–38.9°C), possible;
night if needed; children
is
airways;
any
deep,
junky frequent steam antibiotics for viral, so no
age)
chest
cough, treatments in bacterial
antibiotics
worse at night, bathroom;
infection
if needed;
if
paleness,
steam
severe
chest
pains
tiredness; child vaporizer while
during
may
also sleeping; clap
coughing are
wheeze, as with on
chest
prolonged or
asthma
nonprescription
fever
lasts
expectorants
several days
during
day;
may
be
multisymptom
bacterial
cough
medicine
at
night for kids 4
and older
Cellulitis
Bacterial
Swollen,
red, Apply
hot Antibiotics;
Mark borders
(infection of the infection,
tender,
warm compresses for oral if mild, by of
infection
skin)
usually
area of skin a few minutes injection twice with
pen;
staphylococcus usually
on every 2 hours; daily
if notify doctor
or
extremities,
elevate infected moderate,
if continuing
streptococcus buttocks
or area;
intravenous in to spread
eyelids; often acetaminophen hospital
if
begins
as for fever and severe;
may
puncture
pain
need
blood
wound, scratch,
tests to evaluate
or boil; local
severity
lymph glands

 swollen
and
tender; fever if
more severe
Chicken pox

Virus
Flulike
Cut fingernails Prescription
Transmitted
(incubation 7– symptoms,
and wear long antihistamine by prolonged
21 days)
fever
clothes
to for
severe close
101°F/38.3°C; avoid
itching;
proximity;
rash on trunk scratching; for antiviral
contagious
begins
like itching,
use medication
until all sores
bites,
rapidly oatmeal baths, may
shorten are scabbed;
forms blisters calamine lotion course
and sun exposure
and
spreads (do not apply severity
if may increase
over trunk, face, to open sores started within scarring
mouth,
then on face—may 72
hours;
extremities;
scar); give oral antibiotics for
then scabs; rash Benadryl for widespread
in
different intense itching; infected sores
stages at same antibiotic
time; itchy; new ointment
for
spots pop up infected sores
daily for several
days and go
through these
changes;
difficult
to
diagnose on day
1
of
rash;
assume
contagious
while waiting 2
to 3 days to
observe if spots
change as above

Conjunctivitis Virus, bacteria, Viral: red eyes, Wash out eyes Viral:
saline Bacterial and
(pinkeye)
allergies,
or occasional
with
saline eyedrops.
viral
both
environmental discharge.
eyedrops
Bacterial: pre- mildly
irritants
Bacterial: red several times scription
contagious
eyes, persistent each day; warm antibiotic drops until redness
discharge,
washcloth
or
ointment. and discharge
swollen eyelids. compresses; for Allergic:
gone;
in
Allergic:
red, allergy,
nonprescription newborns and
itchy,
tearing nonprescription antihistamine infants, daily
eyes,
maybe antihistamine eyedrops.
discharge
white discharge. eyedrops
Irritant: flush without

 Irritant:
red,
burning, maybe
white discharge

Diphtheria

Bacteria
Severe,
Give
fluids, Prevention with Rare,
(incubation 2– obstructive
Popsicles,
DTaP vaccine; especially in
5 days)
tonsillitis; white bland diet; use antibiotics;
immunized
membrane
mist
hospitalization countries
covers tonsils;
fever; difficulty
breathing and
swallowing

Epiglottitis
Bacterial
(life-threatening infection,
swelling of the usually
larynx
[voice influenzae
box],
(HIB)
obstructing
passage of air
into windpipe)

Fifth disease

repeatedly with redness may
saline solution be caused by
plugged tear
ducts
(see
here)

Virus

Fever
Medical
Hospitalization, Differs from
103°F/39.4°C; emergency:
ICU
croup (here):
H. baby
looks rush
to observation;
with
panicky and acts hospital, call antibiotics;
epiglottitis,
sick, behaves as doctor;
calm oxygen, mist, child sicker,
if
choking child and open intravenous,
higher fever,
(leans forwards, windows in car inhalation
drooling,
protrudes
en route; don’t therapy;
difficulty
tongue, opens feed; sit baby sometimes
swallowing;
mouth, drools); up to breathe lifesaving tube child
looks
prolonged sealput
through panicky and
like
noise
mouth
into hungry for air;
during exhaling;
airway;
HIB usually,
but
indraws while
vaccine lowers not
always,
inhaling; rapidly
risk
occurs in child
worsens
over 2 years;
now
rare
because
of
HIB vaccine
Bright red rash Treat fever and None necessary Keep
away
begins
on any
other
from pregnant
cheeks;
symptoms as
women,
as
“slapped cheek” needed
can
cause
look; lacelike
miscarriages,
red rash on
especially in
trunk
and
first trimester
extremities may
if
exposed
fluctuate for 1–3
woman
not
weeks; possible
immune; most
slight
fever;
contagious at

 sore
joints;
possible
cold
symptoms

onset of rash
or fever until
child
no
longer feeling
ill;
residual
rash probably
not contagious

Flu (influenza) Virus
Fever (may be Give sips of Flu
vaccine Doctor’s
(incubation
high),
body liquids,
ice strongly
exam helpful
period
1–3 aches, vomiting, chips,
recommended to rule out
days)
diarrhea, sore Popsicles, oral for
children secondary
throat,
electrolyte
with
chronic infection; clue
headache,
solutions, small illnesses: heart, that it is the
cough,
runny frequent
lung;
the flu is presence
nose, red eyes; feedings,
vaccine is also of several of
infant
looks acetaminophen; useful
in the
above
unwell,
but treat
most preventing the signs together
illness not toxic; bothersome
flu even in
can
begin symptoms with healthy infants
quickly; worst multi-symptom over
six
symptoms
cold and flu months of age;
slowly resolve medication in antibiotic given
over
several children
4 if
secondary
days, cough and years and older infection; may
cold symptoms
lead
to
may linger
complications
such
as
bronchitis,
pneumonia, or
ear infection;
antiviral
flu
medicines
rarely used in
young children;
prescription
suppositories to
stop vomiting
if needed
German
Rubella virus Low-grade
Treat like flu; Prevention with Keep
away
measles
(incubation
fever
100°– baby not that MMR vaccine; from pregnant
(rubella, 3-day period 14–21 101°F/37.8°– sick
exam
to women,
as
measles)
days)
38.3°C,
baby
confirm
can
cause
mildly
sick;
diagnosis; may birth defects
flulike,
slight
resemble other (85 percent of

 cold; pinkishred-spotted rash
begins on face,
spreads rapidly
to trunk, and
disappears by
third
day;
swollen glands
behind
ears,
nape of neck

viruses; serial women
blood tests can already
confirm,
yet immune);
this is rarely contagious
necessary
from a few
days before to
7 days after
rash appears

Hand,
foot, Coxsakie virus Tiny blisterlike Two
main No antibiotics; Child can act
and
mouth (incubation 3– sores in mouth, goals: to give prescription
very ill, but
virus
6 days)
on palms of pain and fever anesthetic
condition is
(herpangina
hands, soles of relief and to mouth rinse for not serious or
virus)
feet; sore throat, prevent
children
old harmful;
painful
dehydration; enough to rinse extremely
swallowing;
give
and spit
contagious
excessive
acetaminophen
until fever and
drooling;
or ibuprofen as
pain resolve;
inflamed gums; needed; push
mild
diarrhea; high fluids,
dehydration
fever up to 5 Popsicles, Jellcommon but
days; can be O, ice cream,
almost never
extremely
soft,
bland
needs medical
painful;
may foods;
avoid
intervention;
have spots in acidic
foods
child may go
only one place; like citrus and
several days
lasts around 7 tomato sauce;
without eating
days;
many Benadryl liquid
cases
involve for
calming
larger grayish- effect
white
ulcers
inside mouth
Hepatitis
A Virus
Depends on age. Same as for flu Same as for flu; Transmitted
(inflammation (incubation 2– Infancy–6
prevention with from
an
of the liver— 6
weeks, years: mild flu
Hepatitis
A infected
very different usually
4 symptoms
vaccine; Hep A person
by
from Hepatitis weeks)
(stomachache,
immune
contaminated
B and C, which
vomiting,
globulin also food or direct
are
sexually
diarrhea);
available
for contact (e.g.,
transmitted
yellow
skin;
adults and older restaurant
diseases)
lasts a few days;
children
(see employee);
no
long-term
here)
water-borne
problems. 6–12
outbreaks rare

 years: same as
infant,
but
symptoms may
be more severe
and last longer;
no
long-term
problems.
12
years–adult:
same
symptoms, but
can last for a
week or more;
degree of liver
inflammation
and damage can
be more severe;
long-term liver
damage rare but
possible
Herpes simplex Herpes virus Painful,
Same as for Same as for Virus
lives
(stomatitis, cold (incubation 7 swollen,
hand, foot, and hand, foot, and inside nerve
sores,
fever days);
reddened,
mouth disease; mouth disease; endings; tends
blisters)
different strain sometimes
try yogurt and prescription
to
recur
from genital bleeding gums; lactobacillus antiviral
periodically
herpes
tiny blisters on culture; do not medication
throughout
tongue, gums, use cortisone may
shorten life;
lips, and around creams
course
contagious
mouth; blisters (eczema
when active
break, leaving creams)
sores that heal
in a week; lowgrade
fever;
irritable; little
appetite
Impetigo
Bacteria,
Pimple-size or Cut fingernails, Prescription
Not
highly
(infection of the streptococcus coin-size spots, keep baby from antibiotic
contagious if
skin)
or
oozing,
scratching;
ointment; oral covered and
staphylococcus blisterlike,
keep covered to antibiotic
if while being
honey-colored prevent spread; severe
treated
by
crusts; usually discourage
doctor,
but
below
nose, picking
raw
don’t let child
around mouth, skin,
e.g.,
touch
other
in diaper area under
nose;
children with
nonprescription
infected area

 antibiotic
ointment
Lyme disease Spirochete
Rash begins as Remove tick Confirmation Suspected
(named
from germ from an single,
red, carefully (see of
diagnosis more
often
town Old Lyme, infected tick raised ring with here);
apply difficult,
than
Connecticut,
bite
pale
center antiseptic
to possibly blood confirmed;
where
first (incubation 3– around
bite; bite;
contact tests
to relatively
diagnosed)
32 days)
circular
spots doctor;
save confirm;
uncommon
spread to trunk tick in case antibiotics
disease
and extremities; later needed for necessary
if
flulike
analysis
suspected
or
symptoms;
confirmed
swollen glands
near
bite;
sometimes
conjunctivitis,
sore throat; joint
swelling or pain
may
appear
weeks later
Measles
(rubeola)

Virus
Begins like a Quarantine
Prevention with Often
(incubation 8– cold, then fever until rash gone; MMR vaccine; suspected but
12 days)
104°F/40°C,
push fluids; use treat
may be other
cough;
fever control complications: virus; rash of
bloodshot eyes,
pneumonia,
measles deep
sensitive
to
encephalitis,
red,
covers
light;
around
ear infection; most of face
fourth day rash
confirmation of and trunk and
(deep
red,
diagnosis
by child
very
confluent)
telltale white sick;
high
begins on face,
spots on inner fever
spreads all over
cheeks
body;
disappears first
on face but lasts
5 days; child
acts
sickest
when rash first
appears

Meningitis
(spinal
meningitis,

Bacteria
or Bacterial: four None; clue to Prevention with The earlier the
virus
classic
diagnosis
is HIB, Prevnar, diagnosis and
(incubation
symptoms—
painful,
stiff and
treatment, the
period depends high
fever, back of neck meningococcal better
the

 inflammation of on infectious severe
combined with vaccines; spinal outcome; also
lining of brain) agent, usually headache,
several other tap
to depends
on
10–14 days) vomiting, stiff symptoms; if determine
type of germ
rigid
painful several
diagnosis.
back of neck symptoms are Bacterial:
(worse
when present
but intravenous
bending
head neck and back antibiotics for
down);
other are fine, less at least 7 days;
signs
include likely;
call monitoring for
lethargy, eyes doctor
complications.
sensitive
to immediately if Viral: treat like
light, stiffening multiple
flu,
no
of back when symptoms
antibiotics
legs pulled up to present or child
change diaper; very ill
bulging
soft
spot in head;
child
acts
extremely
ill.
Viral:
similar
signs, but child
does not appear
as sick
MRSA
(methicillinresistant
staphylococcus
aureus)

Staph bacteria, Begins
as Warm soaks; Oral
Can be serious
resistant
to impetigo (here), allow to drain specifically for but often is
most
boil (here), or if opens; cover MRSA; large not;
is
antibiotics
cellulitis (here) to
prevent abscess
may contagious
but worsens into spread
need surgical antibiotics
large boil or
drainage
and
abscess
IV antibiotics

Mumps
Virus
Begins like flu, Give
bland Prevention with Not to be
(inflammation (incubation 7– usually
also diet,
MMR vaccine; confused with
of
salivary 10 days)
upset stomach; smoothies;
treatment
of other swollen
glands in neck)
2–3 days later apply
cool rare
neck glands:
tender swollen compresses to complications: mump glands
glands beneath neck;
give encephalitis,
very
large,
and in front of acetaminophen; dehydration
tender,
and
earlobes; may call doctor if
beneath and in
begin on one baby becomes
front of ear
side, then the drowsy,
but
above
other;
persistently
jawbone;
“Chipmunk
vomits, or has
other
cheeks,” may be stiff neck
glandular
painful to open
infections

 jaw; lasts 7–10
days; possibly
low
fever;
usually
child
doesn’t act very
sick

occur below
jawbone;
contagious
until swelling
gone

Pinworms

Intestinal
Night waking, Use flashlight Prescription
More
of
worms,
a restlessness;
to see worms in medicine
for nuisance than
parasite
intense itching anus at night or each
family medical
(incubation
around anus or place
sticky member; take problem; only
varies, can be in
vagina; tape
around once but be transmitted
months)
worms look like anus to capture sure to take from person to
threads, 1/3 inch eggs, take to another dose 2 person,
not
(1 cm) long; laboratory for weeks
after from pets or
travel out of identification; first dose
toys;
child
rectum
to cut fingernails
scratches, gets
deposit
eggs to discourage
eggs beneath
around anus or scratching
fingernails,
vagina at night
shares
with
friend or puts
into
own
mouth, eggs
grow
into
worms
in
intestines, and
cycle
continues

Pneumonia
(inflammation
of lung tissue)

Bacteria
or Starts off as Lots of fluids; Oral
Provided it is
virus
regular cough treat
fever; antibiotics;
treated early,
(incubation
and cold, then steam
chest X ray no
longer
usually 7–14 worsens.
treatments— sometimes
considered a
days
Bacterial:
have
child needed
to serious
depending on 102°–
breathe
in confirm
disease; easily
germ)
104°F/38.9°– steam deeply diagnosis;
treatable with
40°C,
chills, for 10 minutes; hospitalization antibiotics and
rapid breathing, pound or clap only
if chestfast heart rate, on front, sides, moderate
to pounding
productive
and back of severe labored therapy;
cough,
chest
to breathing and doctor
can
abdominal pain, encourage
oxygen needed hear specific
chest
pain, coughing; give
pneumonia
vomiting; baby expectorant
sounds with
progressively (guaifenesin) to
stethoscope
sicker.
Viral: loosen
chest

 low fever, no congestion;
chills; lingering give
cough
cough,
suppressant at
wheezing; baby night only if
not, that sick; needed
may last 3–4
weeks
Reye’s
syndrome
(inflammation
of brain, liver)

Unknown,
Increasing
Notify doctor if Hospitalization; Aspirin
possibly toxins lethargy, may baby
shows supportive
implicated
released
by progress
to rapidly
treatment;
(but
not
viral illness
coma; persistent deteriorating treatment
of proven)
as
vomiting; fever; state
of brain swelling, cause
when
follows
viral consciousness liver
taken
for
illnesses;
involvement, chicken pox
seizures;
a
seizure control or influenza
serious disease

Roseola

Virus
Sudden onset of Treat
fever, Control fever; Very common
(incubation 5– high
fever push
fluids; diagnosis not cause of fever
10 days)
103°–
don’t
worry confirmed until in
6–18105°F/39.4°– despite
high rash appears
month-olds;
40.6°C
in fever if baby
suspect
in
previously well seems
better
baby who has
baby, may cause when
fever
high fever that
febrile
decreases
goes up and
convulsions;
down but who
fever decreases
doesn’t
act
easily
with
very sick; if
treatment; baby
antibiotic is
does not act
given and rash
very
ill,
later appears,
especially when
it may be
fever
goes
mistaken for
down;
fever
allergic rash
breaks on third
to
the
day; baby seems
antibiotic
almost
well,
then faint pink
rash appears on
neck, trunk, and
extremities,
lasting 1 to 3
days

 RSV(respiratory Virus
Like
Same as for Possibly
Be concerned
syncytial virus, (incubation 5– bronchiolitis:
bronchiolitis; hospitalization; about
any
inflammation of 8 days)
raspy
cough, notify doctor if antivirus
lingering
the lungs). See
rapid breathing, baby
having medication by cough
and
Bronchiolitis
wheezing,
difficulty
special
increasingly
indrawing; one breathing,
inhalation
labored
of the most becoming
therapy
in breathing in
common causes exhausted, or severe cases
infant under 6
of “wheezing” pale or blue
months;
or “bronchitis” around mouth
common
during first 6
cause
of
months
chronic
progressive
cough
in
newborn
in
first
few
months
Scabies (skin Mite,
infection)
microscopic
size

Intense itching Give
cool Prescription
Suspect
if
and scratching baths;
try cream or lotion intense, itchy
of flea-bite-size Oatmeal baths; (use only as rash lasts for
bumps;
cut fingernails; directed;
weeks; highly
sometimes
launder
overuse may be contagious
mites
burrow clothing
and toxic); anti-itch from person to
under
skin, bedsheets;
medicines
person,
not
leaving linear, liquid Benadryl
from toys
bumpy
rash; for itching
persists
for
weeks without
treatment

Scarlet
fever Not
an Sunburnlike
Same as for Same as strep No
more
(scarlatina;
infection itself; rash over face, sore
throat; throat
serious than
basically, same immune
trunk,
and oatmeal baths
regular strep
illness as strep reaction
to extremities,
and Benadryl
throat;
no
throat)—see
strep
throat feels
like liquid
for
special
“Sore throat,” infection
sandpaper;
itching
precautions
below
mustachelike
necessary
pallor
around
mouth;
rash
disappears in 5
days,
leaving
peeling areas;
fever
101°–
104°F/38.3°–
40°C; tonsillitis,

 like strep throat;
vomiting
common; occurs
during a strep
throat infection
Sore
throat Virus, bacteria Strep
throat: Push
fluids, Strep
throat: Strep throat:
(strep
throat, (streptococcus) uncommon
Popsicles, soft, quick strep test contagious for
viral sore throat) (incubation 2– under age 3;red bland
foods; (results within 24–48 hours
5 days)
throat
and treat pain with 5 minutes) or after treatment
tonsils;
acetaminophen throat culture begun. Viral
moderate
to or ibuprofen, (1–2
days) sore throat:
severe
sore throat lozenges, needed
to contagious
throat; painful anesthetic
confirm
until fever is
swallowing; red throat sprays if diagnosis;
gone for 24
spots on palate; severe; gargle antibiotics
if hours and pain
may or may not with warm salt test
positive. is
minimal.
have pus on water
Viral
sore Clues
to
tonsils;
throat:
no distinguish
“strawberrylike”
antibiotics
between the
tongue; possible
needed
two:
strep
swollen tonsils
usually
in
and
neck
ages 4 and up,
glands; fever;
sore throat is
may
have
main
headache and
symptom, and
stomachaches.
child
Viral
sore
generally
throat:
more
acting sicker
common cause
than
with
of sore throat in
viral;
viral
infants
and
more common
toddlers; may
in infants or
have
similar
toddlers; sore
signs as strep,
throat along
but less severe;
with various
often
other cold and
accompanied by
flu symptoms
other
general
cold and flu
symptoms
Tetanus
(lockjaw)

Bacteria
Generalized
Prevent
(incubation 3– muscle spasms, cleaning
21
days); especially jaw wounds
caused
by

by Prevention with Extremely
DTaP vaccine; rare
in
with hospitalization; younger
antibiotics
children

 toxin
from muscles;
bacteria
in convulsions
deep,
contaminated
wound
Tonsillitis (sore Often
throat)
bacterial,
sometimes
viral

Whooping
cough
(pertussis)

antiseptic and
immunizing

Similar to strep Same as for Oral antibiotics Contagious
throat
(see sore throat
usually given; for
24–48
“Sore throat”),
oral steroids for hours
after
but tonsils are
extreme
treatment
more swollen
swelling
begun
and
usually
have pus; more
difficulty
swallowing;
usually acting
sicker than with
strep throat

Bacteria
Begins
like Push fluids; try Prevention with Most serious
(incubation
regular cold but cool mist, chest DTaP vaccine; under
6
usually 7–10 lingers; cough clapping,
diagnosis based months; older
days; can be worsens around expectorant
mostly
on toddlers and
20 days)
2 weeks later; cough syrups; parent’s
children
severe coughing call doctor if description of usually do not
fits begin in cough persists, cough or doctor suffer
which child has child becomes observing an complications;
30-second to 1- exhausted, has episode;
contagious
minute
difficulty
antibiotics
until treated
coughing
fits breathing, or is important
to for 5 days;
producing thick turning
blue prevent
coughing may
mucus,
during episodes epidemic
persist
for
excessive drool,
spread,
weeks
after
red face, and
household
treatment
often vomiting
contacts
at end of fit,
usually treated
followed
by
as
well;
long catch-up
expectorants
inhalation
may
help;
(“whooping”
hospitalization
sound);
child
if
child
is
may turn pale or
turning
blue
blue
around
with coughing
mouth during
fits
coughing;
usually no fever,

 and child seems
unusually well
between
episodes, with
no in-between
coughing;
episodes may
occur a few
times an hour or
once every few
hours

VISIT DR. SEARS ONLINE
For more detailed information on common and not-so-common childhood illnesses, visit
AskDrSears.com.

SEARS PARENTING LIBRARY ALERT
For a complete discussion on every pediatric illness from A to Z, see The Portable Pediatrician.
This extensive guide provides details on how to diagnose, treat, and prevent virtually every illness
and emergency, and provides guidelines on when to worry and when to relax when your child is
ill.

OceanofPDF.com

 28

OceanofPDF.com

 Lifesaving Procedures and First Aid
for Common Emergencies

Susan, a prematurely gray-haired mother of an accident-prone toddler,
once asked, “Where can I find a live-in doctor? Will I ever survive these
toddler years?” When accidents happen, and they can, even in the safest
homes and to the smartest babies, you, mom and dad, are baby’s first
emergency medical system. Here is a crash course on how to save your
baby’s life.

OceanofPDF.com

 THE THREE P’S
If an emergency happens, and it most likely will, preparing your home, your
skills, and your mind keeps you a childsaving step ahead.
Prevent. Accidentproof your environment, as much as possible, by
following the home babyproofing guide in Chapter 25.
Prepare. Take an infant-CPR and first aid course and a refresher course
every two years. These are offered by your local American Heart
Association chapter, Red Cross, or hospital. If not, get a group of parents
together and hire a certified instructor from your local emergency medical
system. Just as a childbirth class prepares you for your baby’s birth, a CPR
(cardiopulmonary resuscitation) class prepares you for your baby’s life.
Junior-high- and high-school-age children should also take a CPR class,
especially if they frequently baby-sit for younger children. At least watch a
CPR video together as a family. Discuss and practice what you learn from
the class and the video. Require that your regular baby-sitter take a CPR
course, and if your baby is in day care, be certain the day-care providers are
trained in CPR.

 Practice. Periodically rehearse in your mind and by acting out what you
would do if… Rehearse what you learned in the CPR class. Practice on
dolls or cushions, not babies. Prethink a plan of action and store this
strategy in your mind like a flash card to be clicked into, almost by reflex,
in an act-fast situation.
In this chapter we will outline the techniques you need to know to be a
skillful and fast lifesaver in a number of emergency situations.

OceanofPDF.com

 WHEN YOUR BABY ISN’T BREATHING: A
STEP-BY-STEP APPROACH TO CPR
These two sections on CPR and choking are designed to give parents and
caregivers a general overview of lifesaving techniques. They are intended
neither to provide certification nor to fully prepare you for emergency
situations. We recommend you take a course in CPR from an instructor
certified by the American Heart Association or the Red Cross. These
guidelines are current as of the publication of this book. However, official
CPR techniques change from time to time. One recent change is that we no
longer use the acronym ABC (airway, breathing, circulation) to describe the
order in which to perform CPR. Chest compressions are now considered the
most important first step, yielding the new acronym CAB (chest
compressions, airway, breathing).
Step one: Confirm that baby is not breathing. If baby is pale, blue, and
obviously not breathing, begin CPR (step two, below). If you are uncertain,
try to wake baby by firmly flicking the bottom of baby’s bare feet, tapping
the chest or shoulder, and loudly calling out baby’s name. Never shake your
baby.

 Step two: Shout for help and tell someone to call 911. If someone is with
you, tell him or her to immediately call 911. If you are alone, it is better to
begin CPR than to delay it while you call 911 alone. After about two
minutes of CPR, and if no other help has arrived, it is then appropriate for
you to call 911.
Step three: Chest compressions. Perform an initial thirty chest
compressions at a rate of a hundred per minute (this should take you fifteen
to twenty seconds). Technique and depth of compressions will depend on
the age of the child:
Infants less than one year of age: Imagine a line running across baby’s
chest from nipple to nipple. This is the sternum. Use two fingers of one
hand to push down on the sternum (breastbone). Push firmly enough to
compress the sternum approximately 1½ inches (4 cm). When two persons
trained in CPR are present, a technique using the thumbs for compressions
while the hands encircle the chest may be used (see picture, here).
Children one year and older: Using either one or two hands, compress the
sternum 2 inches (5 cm) with the heel of the hand (see picture, here).
Step four: Breathing. After the initial thirty chest compressions, open the
mouth and scan for any foreign object that the child may have choked on,
especially if you witnessed the child choking on something before losing
consciousness. If one is visible, remove it. Do not perform a blind finger
sweep, as this may push the object farther down. Then administer two

 breaths, each one lasting for approximately one second. Proper technique
depends on the age of the child:
Infants less than one year of age: Cover the infant’s mouth and nose with
your mouth to breathe (see picture, here).
Children one year and older: Plug the child’s nose and breathe only into the
mouth (see picture, here). Watch for the chest to rise and fall with each
breath. If the chest does not rise, reposition the head, make a better seal
with your mouth, and try again.
Step five: Continue for two minutes. Alternate between thirty chest
compressions (which should take fifteen to twenty seconds, or a little less
than two compressions every second) followed by two breaths, for two
minutes. If you are alone, now is the time to leave the victim, if necessary,
while you run to call 911 or find another person to call 911. If you are not
alone, and 911 has already been called, continue CPR until professional
help arrives or until you notice the child begins breathing on his own.
If two people are performing CPR, one should give the chest
compressions while the other breathes but at a ratio of fifteen compressions
followed by two breaths (as opposed to thirty compressions and two breaths
for one-person CPR). If an AED (automated external defibrillator) device is
available, now is the time to set it up and follow the directions.

OceanofPDF.com

 CHOKING
Choking means that baby is trying to dislodge material from a partially
obstructed airway or is frantically trying to get air in, past the obstruction. It
is one of the most common causes of death in children.

OceanofPDF.com

 What Not to Do

If baby can cough, cry, or speak and is obviously breathing, the airway is
not fully obstructed. It takes moving air to make sounds. Baby’s own gagand-cough reflex will usually dislodge the piece. In this case, doing any of
the intervention procedures is unnecessary and potentially dangerous.
Instead, remain on standby offering baby the emotional support of a calm,
reassuring “It’s okay” so that baby doesn’t panic. Remember, you are a
when-to-worry mirror to baby. If you panic, baby panics. Unless you can
easily see the obstructing object, do not use a blind finger sweep to grope
for it; doing this may push the object farther back in the throat.

OceanofPDF.com

 When to Intervene

If baby shows the following signs, his airway is obstructed:
• gasping for breath or turning blue
• fainting (and you suspect choking)
• displaying an “I’m choking” expression: wide eyes, open mouth,
drooling, a panicky look
• for an older child, showing the universal choking sign by clasping his
throat

OceanofPDF.com

 If Your Baby Is Choking: Two Techniques

If your child shows any of the signs just listed, there are two approaches
you can take: the Heimlich maneuver (also called abdominal thrusts) for
infants over one year, and the back blow–chest compression technique for
infants under one year. The Heimlich maneuver is not recommended for
infants under a year because it can possibly cause a contusion to vital
abdominal organs. In the past there has been spirited controversy over
whether the back blow–chest compression method or the Heimlich
maneuver is better for the infant between one and two years, but now there
is general agreement on the superiority of abdominal thrusts (Heimlich) for
older infants and children. Parents usually feel more comfortable and
therefore make fewer mistakes with the back blows, but the latest guidelines
recommend the Heimlich maneuver (abdominal thrusts) in infants over a
year old.

SWALLOWED OBJECTS
From hand to mouth is standard operating procedure for a baby but a worry
for parents. Babies sometimes swallow small objects such as coins, which
nearly always pass through the intestines and are eliminated in one to three
days without causing any harm. If your baby is not coughing, not drooling
excessively, not experiencing any abdominal pain, and seems perfectly well,
it is seldom necessary to share your discovery with your doctor.
But there are times when you need to worry. Sometimes an object such
as a large coin may lodge in baby’s esophagus, the tube running from the

 mouth to the stomach. An object stuck in the esophagus is much less serious
than one stuck in the windpipe, but it may still compromise baby’s ability to
swallow and sometimes even the ability to breathe. Here are the call-doctorright-away signs: excessive drooling, pain where the object is stuck (usually
only an older child can locate the site of the pain), and inability to swallow.

SPECIAL NOTE: No matter which method you use, pull out all the stops.
Don’t give up. The foreign body may dissolve or become smaller, or the
airway may relax, making dislodgment easier. If your baby chokes in a
public place, shout for help, especially if you don’t know CPR. There may
be a guardian angel off-duty fireman or paramedic (or someone else who
knows CPR) who will assist while called-for help is on the way. Act fast, but
make every action count.

OceanofPDF.com

 THE BACK BLOW–CHEST COMPRESSION
TECHNIQUE (FOR INFANTS UNDER ONE
YEAR)
Step one: Five back blows. Straddle baby facedown along your forearm in
a slightly head-down position. Support baby’s chin in your cupped hand.
Apply five quick, forceful back blows between baby’s shoulder blades with
the heel of your hand. Meanwhile shout for help: “My baby is choking—
dial 911!” If you are alone, do not delay choking rescue steps or CPR in
order to call 911 yourself. It is better to begin rescue steps for two minutes
before pausing to call 911. Periodically call out for help until someone hears
you and can call 911.
Step two: Chest compressions. If baby has not dislodged the object after
five back blows (evidence of disloding is coughing or crying, or you see the
piece shoot out) and is still not breathing, flip him over on your thigh. Deal
five quick, forceful chest compressions to baby’s sternum, using the same
technique as in CPR, here. To find the right place, imagine a line between
the two nipples. The right area to depress is where the line crosses the
sternum. Use two fingers to quickly depress the sternum to a depth of 1½

 inches (4 centimeters), allowing the breastbone to return to its normal
position between thrusts without moving your fingers.
Continue alternating between five back blows and five chest
compressions until either the object is dislodged or the baby loses
consciousness. If he becomes unconscious, do not continue to attempt back
blows. You will now use the chest compressions that are part of normal
CPR to try to clear the object from the airway. Begin CPR with thirty chest
compressions according to the directions on the previous pages (When Your
Baby Isn’t Breathing: A Step-by-Step Approach to CPR).
Step three: Look for an object. After you have performed CPR chest
compressions for thirty seconds on the unconscious infant, open the mouth
and look for an object. If one is visible, remove it. Do not perform a blind
finger sweep, as this may push an object farther down.
Step four: Mouth-to-mouth breathing. If baby is still not breathing, give
two breaths by the mouth-to-mouth-and-nose technique (CPR, here). If
baby’s chest rises with each breath, you know the airway is clear.

 Back blows.
Resume chest compressions for thirty seconds, followed by two breaths
(according to the CPR instructions), and repeat until baby begins breathing
or professional help arrives. If baby’s chest does not rise with your breaths,
reposition the head and mouth, form a better seal, and try two breaths again.
If there is still no chest rise, resume chest compressions for another thirty
seconds, then examine the mouth again (repeating step three). Continue
alternating among chest compressions, breaths, and looking for an object
until help arrives. If you’ve given CPR for two minutes and you are still
alone, it is better to leave the baby if necessary to run for help and call 911.

 Chest compressions.

With practice, this entire sequence of back blows, chest compressions,
checking the mouth, and administering breaths can be performed in less
than a minute. Practice on a doll and notice how skillful you can become at
alternating between back blows and chest compressions, holding baby
sandwiched between your two hands and flipping him from one position to
the other.

OceanofPDF.com

 THE

ABDOMINAL-THRUST

(HEIMLICH)

TECHNIQUE (FOR CHILDREN OVER ONE
YEAR)
The Heimlich maneuver is not recommended for infants under one year of
age.
In a conscious child. Stand behind the choking child and wrap your arms
around his waist. Make a fist with one hand and place the thumb side of that
fist against the child’s abdomen in the midline slightly above the navel, but
well below the tip of the breastbone. Grasp this fist with the other hand and
press into the child’s abdomen with a quick inward and upward jerk. Be
sure your fists do not touch the tip of the breastbone or the ribs. Continue
these thrusts until either the object becomes dislodged and the child can
breathe again or the child becomes unconscious.
If the child is unconscious. Lay the child down and begin CPR with thirty
chest compressions according to the directions here. Do not attempt the
Heimlich maneuver. The act of CPR chest compressions and breaths may
dislodge the foreign body. Each time you pause the compressions to give

 breaths, check the mouth for a visible object (remember, it is unsafe to
perform blind sweeps). Continue CPR until help arrives.

Abdominal thrusts for conscious child.

 Mouth-to-mouth breathing for infants under one year.

Mouth-to-mouth breathing for older babies and children.

 VARIATIONS IN CHEST COMPRESSIONS WITH
AGE
Newborn: Compress the sternum using two fingers if you are alone, or
using two thumbs with the hands encircling the chest for two-person CPR.
Compress 1½ inches (4 cm) at a rate of one hundred strokes per minute.
For the older child (over one year): Use the heel of your hand and
compress deeper, 2 inches (5 centimeters), and at a rate of one hundred
strokes per minute.

Chest compressions of newborn.

OceanofPDF.com

 BLEEDING
Be prepared for baby’s first bleed. While most are tiny trickles needing only
a sympathetic Band-Aid, knowing how to recognize and stop a severe
hemorrhage could save your child’s life.

OceanofPDF.com

 Big Bleeds

Apply pressure. Using gauze or a clean handkerchief, use pressure over the
site of bleeding for two minutes. Then, if possible, hold the bleeding site
underneath cold running tap water and assess the severity of the cut. Highly
vascular areas, such as the scalp, bleed profusely from only a tiny puncture
wound (which heals easily with the application of pressure, a dab of
antibiotic ointment, and tincture of time). The amount of bleeding depends
on what type of vessel is cut. If a small vein is cut, the bleeding may only
trickle and stop after two or three minutes of pressure and/or holding under
cold water.
If an artery has been cut, the blood will spurt; this requires at least ten
minutes of constant pressure to stop the bleeding. If you peek, start the
timer over. Then apply a pressure bandage for at least twenty more minutes,
after which survey the site and seek medical attention.
Make a pressure bandage. If there is more than a cut-vein trickle, keep the
pressure on for ten minutes. Instead of removing the blood-soaked pressure
gauze (removing it may dislodge the clot and reopen the bleeding), apply a
second fluff of gauze on top of the first. Without interrupting the pressure
on the bleeding site, wrap tape around the bandage to keep pressure on the
bleeding.

 Calm your child. An upset child pumps more blood to the site. Be calm;
take charge.
Position baby correctly. Place your child lying down and elevate the
bleeding site above the level of the heart—for example, by raising the arm.
Get help. Call your doctor for further advice or take your child to the
emergency room, especially if you can’t stop the bleeding.

OceanofPDF.com

 Little Bleeds

While there is no such thing as a little bleed to a child, most little people get
little bleeds that can be managed easily at home.
Keep cool. Toddlers get upset at the sight of blood and the very thought of a
leak in their body. If you mirror panic, you are likely to have a bloodier
mess to handle.
Wash the cut. Hold the bleeding site (for example, the arm) under cold
running water for a few minutes while giving reassuring “It will be okay”
(not “It is okay”) messages to baby. (Note: Fresh blood washes off skin and
hair better with cold water than with warm.) And don’t forget the adhesive
bandage. Even if the bleeding has stopped, this timely patch reassures the
child that his leak is fixed.
Daily care. An initial and daily cleansing under running water removes
debris, germs, and dead tissue, all of which increase the chances of
infection. Pat dry with clean gauze. Depending on the location and type of
cut, your doctor may advise gently cleaning off the accumulating crust with
half strength (half water) hydrogen peroxide applied twice a day with a
cotton-tipped applicator. Cover with antibiotic ointment, and dress the cut
according to your doctor’s instructions.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Facts About Stitches

Does the cut need stitches? Stitches speed healing and minimize infection
and scarring. If the wound is gaping or you can see beneath the layers of
skin, it needs suturing.
As stated earlier, cuts on the scalp bleed profusely, but after the bleeding
stops, you may be surprised how tiny the cut is. The same generous blood
vessels that caused the initial panic also heal the wound quickly, and scalp
wounds rarely become infected. These considerations and the lack of
cosmetic concern make a tiny scalp cut likely to self-heal without stitches.

APPLYING STERI-STRIPS
The materials you will need are ¼-inch (6-millimeter) steri-strips, a cottontipped applicator, tincture of benzoin, and scissors.
1. Clean and dry the wound according to earlier instructions.
2. Cut steri-strips in approximately 1- to 2-inch (2½- to 5-centimeter)
lengths.
3. With a cotton-tipped applicator, apply benzoin adhesive sparingly along
both sides of the wound, but not touching the wound, as it stings.
4. Push the edges of the wound together, then secure the strips across. If
three strips are needed, apply the first across the center to hold the edges
together, then another one on either side. A smaller cut will need only
two strips.

 Another profuse bleeder but self-healer is the very vascular band of
tissue connecting the upper gum to the lip, called the frenum. It commonly
gets cut and bleeds following a fall on the face. The frenum rarely needs
stitches and heals easily following the application of pressure with gauze
soaked in cold water or while baby is sucking on a Popsicle. The same goes
for the tongue.

WOUND GLUE VS. STITCHES
Wound glue (Dermabond) has often been a kid’s best friend in the
emergency room, allowing many wounds to be closed quickly and
painlessly. If the wound is not too deep or ragged, the potential for scarring
is no different whether you use glue or stitches.
Some tiny cuts less than ½-inch (1½ centimeters) long and not gaping
can be closed with steri-strips (improved butterfly bandages—see box
“Applying Steri-strips”). If you are uncertain whether or not your baby
needs stitches, have your doctor or your local emergency room doctor check
the cut.
The parent surgeon. If your baby needs stitches, be sure you stay with
your baby for reassurance while your doctor performs the suturing. Tell
baby exactly what to expect. Don’t say it won’t hurt if it will. That
misstatement causes mistrust.
How to minimize scarring. Most scars occur from the way the wound is
cared for rather than from how it is sutured. Try these cosmetic tips:

 • Follow your doctor’s instructions on wound care and the earlier
suggestions for keeping cuts clean. Infections in the wound are the most
common cause of scarring.
• Keep baby’s appointment for suture removal. Sutures that stay in too
long increase the chance for infection.
• Massage the wound after a few days. Use a moisturizing lotion
containing aloe or vitamin E oil and rub it into the skin. This healing
touch increases the flow of blood to the wound.
• Keep the wound out of the sun, especially a facial wound. During the
first six months of healing, avoid prolonged exposure of the wound to
direct sunlight. The scar may tan a much darker color than the
surrounding skin, making the scar line more obvious. Use an SPF (sun
protection factor) 15 or greater sunblock or a large-brimmed cap to cover
or shade the wound.

OceanofPDF.com

 HEAD INJURIES
There is no sound that sends shivers up and down your spine like the thud
of a child’s head meeting a hard floor. Goose eggs and scalp bleeds lead the
list of doctor’s phone calls about injuries. It helps to appreciate the
difference between a skull injury and a brain injury. The skull acts as a
protective helmet for the delicate brain, and the skull is covered with a
richly vascularized scalp. The great majority of falls involve injury to the
scalp only, which bleeds profusely if cut or forms a large swelling (goose
egg) from broken blood vessels beneath the skin. Don’t be alarmed by how
quickly these large bumps appear. They go down quickly with ice packs and
pressure. These bumps and bleeds are usually limited to a scalp injury and
seldom indicate that the underlying brain has been injured.
The main concern after any blow to baby’s head is injury to the
underlying brain, which can occur in two forms: bleeding and concussion.
When small blood vessels have been broken between the skull and the brain
or within the brain, bleeding occurs within this space and compresses the
brain. A blow to the head may also cause a concussion, meaning the brain
has been “shaken up” by the fall. Pressure on the brain from bleeding or
from the swelling associated with the concussion produces the outward
signs of a brain injury.

 SPECIAL NOTE: Take puncture wounds to the scalp seriously. Externally
these may look insignificant. But a nail, for example, may penetrate the
scalp and skull and lead to a serious infection in the underlying brain.
Notify your doctor.

OceanofPDF.com

 What to Look For—When to Worry

If baby is unconscious, but breathing and pink (no blue lips), lay her on a
flat surface and call emergency medical services. If you have cause to
suspect a neck injury, don’t move baby but let the experts trained in neck
injuries transport her. If she is not breathing, apply CPR (see technique
here), or if she’s having a convulsion, keep her airway clear (see
instructions on handling convulsions, here).
Sometimes, if baby is the sensitive type and prone to temper tantrums,
the anger after the fall pushes baby into a breathholding spell, which may be
mistaken for a convulsion. This scene naturally pushes panic buttons and
gets baby rushed to the hospital. Even if this turns out to be unnecessary, it
is better to be safe. We tell our patients that when in doubt, take baby and sit
in the waiting area of the local hospital emergency room.

OceanofPDF.com

 A Period of Observation

If baby is alert and conscious, walking, talking, playing, and acting just like
before the fall, administer a dose of parental sympathy, apply an ice pack to
the cut or bump for twenty minutes, and begin a period of observation
before calling your doctor. The reason for the period of observation is that
the doctor often relies more on how baby behaves after the injury than what
happened at the time of the injury. If the brain has been injured, signs may
show immediately, or they may appear slowly during the next twenty-four
hours.
After the period of observation, depending on your baby’s condition,
you may or may not wish to call the doctor. Besides any when-to-call-thedoctor list there is an overriding inner voice treasured by mothers, which we
call mother’s worry signals. We have learned to trust this monitoring system
as much as the most sophisticated electronics. If it tells you something’s not
quite right, call your doctor to report baby’s condition, seek advice, and
above all tell the doctor why you are concerned. Here’s what to look for
over the next twenty-four hours.

Changes in Baby’s Sleep Behavior

 Babies normally retreat into sleep after trauma, which makes the usual
admonition to “watch for a change in consciousness” an anxiety-producing
instruction for the parent. If a head injury occurs near night or nap time in
an already tired child, you may be confused about whether the drowsiness is
due to the injury or whether it’s just time for sleep to naturally overtake the
child. And it may be impossible to follow the advice “Don’t let baby go to
sleep.” Let baby fall asleep, but awaken yourself every two hours and do a
baby check. Look for
• change in color from pink to pale or, even more alarming, blue
• change in breathing: periods of very shallow breathing, ten- to twentysecond periods of stop-breathing episodes followed by irregular
breathing, or gasping episodes (remember that newborns normally have
some irregular breathing)
• twitches on one side of the body involving a whole limb

SIGNS OF BRAIN INJURY
If your baby shows any of the following signs after a head injury, call your
doctor or take her to the hospital.
• disorientation, difficulty arousing
• unusual breathing while sleeping
• crossed eyes, unequal pupils
• persistent vomiting
• increasing paleness
• oozing of blood or watery fluid from an ear canal
• convulsions
• off balance while sitting, crawling, or walking

 If baby’s color and breathing patterns are normal (no change from usual)
and your parental instincts sense nothing wrong, there is no need to awaken
baby unless advised to do so by your doctor. The deep sleep from a serious
head injury is nearly always associated with shallow, irregular breathing
patterns that you are unlikely to have seen before.
If, however, you are uncertain or baby’s appearance sets off a “not
normal” alarm, do a partial arousal. Sit or stand baby up and then put her
back down. Normally a baby will fuss a bit and thrash around in the bed to
resettle. If baby does not act like this, try to fully arouse her by sitting or
standing her up, opening her eyes, and calling her name. If baby awakens,
looks at you, fusses or smiles, and struggles to be left undisturbed, you can
go back to sleep without worrying. If, on the other hand, baby does not
protest, can’t be awakened enough to begin fussing, is pale, shows irregular
breathing, and is drooling profusely, or shows any of the signs of brain
injury listed above, seek medical attention immediately.

Changes in Balance and Coordination

During the day signs of head injury are easier to observe. Watch baby’s
normal play. Is he doing everything the same after the fall: sitting straight,
walking well, moving arms and legs normally? Or is he off balance,
wobbly, dragging a leg, or becoming increasingly disoriented? In the
prewalker, do you notice any change in sitting or crawling skills or in
manipulative hand skills?

 Vomiting

Just as some babies fall asleep after a head injury, some babies vomit,
mostly from being upset at falling and hurting. Don’t worry. But persistent
vomiting over the next six to twenty-four hours is an alarming sign. Call
your doctor right away if baby vomits more than twice. As a precaution feed
the recovering faller clear liquids for a few hours. Breastfeeding is
therapeutic.

Eye Signs

The eyes mirror what’s going on inside the body, especially inside the brain.
In fact, the back of the eye is so intimately connected with the brain that
your doctor looks at the backs of the eyes for evidence of brain swelling
while examining a baby following a head injury. Baby eye signs are more
difficult to assess than the other signs, but here are the call-doctor cues:
crossed eyes or rolling eyes, one pupil larger than the other, and behavior
such as tripping or running into things that indicates baby’s vision is
diminished. In the older child, add complaints of seeing double and blurred
vision to the worry list.

OceanofPDF.com

 What About Skull X Rays?

Except for severe head injuries or obvious fractures, skull X rays are
seldom helpful; nor is it necessary to rush a happily playing baby to the
hospital for an X ray. First, try a period of observation; next, call your
doctor; then comes the advice on whether or not to take baby to the hospital
for X rays. A CAT scan, a series of cross-sectional X rays of the brain, has
nearly replaced the plain skull X ray. In most cases if baby warrants an X
ray at all, he merits a CAT scan. This technological breakthrough reveals
much more about an injury, such as whether there is bleeding or swelling of
the brain, than a simple skull X ray. On a softer note: In the life of a child,
considering the many times little heads meet hard floors, injuries to the
brain are uncommon.

IN PRAISE OF THE SIMPLE ICE PACK
Injured babies don’t take kindly to cold objects pressed against sore tissues.
Cold relieves pain, lessens bleeding, and reduces swelling. But no bare ice
to bare skin, please. This could produce frostbite damage to the tissues. You
can buy instant cold packs that don’t drip and place them in your medicine
cabinet, or you can make your own: Put ice cubes in a sock or handkerchief.
If you use a plastic bag, cover it with a thin cloth or damp washcloth.
Crushed ice in a sock makes a moldable pack. You can store an ice cube in a
terry-cloth toy. In our freezer we have a “boo-boo bunny” on standby who
has become a trusted friend for bumps and bruises and to soothe the psyche
when the only damage is to baby’s fragile sensitivity. Bags of frozen
chopped veggies also make a handy ice pack, and sucking on a Popsicle or

 juice bar helps swollen lips. Begin gently increasing the pressure as
tolerated for as long as twenty minutes. Letting your toddler keep his hand
on the ice pack helps acceptance.

OceanofPDF.com

 CONVULSIONS
Convulsions (also called seizures) are caused by abnormal discharge of
electrical currents in the brain, and they shake up both babies and parents.
Their severity ranges from localized muscle jerks to total body shaking,
called a grand mal seizure, which may also include falling and writhing on
the ground, rolling back the eyes, frothing at the mouth, biting the tongue,
and temporarily losing consciousness.
Your primary emergency goal during a convulsion is to ensure that
baby’s tongue or secretions do not block his airway, depriving the brain of
oxygen. Most convulsions in infancy are due to fevers. These seizures are
brief, self-limiting, and rarely harm baby, but may leave parents trembling.
If you witness a convulsion, do the following:
• Place baby safely on the floor and on his side to allow the tongue to
come forward and secretions to drain from the throat by gravity.
• Don’t put any food or drink into baby’s mouth during or immediately
after the convulsion; nor should you try to restrain baby from shaking.
• If baby’s lips are not blue and baby is breathing normally, don’t worry.
• Though unlikely, if baby’s lips are turning blue or he is not breathing,
give mouth-to-mouth breathing after you have cleared the airway (see
here).
• To prevent the thrashing child from bumping into furniture, clear the
immediate area.

 Following a convulsion, babies normally retreat into a deep sleep. Also,
it’s common for baby to have another convulsion within a few minutes of
the first, especially if the seizure was due to fever. To prevent this
recurrence, if baby feels hot immediately after the seizure, give an
acetaminophen suppository (oral medications may trigger vomiting).
Remove baby’s clothing, and cool baby by sponge bathing with a cool
towel (see discussion of fever control, here).
In general, it’s wise to call your doctor or take baby to a hospital
emergency room immediately after the convulsion. Or, depending on the
circumstances, you could begin a period of observation similar to the one
described earlier for a head injury. A period of observation may be
appropriate if baby was previously well and the fever came on suddenly,
followed by a brief convulsion, and now baby seems all right. Keep the
fever controlled, and you may safely sit tight for a few hours rather than
calling your doctor or rushing to the hospital at 3:00 A.M. But any
convulsion not associated with a fever or occurring in a sick-appearing baby
deserves immediate medical attention. It is wise to apply fever-control
measures (medication and cooling) before rushing off to the hospital, since
the escalating fever can bring on more seizures en route. (See also “Fever
Fits,” here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 BURNS
Put a nine-month-old with a lightning-fast reach close to a hot cup of coffee
and you have the makings of a severe burn. The degree or depth of a burn
determines how painful and deforming it is. First-degree burns (such as
sunburns) cause redness of the skin, are not severely painful, and need only
cool water, a soothing ointment, and time. Second-degree burns cause
blistering, swelling, and peeling and are very painful. Third-degree burns
damage the deeper layers of the skin and are the most disfiguring.

OceanofPDF.com

 Basic Burn Treatment

If baby gets burned, do the following:
• Immediately submerge the burned area in cool water for at least twenty
minutes. Besides relieving pain, water cools the skin and lessens skin
damage. Do not use ice, which increases tissue damage. If the burn is to
the face, apply a cool, watersoaked towel or hold the cheek under
running water. Do not put butter, grease, or powder on a burn.
• If baby’s clothing is on fire, smother the flames with a towel, blanket,
coat, or your own clothing.
• Quickly remove any burned or hot-water-soaked clothing, but be careful
not to touch the face when pulling a hot shirt over baby’s head. Cut
clothes off if necessary.
• Assess the severity of the burn. If only red but not blistery, keep the area
in cool water for as long as baby tolerates it. Leave the burn uncovered
and observe it for change.
• If the skin becomes blistered, white, or charred, apply an antiseptic
ointment and cover loosely with a clean cloth or a nonstick bandage. Call
your doctor or take baby to the emergency room.
• Besides soaking the burned area in cool water, give baby ibuprofen.
Burn treatment is aimed at relieving pain and preventing infection,
disfiguring, and contractures (shortening of the burned tissue while
healing). Along with your doctor’s advice, most home treatment of burns
involves the following daily ritual.

 Wash. Cleanse the burned area under lukewarm running tap water, and blot
it dry with a clean towel. The water jet removes germs and dead tissue.
Apply burn cream. Keep the burned area covered with a prescription
cream (a combination of silver and sulfa antibiotic) that promotes healing
and prevents infection.
Cover. Your doctor will instruct you whether (and how) to keep the area
covered with cream only, or you will be told to cover the burn with a
nonstick pad and wrap it with gauze.
Stretch. If the burn is across an area that bends, such as the palms of the
hands or joints of the fingers, stretch the area for a minute at least ten times
daily to prevent contractures.
Debride. To minimize infection, your doctor may need to cut away the
burned tissue several times during the course of healing (a process called
debridement) or instruct you how to do this minor surgical procedure,
which is as easy as trimming fingernails. Do not break blisters, nature’s
dressing, unless your doctor so advises.
With meticulous care, burned baby skin heals beautifully, without scarring
unless the skin was deeply or extensively damaged.

OceanofPDF.com

 Electrical Burns

Not only can electrical burns damage tissue even more than scalds, but the
electrical current may set off abnormal heartbeats. Handling downed power
lines is an extremely dangerous accident and requires immediate medical
attention, even CPR. Poking an exploring finger into a light socket usually
gives baby only a scary zap.

OceanofPDF.com

 Chemical Burns (Lyes and Acids)

Immerse the burned area under cool running water for twenty minutes.
Remove baby’s chemical-soaked clothing, being careful not to spread the
irritant to other areas of the skin. Use a scissors to cut the clothes off baby if
necessary, or leave the clothing on if you can’t remove it safely. For
example, do not pull a bleach-soaked T shirt over a child’s head. Wash the
area with soap and water, but do not vigorously scrub the area, since intense
scrubbing may cause more of the poison to be absorbed into the skin. If any
of the substance was inhaled or swallowed, call poison control immediately
and give baby the antidote recommended on the chemical’s container, or
give your child large amounts of water to drink. If the chemical splashed
into baby’s eyes, flush the eyes for twenty minutes using a steady stream of
water from a pitcher, or use a bottle of eyewash from your pharmacy. (See
discussion of eye injuries, here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 Treating Sunburn

If the skin is only slightly red and baby is not uncomfortable, no treatment
is necessary. In more serious cases, try the following:
• If the skin is very red and baby is crying, immerse the burned area in cool
water, or use cool water and towel compresses for fifteen minutes at least
four times a day. Leave some water on the skin to cool by evaporation.
• Apply a nonpetroleum-based moisturizer lotion (aloe, for example)
several times a day.
• If the skin is blistered, call your doctor for a prescription cream; consider
it a second-degree burn and follow earlier suggestions for burn treatment.
• Give ibuprofen for pain and to reduce inflammation.

OceanofPDF.com

 POISONING
The dreadful-sounding term “poisoning” refers to swallowing, inhaling, or
touching any substance that harms the body. While many poisons cause no
more than a brief stomach upset, some can severely damage lung and
intestinal tissues; a few are fatal. (To prevent poisoning, see the home
babyproofing suggestions here and the information on toxic plants and
household substances here.)

OceanofPDF.com

 What to Do

If your child swallows a poison, call the poison control center (800-2221222), 911, or your local hospital. Give the following information:
• name of the substance ingested and the list of ingredients
• time and suspected amount of ingestion
• age and weight of baby
• symptoms: coughing, vomiting, behavior changes, and so on
• your telephone number
Do not induce vomiting before consulting your poison control center.
For some substances it may not be necessary to induce vomiting, and others
may damage the lungs if aspirated and further damage the lining of the
esophagus if vomited. Unless advised otherwise by your poison control
center, do not induce vomiting, especially when any of the following are
ingested:
• petroleum products: gasoline, kerosene, benzine, turpentine
• polishes for furniture or cars
• strong corrosives such as lye, strong acids, drain cleaners
• cleaning products such as bleach, ammonia, toilet bowl cleaners

 Your poison control center will advise you what antidotes, if any, to
give. Usually it is several glasses of water or a glass of milk.

SUN PROTECTION FOR YOUR BABY
Thin baby skin and summer sun don’t mix. Besides causing sunburn,
excessive sun exposure during the childhood years increases the risk of
adult skin cancer. Here are ways to protect your baby from sunburn:
• Sun rays are most intense from 10:00 A.M. to 3:00 P.M. If possible, plan
beach outings late in the afternoon.
• Use sun-protective clothing, such as a long-sleeved shirt and widebrimmed hat made from sun-proof fabrics. Sun-protective clothes
typically offer an SPF (sun protection factor) of at least 30 wet or dry,
whereas an old hand-me-down T-shirt provides only an SPF of 6, and
even less if wet.
• Place baby under a sun umbrella at the beach.
• Beware of sun rays reflecting off white sand. Turn baby away from this
reflection.
Selecting a Sunscreen
Use a lotion or milky gel-type sunscreen rather than the clear alcohol type,
which may burn baby’s skin on application. Select one that offers both UVA
and UVB protection (check the label), with an SPF of 15 or more. For water
play, use a waterproof sunscreen and generously reapply the lotion after
several dunkings. For particularly sensitive areas, such as the nose, cheeks,
and ears, use an opaque zinc oxide sun block.
Some babies are sensitive to PABA, the active ingredient in many
sunscreens, so use a PABA-free preparation. To determine if your baby’s
skin is sensitive to a sunscreen, rub a test dose on a small area of baby’s arm
before using it all over the body.
Because of the uncertain absorption of sunscreen through the skin of
tiny babies, its use in babies under six months should be only a last resort.

 Use it very sparingly, only on small areas, such as the face and back of the
hands. Shade and protective clothing is best for baby.
Shading Little Eyes
Baby specs may be fashionable, but are they safe? Infant eyes are more
sensitive to the harmful effects of ultraviolet (UV) light than are older eyes.
Little eyes need to be protected. Eye specialists believe that toy sunglasses
may be worse than none at all. They simply darken the area, making baby’s
pupils larger and allowing more damaging light to reach the inside of the
eye. Best are sunglasses labeled “100 percent UV filtration,” but expect to
pay a higher price for this protection, and rare is the toddler who keeps the
glasses on. For infants the most practical sunshade is a wide-brimmed hat
and a pair of watchful adult eyes keeping baby shaded from bright reflected
light off sand, snow, or white surfaces.

OceanofPDF.com

 Inhaled Poisons

Nail polish, polish removers, glues, lacquers for models, varnishes, and
acetone-containing hydrocarbons may be toxic to the lungs, kidneys, and
brain of a developing child. To protect yourself and baby, use these
substances in a well-ventilated room and definitely not in the same room
with baby. If baby has inhaled toxic fumes, rush him into fresh air and
observe him for severe coughing or lethargy and seek medical attention.

CALLING POISON CONTROL
A nationwide poison control phone number will connect you to the center
nearest you. It is (800) 222–1222.

OceanofPDF.com

 EYE INJURIES
Eyes are exquisitely sensitive when injured but are quick to heal. Babies
protest intrusion of their eyes by tightly squinting and rubbing, further
irritating the eye. To keep dirty fingers out of hurting eyes, secure baby in a
burrito wrap using a large towel, blanket, or sheet (see here) before trying to
examine or flush out baby’s eyes.

OceanofPDF.com

 Flushing Out Little Eyes

To wash irritants from baby’s eyes, it is best to have two persons, a holder
and a flusher. Gently pull down the lower lid, encouraging baby to open the
eyes very wide as you irrigate them with a gentle, steady stream of
lukewarm water from a pitcher or water bottle. Turn baby’s head toward the
side of the affected eye to allow the water to run across the eye and onto a
towel. Continue flushing for at least fifteen minutes. If baby clamps the
eyelids shut, pull down on the lower lid with your fingertip or put your
index finger on the upper lid just beneath the eyebrow and another finger on
the lower lid and gently pry the lids open.
Following flushing, call for medical advice. Some corrosives may
irritate the cornea and promote infection. Preventive antibiotic ointment
may be needed. Pain from a scratch or irritant may last for twenty-four
hours. Give acetaminophen and whatever eye care your doctor advises.

OceanofPDF.com

 Administering Eye Medicine

Eye medicines come in two forms—ointment and drops. Drops are easier to
give but can sting a bit if the eyes are inflamed. Ointment requires more
control and less squirming because you have to get close to the eye.
Holding baby still requires two people (or one person can “mummy” the
baby in the burrito wrap) to keep baby’s hands from getting in the way. If an
extra pair of hands is available, have that person hold baby’s head while you
hold baby’s body quiet enough not to have a moving target—this gets
harder as baby gets older. Newborns are easy enough to handle solo. Put
baby on a soft surface—couch, bed, carpet—where you can bend over her.
Hold the medicine in your dominant hand and pull down the lower
eyelid to make it form a pouch into which you deliver the drops or line of
ointment.

OceanofPDF.com

 NOSE INJURIES
Be prepared for a hard fall and a flattened nose several times during the life
of a growing child. Fortunately, most often both the child and the nose
bounce back without deformity. The nose is beautifully designed to act as a
shock absorber so that blows to the face do not injure the head. When the
nose collides with a hard surface, the nose flattens as the thin nasal bones
are pushed out to each side. If your baby gets a flattened nose, go through
the following steps:
• Drape an ice pack over your baby’s nose, gently pressing on the bulgedout swollen area on each side of the nose just below the nasal corner of
the eyes. Keep the ice pack on at least twenty minutes or as long as baby
tolerates it. The sooner you apply the ice pack and the longer you leave it
on after the injury, the less the swelling will be.
• Position baby upright and leaning forward to reduce blood dripping down
the back of the throat.

OceanofPDF.com

 When to Seek Medical Attention

Most flattened noses are indeed fractured, but the great majority reset
themselves very easily within a couple of weeks after the injury and don’t
leave any cosmetic or functional impairments. There are two reasons to
seek medical attention for a fractured nose: cosmetic, if the nose has been
pushed to one side and remains crooked, and functional, if airflow is
impaired. Observe the nose for angulation to one side or the other. With a
fingertip, gently press the side of each nostril closed to see if baby can
breathe normally through each nostril with his mouth closed. In a small
baby you may have to try this procedure while baby is asleep. If either
cosmetic or functional impairment is obvious, seek immediate medical
attention. Most of the time the examining doctor will advise waiting a week
or two to see if the nasal bones bounce back into a normal position. The
doctor will then recheck baby’s nose to see if any cosmetic or functional
impairment persists and recommend treatment accordingly. Infant nasal
fractures rarely need setting.

OceanofPDF.com

 Nosebleeds

“Which finger do you use to pick your nose?” is the telling question we ask
young nose pickers. (Asking, “Do you pick your nose?” is guaranteed to
elicit a “no.”) Bleeds from nose picking are most common during the
allergy season due to the child’s scratching the already inflamed nasal
membranes. Central heating dries the air and irritates the lining of the nose,
accounting for winter nosebleeds. A vaporizer used in baby’s bedroom
during the months of central heating should alleviate this cause of
nosebleeds. If baby’s nasal secretions get crusty during a cold, you will
soon see a little fingertip inside a little nose followed by a little nosebleed.
A squirt of saline nose drops and perhaps a dab of antibiotic ointment or
Vaseline will loosen the crust and often prevent a nosebleed.
Here’s how to stop a nosebleed:

 • Sit baby on your lap, with him leaning slightly forward.
• Apply pressure by pinching the nostrils together for at least ten minutes
without releasing. If bleeding persists, insert a twisted piece of wet cotton
into the bleeding nostril so that it fits snugly to fill around two-thirds of
the nasal opening. Applying pinched-nostril pressure with the cotton in
place transmits the pressure to the nasal septum.
• If this doesn’t stop the bleeding, apply pressure to the major vessel
supplying the nose, located where the upper lip joins the gum, just below
the nostrils. Place a chunk of wet cotton underneath the upper lip and
apply pressure with two fingers upward under the lip in the direction of
the nostrils or by pressing a finger over the upper lip just below the
nostrils.
• Keep your child upright to prevent blood from dripping down his throat,
which may trigger vomiting or sneezing. This could dislodge the clot and
cause the bleeding to resume.
• Encourage baby to keep his mouth open by holding your own mouth
open, so that a sneeze or cough is not transmitted to the nose.
• Once the bleeding stops, leave the cotton in the nostril for a few hours to
tamponade the bleeding, allowing a clot to form. Remove the cotton plug
gently (moisten with a squirt of water if crusty), trying not to dislodge the
clot and restart the bleeding. In an adult or an older child the cotton may
be left in longer, as there is less of a fear of choking on the cotton.
• If these measures do not stop the nosebleed, take your child to your
doctor or to the emergency room.
• To discourage the nose picker, cut baby’s fingernails short, increase the
humidity in his bedroom, and treat inhalant allergies.

OceanofPDF.com

 Object Stuck in the Nose

Babies are pokers, and the nose is an easy place to poke. Over the years we
have removed all sorts of objects from babies’ noses. The most popular are
beans, peas, pieces of cotton, and tiny rocks. Surprisingly, babies seldom
complain of a foreign body in their nose, but suspect this if you detect a
foul-smelling yellow or green discharge from one nostril (with a cold both
nostrils drain and the discharge doesn’t stink). To remove a foreign object
from your baby’s nose, try the following:
• If you can see the object, attempt to remove it with blunt-end tweezers.
(The burrito wrap described here may be necessary to restrain baby’s
protesting arms.)
• If the object is lodged far back in the nose, compress the unblocked
nostril and encourage the child to sneeze or blow with his mouth closed.
This may dislodge the obstruction.
• If the object is water soluble, such as a piece of candy, take the child into
the shower and let the steam melt the candy. Or squirt some saline nasal
spray into the nose to soften the object and reduce its size.
If you are unable to remove the object easily with the above measures,
take your child to your doctor’s office or to an emergency room where the
doctor can remove the object with a special instrument. Do not allow baby
to lie on his back and fall asleep with the object still in his nose, as it may
be aspirated into the lungs.

 OceanofPDF.com

 INSECT STINGS AND BITES
Insects leaving their calling card in baby’s skin cause two potential
problems: an infection at the puncture site or an allergic reaction to the
injected venom.

OceanofPDF.com

 Removing Stingers

A bee leaves its stinger and its attached venom sac in the wound. Scrape
away the protruding venom sac with a sharp knife or the edge of a credit
card before removing the rest of the stinger. (Squeezing the sac with
tweezers will force more venom into the skin.) After removing the stinger
with tweezers, applying ice to the sting site slows down the spread of
venom and eases the pain. Wasps and hornets do not leave their stingers in
the skin.

OceanofPDF.com

 Allergic Reactions

Signs of a systemic allergic reaction are swollen hands and eyelids,
wheezing, and a hivelike rash. If your baby has only localized swelling
around the sting site, apply ice, give a dose of Benadryl, and wait before
calling your doctor. If a concern-causing allergic reaction is going to occur,
expect it to happen within an hour of the sting. If the above signs of
systemic allergy occur, give your child a dose of Benadryl and take him
immediately to your doctor’s office or to the emergency room. The most
concerning allergic sign following a sting is wheezing or difficulty
breathing.
Baby’s second sting may produce a more severe allergic reaction than
the first. If your baby showed any of the above signs from the first bee
sting, here is a wise precaution: As soon as your baby is stung, give
Benadryl, apply an ice pack, and immediately go and sit in the emergency
room. If no allergic signs appear within a couple of hours, then it is safe to
return home.
If your child has a history of severe allergies to insect stings, ask your
doctor about desensitizing the child to insect stings with a series of shots. If
your baby has had severe reactions to stings, keep injectable epinephrine
(called an EpiPen) with you at all times. Your doctor can give you a
prescription.

 OceanofPDF.com

 Removing Ticks

Because ticks carry disease, notably the germ that causes Lyme disease (see
here), they should be carefully and entirely removed. Here’s how to remove
a tick:
• Clean the area with an alcohol-soaked cotton ball.
• Using a blunt tweezers, grasp the tick as near to its mouth parts and as
close to your skin as you can. Steadily pull the tick up and out, but do not
squeeze or twist the tick.
• Do not attempt to pull the tick off with your fingers, as the head may
break off from the body and become embedded in the skin.
• Do not use heat from a match or lit cigarette to remove the tick, as the
heat may cause the tick to embed itself even farther into the skin.
• If the tick is embedded in the skin: (1) With your thumb and forefinger
pinch up the fold of skin with the embedded tick head, then (2) using a
scalpel or a sterilized single razor blade, carefully scrape the skin
containing the head and mouth of the tick, or use a sterilized needle to
break the skin and remove the head and mouth. If you are tick
squeamish, ask your doctor to perform this tick extraction.
• Cleanse the bitten area thoroughly with an antiseptic.

PREVENTING DISEASES CARRIED BY TICKS
Ticks may transmit germs that cause Lyme disease or Rocky Mountain
spotted fever. If you find a tick on yourself or your child, carefully remove
it. Preventive antibiotic are usually not necessary, but we recommend you
see your doctor to discuss this. The risk of disease is very small (only 3

 percent even in high-risk areas), and tick-borne diseases are easily treated if
recognized early. If any of these signs occur, contact your physician:
• fever within two weeks of tick bite
• rash, either at the bite site or on other areas of the body, within five
weeks of the tick bite
• joint or muscle pain or fatigue
• muscle weakness in a specific area above the neck, such as a crooked
smile or tongue or weakness when opening or closing one eye
• double vision

OceanofPDF.com

 TOOTH TRAUMA
Beginning walkers and tripping toddlers often encounter table corners with
their two front teeth. Most of the time these pushed-back teeth spring back
and continue to survive a few more falls until surrendering their place to
permanent teeth five years later. If your baby injures the gums and teeth,
apply ice packs or offer a Popsicle to suck on to ease the swollen gums. If
the gums are bleeding, put cold water on a piece of gauze and push it
between the lips and gums and hold pressure on the bleeding site. Call your
dentist in case immediate realignment is necessary. If teeth have been
pushed far up into the gums, the roots may be injured, and the remaining
life of the tooth will be shortened (recognized by increasing darkening and
loosening of the tooth). Again, consult your dentist.
Also, watch for an abscess (fever and swollen, tender gums above the
injured tooth) developing at the injury site three to seven days later. If the
tooth has been loosened so much that it is just hanging on for dear life and
obviously won’t survive, your dentist may wish to remove it immediately
for fear of baby’s aspirating the dislodged tooth during sleep. A knocked-out
baby tooth cannot be reimplanted. If a baby tooth has been fractured leaving
sharp, pointed edges, sometimes dentists recommend filing the points
smooth to prevent a cut to the lip during the next fall. A permanent tooth, on
the other hand, can often be reimplanted, but care of the tooth en route to

 the dentist is crucial. Pick up the tooth by the crown, not the root. If the
tooth is very dirty, wash it off gently with water (not over an open drain),
immerse the tooth in the child’s saliva, and put it in a safe container for the
dentist. Do not scrub the roots of the knocked-out tooth, as this may injure
the roots and preclude reimplantation.

OceanofPDF.com

 STRAINS, SPRAINS, AND FRACTURES
The four classic signs of broken bones at any age are swelling, pain,
limitation of motion, and point tenderness (the site of the fracture is tender
to a fingertip’s touch). First aid for common strains, sprains, and fractures
can be remembered by “ICES”: ice, compression, elevation, and support.
All four of these measures slow down continued bleeding within the joint or
muscle and shorten the recovery time. Apply an ice pack to the swollen or
fractured area for at least twenty minutes. Snugly (but not constrictingly)
wrap the ice pack with an elastic bandage around the affected joint or
possible fracture site. Elevate the limb about 6 inches on a pillow or support
the limb with a sling and prevent any unnecessary motion or weight
bearing. If you suspect a broken bone, immobilize the limb and take your
child to the emergency room.

OceanofPDF.com

 Toddler Fractures

Mild fractures to the midshaft of the long bone of the legs occur during the
frequent falls of the beginning walker. Suspect toddler fractures if your
baby limps and is unwilling to bear weight on one leg. Toddlers often limp
for a few hours after a fall or even from a sore on their foot or a stubbed toe.
Any limp in a toddler that lasts longer than twenty-four hours merits
medical attention to be sure there is not a toddler fracture or an injury to the
hip joint.

OceanofPDF.com

 Pulled Elbow

During play, or as a result of the typical tug-of-war between exploring
toddler and a parent trying to keep him in tow, an arm bone may partially
pop out of the elbow socket. Your doctor or local emergency room can
usually pop a pulled elbow back into place with no particular harm done.

SEARS PARENTING LIBRARY ALERT
For the most complete Sears guide to pediatric illness treatment and
prevention, check out The Portable Pediatrician in the Sears Parenting
Library (also available as an app on iTunes).

OceanofPDF.com

 About the Authors

William Sears, MD, and Martha Sears, RN, are the parents of eight
children and the authors of more than forty bestselling books on parenting.
They are the pediatric experts on whom American parents increasingly rely
for advice and information on all aspects of pregnancy, birth, child care, and
family nutrition. Dr. Bill received his pediatric training at Harvard Medical
School’s Children’s Hospital and Toronto’s Hospital for Sick Children. He
has practiced pediatrics for more than forty years and is an associate clinical
professor at the University of California–Irvine School of Medicine. Martha
Sears is a registered nurse and parenting and health consultant. They live in
Dana Point, California.
Robert W. Sears, MD, FAAP, is a board-certified pediatrician in private
practice in Southern California. Dr. Bob received his medical degree from
Georgetown University and completed his pediatric training at Children’s
Hospital Los Angeles. He has coauthored six books in the Sears Parenting
Library, including The Baby Book (revised edition). He is also the author of
The Vaccine Book and The Autism Book, and coauthor of HappyBaby. He
lives with his wife and three sons in Dana Point, California.

 James Sears, MD, is a pediatrician and cohost of the popular TV show
The Doctors, a spin-off of Dr. Phil. Dr. Jim received his medical degree
from Saint Louis University School of Medicine and did his pediatric
residency at Tod Children’s Hospital in Youngstown, Ohio. He frequently
speaks to parenting groups around the country about children’s nutrition. He
is the proud father of two children and resides in Southern California.
askdrsears.com

OceanofPDF.com

 Sears Parenting Library
The A.D.D. Book
The Attachment Parenting Book
The Autism Book
The Baby Book
The Baby Sleep Book
The Birth Book
The Breastfeeding Book
The Discipline Book
The Family Nutrition Book
The Fussy Baby Book
The Healthiest Kid in the Neighborhood
The N.D.D. Book
The Portable Pediatrician
The Pregnancy Book
The Premature Baby Book
The Successful Child
The Vaccine Book

Sears Children’s Library

 Baby on the Way
Eat Healthy, Feel Great
What Baby Needs
You Can Go to the Potty

OceanofPDF.com

 Thank you for buying this e-book, published by
Hachette Digital.
To receive special offers, bonus content, and
news about our latest e-books and apps, sign up for
our newsletter.
Sign Up
Or visit us at hachettebookgroup.com/newsletters
OceanofPDF.com

 Appendix: Growth Charts

 OceanofPDF.com

 OceanofPDF.com

 Resources

OceanofPDF.com

 AskDrSears.com

Our comprehensive website has a large volume of information on parenting
and child health issues, in addition to Baby Book updates, answers to FAQs,
valuable insights on pregnancy questions, infant and child-care issues, and
nutritional tips.

Adoption Resources

Dear Birthmother, Thank You for Our Baby, by Kathleen Silber and Phyllis
Speedlin, 3rd ed. (Corona, 1998)
Twenty Things Adopted Kids Wish Their Adoptive Parents Knew, by Sherrie
Eldridge, (Dell, 1999)
adopting.com
adoption.com
adoption.org
International Adoptions:
cdc.gov/travel/other/adoption.htm

 Attachment Parenting

The Attachment Parenting Book, by William Sears and Martha Sears (Little,
Brown, 2002)
Attachment

Parenting

International

(API),

(615)

298–4344;

attachmentparenting.org. A network of like-minded parents, API gives
assistance to those forming attachment-parenting support groups and also
provides educational materials, research information, and consulting to
promote attachment-parenting concepts.
Attached at the Heart, by Barbara Nicholson and Lysa Parker (iUniverse
Star, 2009).

Baby Carriers

Balboa Baby: balboababy.com

Bedside Co-Sleepers

Arm’s Reach Co-Sleeper: (800) 954–9353; armsreach.com

 Breastfeeding

The Breastfeeding Book, by Martha Sears and William Sears (Little, Brown,
2000.)
La Leche League International (LLLI):(800) 435–8316 or (847) 519–7730;
lalecheleague.org
International Lactation Consultant Association (ILCA): (919) 787–5181;
ilca.org
Corporate Lactation Program by Medela: (800) 435–8316; medela.com
Motherwear (nursing clothing): (800) 950–2500; motherwear.com

Children’s Books

See the following books in the Sears Children’s Library, by William Sears
and Martha Sears and Christie Watts Kelly, (Little, Brown, 2001 and 2002).
Baby on the Way (introducing siblings to the new arrival)
Eat Healthy, Feel Great (fun ways to teach kids about healthy nutrition)

 What Every Baby Needs (explaining baby care to children)
You Can Go to the Potty (a step-by-step manual on toilet training)

Down Syndrome

The National Down Syndrome Society: ndss.org
Down Syndrome Quarterly Journal: denison.edu/dsq/
National Association for Down Syndrome: nads.org

Food Allergies

The Food Allergy and Anaphylaxis Network (FAAN): foodallergy.org
Food Allergy News for Kids: fankids.org

Gastroesophageal Reflux (GERD)

Pediatric/Adolescent Gastroesophageal Reflux Association (PAGER):
reflux.org

 Reflux Wedges and Slings: tuckerdesigns.com

Goat Milk

meyenberg.com

Labor Support Assistants (Professional Labor Assistants)

Doulas of North America: dona.org

Natural Family Planning

Breastfeeding and Natural Child Spacing, by Sheila Kippley (Couple to
Couple League International, 1999)
nfpandmore.org

Nutritional Information

 The Family Nutrition Book: Everything You Need to Know About Feeding
Your Children—From Birth Through Adolescence, by William Sears and
Martha Sears (Little, Brown, 1999)
The Healthiest Kid in the Neighborhood: Ten Ways to Get Your Family on
the Right Nutritional Track, by William Sears, Martha Sears, James Sears,
and Robert Sears (Little, Brown, 2006)
Eat Healthy, Feel Great, by William Sears, Martha Sears, and Christie Watts
Kelly (Little, Brown, 2002)
AskDrSears.com. (Click on “Feeding Infants and Toddlers” and “Family
Nutrition”)
Nutritional Analysis: leankids.com

Obesity

Prevention and Treatment: leankids.com

Omega-3 Fats

 The Omega-3 Effect: Everything You Need to Know About the Supernutrient
for Living Longer, Happier, and Healthier, by William Sears and James
Sears (Little, Brown, 2012)

Nursing Pillows

balboababy.com

Poison Control

American Association of Poison Control Centers: (800) 222–1222;
AAPCC.org National hotline: (800) 222–1222
Write in the number of your local poison control center here:
____________________

Pregnancy Resources

The Pregnancy Book, by William Sears and Martha Sears, with obstetrician
Linda Hughey Holt (Little, Brown, 1997). A month-by-month guide during
your pregnancy and helpful information on having a safe and satisfying
birth. (See also labor support assistants.)

 Recipes

AskDrSears.com/recipes

Relaxation Music

Giver of Peace by Jason and Nolan Livesay is available at iTunes.

Safety, Toys and Infant Products

U.S. Consumer Products Safety Commission: cpsc.gov
Juvenile Products Manufacturers Association: jpma.org

Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS)

SIDS: A Parent’s Guide to Understanding and Preventing Sudden Infant
Death Syndrome, by William Sears (Little, Brown, 1995)—out of print but
available through used booksellers

 SIDS Alliance: sidsalliance.org

AskDrSears.com/babybookupdates. New information about reducing the
risk of SIDS.

Twins and Multiples

National Organization of Mothers of Twins Clubs: (877) 540–2200 or (615)
595–0936 or nomotc.org
twinslist.org. A valuable resource with lots of message boards with practical
tips.
Mothering Multiples: Breastfeeding and Caring for Twins or More, by
Karen Gromada (La Leche League, 1999)

OceanofPDF.com

 * Throughout this book, unless stated otherwise, “I” refers to Dr. Bill
Sears; “Martha,” naturally, refers to Martha Sears. Much of the advice that
“we” otherwise offer is from the collective Doctors Sears.

OceanofPDF.com

 * Use caution in the newborn period.

OceanofPDF.com

 † Avoid taking tetracycline for longer than 3 weeks.

OceanofPDF.com

 * It is safe to breastfeed six to twelve hours after most general anesthetics.

OceanofPDF.com

 † Some authorities consider lithium absolutely contraindicated while
breastfeeding; others believe lithium can be used cautiously, as long as
blood lithium concentration in the baby is monitored.

OceanofPDF.com

 * The calcium contents are average values, depending on type of packaging
and other such factors. For fish (sardines and salmon) the calcium content
varies with the amount of mashed bone in the fish. Greens (kale and
collards), though high in calcium, are usually unpalatable for infants, but
they may be chopped and disguised in casseroles.
Sources: “Nutritive Value of Foods,” USDA Home and Gardens Bulletin
No. 72 (US. Department of Agriculture, 1981) and Food Values of Portions
Commonly Used, by A. De Planter Bowes and H. H. Church (Lippincott,
1998).

OceanofPDF.com

 * Use only as a guide; calorie needs vary considerably according to
preferences and development.

OceanofPDF.com

 † Vitamin supplements are rarely necessary in breastfeeding infants; 32
ounces of formula contain the daily requirements of vitamins for term
infants.

OceanofPDF.com

 * Many of the symptoms can also be signs of inhalant allergies. See here for
a discussion of this problem.

OceanofPDF.com

 * Babies’ night-waking habits and parents’ perception of what constitutes a
sleep problem vary so widely that “average” or “normal” amounts of night
waking must be stated as ranges rather than in exact figures.

OceanofPDF.com

 * As you journey through this section on infant development, you will read
passages entitled “Martha notes.” These are based on entries in Martha’s
daily journals written when our son Matthew was a baby.

OceanofPDF.com

 1 Although one cigarette theoretically contains enough nicotine to be toxic,
ingested tobacco is not easily absorbed from the intestines. The child
frequently vomits and gets rid of much of the tobacco.
2 Most cosmetics are generally not harmful. However, permanent wave
neutralizer and fingernail polish are extremely harmful. Even inhaling
fumes from nail polish as it is being applied may be harmful to a child.
3 Crayons labeled “AP,” “CP,” or “CS 130–46” are nontoxic.
4 Most household laundry detergents, cleansers, and dish detergents are not
toxic. However, bleaches, ammonias, toilet bowl cleaners, and automatic
dishwasher granules and liquids are highly toxic.
5 Mouthwash contains a large amount of alcohol and therefore can harm a
child if ingested in large quantities.
6 Iron and fluoride in vitamins may be toxic if ingested in large amounts.

OceanofPDF.com

 Contents

Welcome
Dedication
A Word from Dr. Bill, Martha, Dr. Bob, and Dr. Jim
Part I: Getting Started: Baby-Care Basics
Chapter 1: Getting Attached: What It Means
Parenting Your Baby
The Seven Baby B’s of Attachment Parenting
Attachment Parenting Includes Fathers
Some Questions You May Have
Chapter 2: Ten Tips for Having a Safe and Satisfying Birth
Find “Dr. Right” for Yourself—Explore Options
Choose the Right Birthing Environment
Hire a Labor Coach
Get Moving
Get Off Your Back

 Experiment with Labor Positions
Use Technology Wisely
Use Medical Pain Relief Wisely
Avoid an Episiotomy
Be Flexible in Formulating Your Birth Plan
Chapter 3: Preparing for Baby
Choosing Dr. Right for Your Baby
Choosing Other VIPs
Choosing Whether to Breastfeed or Bottlefeed
Circumcised or Intact?
Cord Blood Stem Cell Banking
Expanded Newborn Screening Blood Test
Preparing Your Nest
Chapter 4: Getting the Right Start with Your Newborn
Baby’s First Minutes
Bonding—What It Means, How to Do It
Getting to Know Your Newborn
Attachment-Promoting Behaviors
Birthday “Pictures”
Routine Hospital Procedures
Newborn Jaundice
Baby’s First Checkup

 Chapter 5: Postpartum Family Adjustments
Nesting-in
Role Adjustments
Preventing and Overcoming Postpartum Depression
Now We Are Three
Shaping Up After Childbirth
Chapter 6: Caring for Your Baby’s Bodily Needs
Diapering Your Baby
Cord Care
Care of the Circumcision Site
Nail Care
Bathing Baby
Keeping Baby Comfortable
Pacifiers: In or Out?
The Right Touch: The Art of Infant Massage
Chapter 7: Common Concerns in the Early Weeks
Early Newborn Changes
Spitting Up
Eyes
Baby’s Mouth
Newborn Skin Marks and Rashes

 Diaper Rash: Prevention and Treatment
Reducing the Risk of Sudden Infant Death Syndrome
Part II: Infant Feeding and Nutrition
Chapter 8: Breastfeeding: Why and How
Why Breast Is Best
Preparing for Breastfeeding
Right-Start Techniques
How Your Breasts Make Milk
Common Breastfeeding Questions and Problems
Chapter 9: The Breastfeeding Mother: Choices, Challenges
Eating Right During Breastfeeding
Upsetting Foods in Breast Milk
Medicines for Two: Taking Medicines Safely While Breastfeeding
Breastfeeding Helpers
Getting It Together: Working and Breastfeeding
Expressing Milk
“Nursing Nuisances,” Challenges, and Funny Things That Happen
on the Way to the Breast
Breastfeeding Special Babies in Special Circumstances
Weaning: When and How

 Chapter 10: Bottlefeeding with Safety and Love
Formula Facts
How Much? How Often?
Preparing Formula
Bottlefeeding Tips
Weaning Baby from the Bottle
A Person at Both Ends of the Bottle
Chapter 11: Introducing Solid Foods: When, What, and How
Why Wait?
Feeding Solids: Six to Nine Months
Feeding Strategies
Feeding Solids: Nine to Twelve Months
Making Your Own Baby Food
Commercial Baby Food
Bring Out the Cup
Chapter 12: Ten Tips for Becoming Your Family’s Nutritionist
Feed Your Baby Smart Fats
Feed Your Baby the Best Carbs
Perk Up the Proteins
Shape Young Tastes
Fill Up with Fiber

 Value Your Vitamins
Mind Your Minerals
Pump Up Baby’s Iron
Make Every Calorie Count
Raise a Lean Baby
Chapter 13: Feeding the Toddler: One to Two Years
Nourishing the Picky Eater
Getting Your Toddler to Eat
Choosing the Right Milk for Your Toddler
Is Your Child Eating Enough?
Food Allergies
Pesticides: How to Keep Them Out of the Mouths of Babies
Part III: Contemporary Parenting
Chapter 14: Babywearing: The Art and Science of Carrying Your Baby
New Support for an Old Idea
Choosing the Right Baby Carrier
How to Wear Your Baby: A Personal Course
The Babywearing Father—Becoming a Shareholder
Other Babywearers
Wearing Down to Sleep
Babywearing in Real-Life Situations

 Babywearing in Special Situations
How Babywearing Benefits Infants and Parents
Babywearing May Change Your Lifestyle for the Better
Chapter 15: Nighttime Parenting: How to Get Your Baby to Sleep
Facts of Infant Sleep
Step One: Give Your Baby the Best Sleep Start
Step Two: Condition Your Baby to Sleep
Step Three: Lessen Conditions That Cause Night Waking
Sleeping with Your Baby—Yes? No? Sometimes?
Handling Worries and Criticisms of Sleeping with Your Baby
Sleep Safety
Troubleshooting: Solving Your Baby’s Sleep Problems
Frequently Asked Questions About Sleep Problems
Chapter 16: Parenting the Fussy or Colicky Baby
Fussy Babies
Why Babies Fuss
Matching Babies and Parents
Soothing the Fussy Baby
The Colicky Baby, Alias the Hurting Baby
Tracking Down Hidden Causes of Colic
Comforting Colic
Is Colic Preventable?

 Entering the Promised Time
Chapter 17: Working and Parenting
The Real Issue: Attachment
Keys to Working and Attaching
Choosing Substitute Caregivers
The Commercial Day-Care Option
Chapter 18: Special Situations
Parenting the Adopted Baby
International Adoption
Parenting Twins
Single Parenting
The Down Syndrome Baby—A Special Kind of Parenting
Mixing Babies and Pets
Part IV: Infant Development and Behavior
Chapter 19: Growing Together: Enjoying Your Baby’s Developmental
Stages
Growing Together
Attachment Parenting: How It Builds Better Babies—And Parents
How Babies Grow

 The Five Features of Infant Development
Seven Ways to Build a Brighter Baby
Autism Screening and Early Detection
Sensory Processing Disorder
Chapter 20: The First Six Months: Big Changes
The First Month: Big Needs
Newborn Reflexes
The Second Month: Big Smiles
The Third Month: Big Hands
A Three-Month Review
The Fourth Month: Big Looks
Language Development, Four to Six Months
The Fifth Month: Big Reaches
The Sixth Month: Sitting Big
Raising Healthy Teeth
Chapter 21: The Second Six Months: Moving Up
Six to Nine Months: Exploring Big
New Fears and Concerns in the Second Six Months
Nine to Twelve Months: Big Moves
Caring for Your Baby’s Feet
Chapter 22: The Second Year: From Babyhood to Toddlerhood

 Twelve to Fifteen Months: Big Steps
Fifteen to Eighteen Months: Big Words
Enriching Your Toddler’s Language
Does Your Child Walk Funny?
Eighteen to Twenty-four Months: Big Thoughts
Chapter 23: Bothersome but Normal Toddler Behaviors
The Real Meaning of Discipline
Headstrong Mind-set
Toy Squabbles
Temper Tantrums
Biting and Hitting
Baby Won’t Mind
Screeching and Whining
Thumb-sucking
Chapter 24: Toilet Training
Facts You Should Know
Better Late Than Early
A Step-by-Step Approach to Toilet Training
The Child Who Won’t Go
Toilet Training Quickly: The Weekend-Training-Camp Method

 Part V: Keeping Your Baby Safe and Healthy
Chapter 25: Babyproofing Your Home
Profile of an Accident-Prone Child
The Accident-Prone Home
Home Babyproofing Checklists
Choosing and Using Safe Baby Equipment
Safe and Sane Car Travel
Cycling with Infants
Plantproofing Your Home
Environmental Pollutants: Getting the Lead Out
Chapter 26: Keeping Your Baby Healthy
Health Maintenance Begins at Home
Well-Baby Checkups
Immunizations: Why, What, and When
Treating Little People
Giving Medicines
Chapter 27: The Most Common Medical Problems: Self-help Home Care
Parenting the Baby with Fever
Colds
Coughs

 Ear Infections
Sinus Infections
Croup
Diarrhea
Vomiting
Constipation
Tracking and Treating Inhalant Allergies
Eczema
Questions Parents Have About AIDS
Childhood Illnesses at a Glance
Chapter 28: Lifesaving Procedures and First Aid for Common
Emergencies
The Three P’s
When Your Baby Isn’t Breathing: A Step-by-Step Approach to CPR
Choking
Bleeding
Head Injuries
Convulsions
Burns
Poisoning
Eye Injuries
Nose Injuries
Insect Stings and Bites

 Tooth Trauma
Strains, Sprains, and Fractures
Appendix: Growth Charts
Resources
About the Authors
Sears Parenting Library
Newsletters
Copyright

OceanofPDF.com

 Copyright

This book is intended to supplement, not replace, the advice of a trained
health professional. If you know or suspect that you have a health problem,
you should consult a health professional. The author and publisher
specifically disclaim any liability, loss, or risk, personal or otherwise, which
is incurred as a consequence, directly or indirectly, of the use and
application of any of the contents of this book.
Copyright © 1992, 2003, 2013 by William Sears and Martha Sears
Cover design by Julianna Lee
Cover photograph by Leslie Bird
Cover copyright © 2013 by Hachette Book Group, Inc.
All rights reserved. In accordance with the U.S. Copyright Act of 1976, the
scanning, uploading, and electronic sharing of any part of this book without
the permission of the publisher constitute unlawful piracy and theft of the
author’s intellectual property. If you would like to use material from the
book (other than for review purposes), prior written permission must be
obtained by contacting the publisher at permissions@hbgusa.com. Thank
you for your support of the author’s rights.

 Little, Brown and Company
Hachette Book Group
237 Park Avenue, New York, NY 10017
littlebrown.com
twitter.com/littlebrown
Revised and updated e-book edition: January 2013
The publisher is not responsible for websites (or their content) that are not
owned by the publisher.
The Hachette Speakers Bureau provides a wide range of authors for
speaking events. To find out more, go to hachettespeakersbureau.com or
call (866) 376-6591.
Drawings by Deborah Maze
ISBN 978-0-316-23050-6

OceanofPDF.com

 