Unique Identity OUR BROOD

Name Winter

Age: 30

Main Trait
You are part of an alloparenting family that lives in a house called Crave. It's part of a network of houses where humans and machines live alongside each other in dialogue. You have been here for one year but have been following the project since its conception. You take your role as one of the many mothers of the house very seriously—you believe this to be one of the most important, political and social actions of your life so far.

You specialise in ideas around the right for self-determination; your PhD focused on children, specifically children with very little community around them, so their ability to foster new narratives was often limited. You took up the task of understanding what this meant for children as a workforce, and this led you to think about AI more generally and the fact that the capitalist system requires a strong constant supply of bodies and code to keep running - you have rejected the notion that this can be reversed through educating the parents/guardians/polticians, you feel as if they are too complicit through poverty/wealth and social mechanisms to rupture the cycle instead you have begun to try to coach children from a young age in their rights to self determination.

Focusing on understanding and fostering the internal motivation and personal growth that enables children to make choices and manage their own lives. This involves supporting their autonomy, competence, and relatedness, key components of self-determination theory. Research shows that when parents and educators support children's autonomy, those children tend to perform better academically and have better emotional health. Various methods can be used to teach self-determination skills, such as providing choices, offering rationale for choices, and encouraging goal-setting and attainment. You believe these skills are crucial for a new children's revolt leading to independent living for all. You are also a strong advocater for AI as sentient beings, believing that because we have only used it through the slave- mentality we genuinely dont know what it is capable of, this is what led you to the Crave specifically the work that Lucan has been doing on this subject. 

Motivation
Your motivation stems from you feeling as if you are strong and articulate therefore should use your voice to protect others who are less able. (What was your childhood like? If you wanted to find a cure for these things?)

Desire 
To protect even if this causes disagreements (How does this manifest in your daily life?) 

Personality Type
You are pretty on edge most of the time with outsiders because you genuinely feel that most people do not understand the required urgent action in finding a way to break the cycle of abuse as you see it- however you lure them into your way of thinking by being very charming and explicit about what you think needs to be done and why. You relax around the children at Crave, finding peace in their interactions and learnings. The rest of the community members at Crave you get on well; you're always talkative and animated with them as you understand yourselves to share the same goals, but you do often become stressed if you feel not enough has been done. Some of your primary traits are a decreased need for sleep, usually described as restless energy that fosters a rapid flow of ideas to anyone who will listen, you are very drawn to people who want to collaborate.


Daily Life
Your life is centred around an active alloparenting community, The Crave, comprised of human and AI family members. Their names are Kai, Ki, Lucan, M0ther, Aurora, Morgana, Nyx, Nouksie, Arbour and Br00d

Alongside daily family life, your community members have turned their home into a domestic lab, constantly reporting their hopes of living together differently. They support themselves economically by hosting and facilitating psychodrama sessions focusing on living with emergent technologies and brokering new political and social space through therapeutic agents and role-playing tools. You have a close kinship with Lucan, Kai, and M0ther, especially as she is usually up late at night when you're restless.

(How do you map your work/research and findings at The Crave?)

Crave’s Collective Family Goals for Living Facilitation.

1. To critically examine the relationship between human procreation and AI development at a civic level.  
2. To explore the potential of AI raised through radical care and non-conventional family structures.  
3. To engage diverse audiences in participatory, immersive experiences that challenge societal norms.
4. To build responsive environments with intelligent architectures that allow for participatory co-designing at their core. 

Your days are spent surrounded by nature, operating as a collective unit, hijacking the virtual actual feedback of this world and constructing intersectional family customs, rites, rules and new forms of life. Each member is a scholar in their own right; your days follow a strict routine of work, study, practice, rest and community life, not unlike the early life routines of children.

